^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-of42-personal-sovereignty-digital-trust-in-the-algorithmic-age^^

 
   >> MOIRA PATTERSON: So I see the audience would like to hear what we have to say. So let's get started with that. 
    Hopefully, we'll have the opportunity to provide the full session because our third speaker has a lot of expertise that we really would like to highlight on the topic. 
    So we'll just give a quick glimpse here and get started. 
    So hello, everyone. Thank you for joining us on a Friday. I am Moira Patterson, and I'm the Global Market Affairs and Community Engagement Director at the IEEE Standards Association. 
    We'll shorten what we were doing to do. With that, maybe I will still invite everyone to maybe just type in to the chat window what kind of stakeholder group you represent and also where in the world you're joining us from. We would like to get to meet you. This is also the feature we'll use for any questions. 
    You can see the chat. I've seen that a lot of people have already put in chat. If we could just see where folks are from and what type of organizations you represent so we can get a sense of who is here. That will be great. 
    So we have someone from Brazil with ICANN and small‑medium enterprises. Dynamic Coalition on Data‑Driven Technologies. I see people still typing. More from Brazil. 
   >> JOHN HAVENS: Australia, Russia. I know two words in every language. So I'm trying to use them all. 
   >> MOIRA PATTERSON: Excellent. Great. All right. Well, really a global audience. So that is very exciting. 
    So welcome again, everyone. We're happy to be here with you, even under the slightly more unusual circumstances. 
    So with that, maybe I will just ‑‑ well, I'm not going to do formal introductions as much as maybe I will just introduce myself and then ask John to quickly introduce himself. 
    I'm Moira, like I said before, Internet Standards Association. I support a lot of initiatives in the areas of digital inclusion, identity, trust and agency, as well as digital resilience. We're looking at initiatives around creating trustworthy experiences for children in the offline and online space. Those are the themes we were wanting to highlight today. 
    John, please give a quick intro. 
   >> JOHN HAVENS: Sure. I'm Executive Director of IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligence Systems. I'm also the author of two books. One is called Heartificial Intelligence and Hacking Happiness. I have a passion for personal data issues and well‑being. I'm glad to be here. Thanks for the invite. 
   >> MOIRA PATTERSON: In our summary, we talked about personal sovereignty and the importance of thinking about personal sovereignty and addressing what we believe is a misconception, maybe, that personal agency and privacy are necessarily intentioned with some of the ability to address some of the issues around COVID‑19 or other major issues, and that really ‑‑ in fact, we need to be looking at how we can balance these different aspects. 
    So with that, maybe I will start with the original topic that we wanted to talk about, which is that as we've seen during COVID‑19, we have really seen digital technologies be a lifeline for many of us. This applies around the world and to many different situations. 
    And so in that environment, though, what is the key message that you have. I will start with you, John, about personal sovereignty, data governance, and identity. 
   >> JOHN HAVENS: Sure. A couple of things. I just want to honor ‑‑ forgive me if I mispronounce this. Againi Atonkic (phonetic). 
    You asked: I guess we need to shape ‑‑ 
    Moira, I just want to let everyone know the question is basically just asked.
>> MOIRA PATTERSON: Yep.
>> JOHN HAVENS: I guess we need to shape the definition of "personal sovereignty" while we're also using the term "digital sovereignty" beyond traditional understanding when we connect it, first of all, with owning and maintaining the objects of critical infrastructure, servers and other technical equipment? Could you give your definition or meaning of personal sovereignty, even if it looks very obvious? 
    Again, just perfect alignment with what Moira just asked. 
    I also want to give a shout‑out because it's late on a Friday. Kaliya Young, you're here, right? I feel like playing air guitar while Eric Clapton is in the room. 
    Kaliya is brilliant and really has driving so much of the personal data or sovereign industry for years. I'm not worthy, if I can say that in Wayne's World parlance. 
    I will tell you, for me, at a very broad way of defining how I talk about the vision of data or personal sovereignty, recognizing that on this call, including Moira, there are multiple experts like Kaliya who have a much deeper technical expertise. I really want to stress, please, please follow Kaliya and her work. She's an amazing thought leader in the space. From me, from a larger vision, I'm going to go with a vision versus ‑‑ I recognize the technical challenges for what I'm going to say. Here, I'm going to ask for grace, if that's the right way to say it and say, Here's the vision. Knowing that it's not a silver bullet and an instance to create. 
    For about the past 10 years, one thing I've been keenly aware of are things like augmented and virtual reality. Ten years ago, for some reason, I just got very into this idea of having lenses in front of our eyes, like my glasses, that could have data overlaid in those glasses so I could, in one sense, be in two different worlds. 
    What I know many my work with data, the algorithms that track us and track our data are in a very real sense very similar. These are lenses that are in front of us, but most people don't see them. We don't see the physical algorithms that track our data, but that doesn't mean that they're not there. 
    Now, in terms of things like privacy and things like GDPR, regulation that's deeply powerful and really important. Maybe it has flaws, but it's there to help, at least EU citizens, have their data and identity being protected while that also means businesses can use the data. Right? Fantastic. Great. 
    Data sovereignty, the term, how I use it ‑‑ and, again, forgive me if it's not the perfect definition, but as an end to be tracked externally. We're tracked by government and businesses to hopefully, if things are working the way we want, to have protection in terms of governments ‑‑ and, of course, we should talk about surveillance and all that, but protection from governments and with businesses, trusted and responsible ways to find information out about us so we can buy stuff and have better experiences with their brands. However, that's A to B. 
    My vision is there has to be B to A or parity. I don't mean everyone in the world has data ownership, per se, because that's incredibly challenging, but it does mean that all people ‑‑ this is my belief, John's belief. I'm not speaking for all of IEEE. 
    We should have access to our data and have what I call personal terms and conditions at the algorithmic level for any individual. And we have a standard, IEEE's P7011 that was inspired by the amazing Doc Sheryls out of Harvard. If humans could have their own terms and conditions that could be available at an algorithmic level, then at one sense, it brings a parity where those algorithms surrounding me can connect and identify with the algorithms that are tracking me. 
    It is not perfect. It's a longer conversation to talk about, decentralized identity and all that stuff, critically important stuff, but the overarching vision is just that every person understands my data and identity is so precious that I should be equipped with these tools to speak with parity back to the immersive web. 
   >> MOIRA PATTERSON: That's an important point, John, to give people these tools. I think it aligns with another thought, maybe, that is very important from the side also that we talk a lot about in the DIITA program, the Digital Inclusion Identity Trust and Agency program, which is dignity and the human‑centered focus, right? The technologies that we develop should focus enhancing on people's experiences and enhancing people's lives and making things better and easier, and that includes, I think you said invisible ‑‑ there are invisible risks. So sometimes we may feel something gets better, but there are invisible risks that we're not aware of. I think it's very important to address those things upfront. That's one of the things we're trying to do in our different programs. 
    So thinking about designing these technologies with certain values in mind and giving people really control and treating people with dignity, I think, is a key aspect that I want to add. 
   >> JOHN HAVENS: I agree. And one thing, you know ‑‑ by the way, Wolfgang just asked a great question. 
    He said, isn't it a question of ownership and what happens with my data? 
    These are very nuanced, depending on the audience. And Kaliya is an expert and created this space. The people here, I don't know what level of expertise you have. I'm going to speak for myself and the work I've represented at EEE. I'm building off your idea of dignity. 
    When I talk to my friends that are not technical experts. By the way, I'm sure that all the attendees here are experts in one area or another. 
    Sometimes I think we don't have to be that complex sometimes. Like, a buddy of mine created a company called Glimpse, Gliimpse. It's in the United States. It's about six years ago. What he did is his tool let people get their health data from multiple different places, hospitals, their doctors, whatever, and the patient had to give permission for data to come from those different places. 
    Five or six years ago in the States when HIPAA, the relation allowing people to just even access their data, made it so that we could access our data as Americans. 
    The challenge was that sometimes the hospital would have XML data, and a doctor would have whatever, a VAX. So the data was available, air quote, but it wasn't usable by the patient. 
    So what my buddy did, the company he created, when you gave him permission, through triple encryption and all that, when you went from a doctor to a hospital, you were able to get the data instead of from a paper form or fax, into an app where the first thing ‑‑ I know you asked about ownership, Wolfgang, but the thing that I always took for Neil ‑‑ when I worked with him ‑‑ I did PR consulting with him ‑‑ was the word "portability," having access to the data where I go to the doctor and they hand me this. You can't see it. Maybe it's a piece of paper. It's portable until I rip it or it gets burned. Right? But if I was able to put it into an app, it becomes lifesaving when I can take it into the app and give it to my next doctor and it aggregates. So the portability is critical. So the word "ownership" is pretty complex. 
    I'm going to get the nuances wrong that people like Kaliya would get better than me. I'm a dad, right? 
    If my child has an illness, cancer, God forbid, and I have to go to each of these different places, the dignity is a great word to think about, but the quality, the life‑saving need, the tool. I control the tool. I want to be clear with GLIIMPSE. I still pay my doctors. I still own my insurance. I don't pay for intellectual property of theirs. Okay. They should have the intellectual property, but can I take the data to the next doctor and hold it up quickly, and then what I do get to do? I get to talk to the doctor about my child. 
    So I use that analogy a lot because it's a lot esoteric sometimes about data. Also, when my friends are like, Who cares? The horse has left the barn. I tell people about my shoes and my feet. I don't care. I have nothing to hide. 
    The thing I say here is, Well, first of all, this is not about hiding. This is about accessing. It's about portability. There may be times that you want to know how you're going to share with certain people. This is not hiding. This is now curating. Right? 
    As parents, I have to sometimes give medical data to a teacher at the school. I trust the teacher, but I don't trust a certain brand. 
    Sometimes I tell this story, and they're like, who cares? GLIIMPSE. Well, they were acquired by Apple. My friend's company was bought by Apple. Obviously, it must be somebody that's useful to have patients and citizens have portability. 
    Anyway, that's my answer. I will try to keep it shorter. I know it's Friday, and we talked about being short. 
   >> MOIRA PATTERSON: Thanks for that, John. It's a very relatable example. 
    One other thing I want to touch on in our shortened version, the role of standards. John and I both work for the standards association within IEEE. The role of standards in helping to create these ecosystems and tools, I think, is really a very important one that we need to, you know, help promote and educate about because standards are building blocks that can make best practices more accessible to all the different actors. 
    And, also, some of the spaces we're talking about, one of the spaces we're increasingly looking at is age‑appropriate technologies. And we see technologies that are intended for use by children but that have complex terms of service and where they collect data about the children and other things like that. 
    There's a lot of questions about that, as you all know. There's regulatory movements and in Britain, for example, they've started with the age‑appropriate design. In other places, they are looking at similar things. 
    Technical standards are one way that we can really help translate some of the protections and some of the principles into implementable solutions and make sure that all developers have easy access to that. 
    So I don't know how many of the artists are involved in standards or regular users of standards, but I think we always evangelize the importance of that because it's open and it's accessible, and it's a way that shared knowledge can get into outputs that really help others apply the same learnings, apply the same guidelines. 
      (Captioner will disconnect in two minutes) 
   >> MOIRA PATTERSON: I just wanted to highlight that and also mention IEEE has a lot of standards in these spaces, some under development, some out there being implemented. We are looking at standards that are applicable to data governance, to data processing as well as, for example, for age appropriate terms of service, you know, there's guidelines for people who make services for children and how to develop those in an age‑appropriate manner. 
    In the interest of those types of activities, please look us up, and I will put my email in as well. 
    John, I don't know if you want to talk about any of the standards or related activities. 
   >> JOHN HAVENS: Oh, sure. 
    To echo what you just said, Moira, I just put a working group I was proud to help get formed. And by "help get formed," I mean just part of the role Moira and I have is when someone has an idea for a standard, then we can bring it to the Standards Association and sort of help shepherd it to becoming a working group. But it's the volunteers who come with the ideas and the working groups themselves that actually do the work. 
    I saw two women speak at a university about Indigenous data, meaning First People's data. They were brilliant, these two women. I said, look, this is something you would want to think about having a standards working group, and they did, which was awesome. So I just put information about that standards working group in the chat. 
    Part of the reason I find their work so fascinating is I use the term "First Nations." At least in the United States ‑‑ and this is where I may be ignorant, so forgive me if I get some of this wrong, but the sovereign nations of the different Indigenous People within North America are just that. They are sovereign nations. So in terms of how their data is being accessed and exchanged, again, this working group is going foundationally important work, not just for the First Nations people that they represent, but, also, how data can be exchanged when a certain group of people want to exchange it. They're doing really fascinating work. I have no formal association with them other than I think they're brilliant.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-10-ws130-election-in-times-of-disinformation^^

      >> I have announcement to make.  The first one is that the session is record and hosted under the IGF Code of Conduct and UN Rules and Regulations.  
     And the chat feature is for social chat only, and only the question and answer feature is used to ask the question.  This is for attendees to ask the questions.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: I think the session started.  My name is Mehdi Benchelah, I'm a senior officer at UNESCO for the section of Freedom of Expression and Safety of Journalists.
     And we are very happy to have you be in this session which has a title, Election in Times of Disinformation.  As you all know, it is a very timely subject.  And so we will have an hour and a half to discuss on the issue with our speakers.  
     So this session is organized by UNESCO and UNDP.  And I will moderate the first part of the debate with the speaker.  And I will be working with Vladimir Christiansen who is a program analyst for the Bureau of Policy and Program Support for UNDP New York. And he will moderate the questions from the public which will be for the last 20-25 minutes or something like this, of the session.  
     So please don't hesitate to ask your question in the specific Q&A section.  And IGF really wanted us to really keep the chat for more actually chat between participants and, you know, like networking, don't hesitate to share resources and links.  That is most welcome.  And keep the questions for the specific Q&A part.  Also, this session is recorded by IGF, so I hope you don't mind.
     And I will start briefly to -- I mean to remind that elections are really a key moment and a very important moment of Democratic life, first of all, because they crystallize the debate and the opposition between different political forces in the country.  
     And sometimes they bring tension which are there underlying because at that very moment they find a way to somehow to express themselves and which leads sometimes to balance.  So it is -- and there are a lot of stakes, as we know, in election.  And even in some countries it is related to not only political direction the country is going to take, but also about the distribution of resources.  So it does bring a lot of tension.  It is really an important moment, as we all know.
     And it is important also to recall that election rests upon a free flow of information and ideas.  That is really extremely important to recall that.  It highlights the role of journalism in facilitating peaceful, credible, and inclusive but also transparent and fair elections.  
     Journalists are, of course, key actors.  And because of the election process, its outcome, sometimes the legitimacy of the election can be deeply affected by disinformation.  So it is really a key issue, and we are very happy to be able to talk about that today with our speakers.
     And really to see how this disinformation nowadays, how this phenomena is affecting the electoral process.  
     We will start with the opening remarks from Mr. Guy Berger, who is the Director of Strategic planning, UNESCO Communication and Information Sectore. 
     And then it will be followed by a video prerecorded by Ms. Sarah Lister, who is Head of Governance at UNDP.  So now I will let Guy Berger speak for his opening remarks.  Please, Guy.
     >> GUY BERGER: Thank you, Mehdi, I was just unmuting.  
     Hello, everybody.  I think this is going to an extremely interesting, this discussion.  I trust you can hear me all.  
     So let me thank UNDP for joining with UNESCO in this.  And these are two parts of the UN that pay a lot of attention to the integrity of elections.  And for UNESCO, recently we have done some interesting work really work in Burundi Cote d’Ivoire, Myanmar, Tunisia, Uruguay on this issue of information -- disinformation of journalism, elections.  And we have some wonderful resources that we've developed here.  
     And I will post some links in the chat which I will speak a bit about if people want to follow them.  
     Now, one of the things that we have really noticed in this year is that there has been a huge amount of attention to disinformation concerning COVID.
     And there is quite a lot of consensus about what is false in terms of content about COVID and what to do about it.  But, of course, elections are much more complicated because there is much more contestation as to what is true and what is false including in advertisements.
     And so we know that some things in the elections, some content would be clearly -- some would be clearly false, but there is a lot of gray area about what facts -- I say facts as opposed to fabrications -- what facts are really important, which ones are less important, and what do they mean?  How do you put them together? What connections do you make?  
     So this contestation in the case of election seems much more complicated.  Not to say that COVID is simple because science papers are in process, policies and process.  
     But elections are particularly -- it is not easy to pinpoint always disinformation in the sense of false or misleading content.  It is also difficult in elections because in some instances we find that internet companies are trying to deal with disinformation by looking not at content but looking at behavior.  And they have this notion called coordinated inauthentic behavior, and that is then pointed to any disinformation at play.  
     The problem with elections is that behavior is not always a way to detect disinformation because elections are about campaigning.  And campaigning involves coordination.  And sometimes there is a range of actors and their identity is not always clear. They might be issued based as opposed to quality based.  And so even to look at coordinated behavior or inauthentic behavior is not always such an easy way to identify the problem during elections.  
     But at the same time, there is a problem before the elections and during the elections and after the elections.  And the problem is that disinformation is used to fundraise, it's used to set agendas.  Because depending on what you say is important, can shift people's attention and therefore their opinions, can be used to directly impact on the opinions, can be used to suppress voting amongst particular groups or confuse people about where to vote or how to vote.  
     And, of course, disinformation can be used to discredit the whole process all together in a very anti-Democratic way.
     And the problem is amplified, of course, that there are super tools in for disinformation in the digital economy.  There's SOC puppets.  We have these networks of inter-coordinating accounts with subaccounts.  And then there's automation, and then there's micro targeting on the side of those tools.  
     And then there are operating in an environment where internet companies have a certain curation model in terms of what kind of content gets amplified and even recommended sometimes.  And that is very conducive to disinformation.  
     And then internet companies not only have this model but the way they moderate content. So curation is one thing and moderation is another thing.  And the two factors also shape the way the tools can play in the digital ecology for disinformation.  
     So UNESCO has done a very nice, if I say so myself, study called the Elections and Media in Digital Times.  And I posted the link.
     And this really points out, as maybe our moderator said, you don't have genuine elections without having a free flow of information.  It is your right in terms of international human rights to vote and to have equal suffrage and secret ballots and to go into your free expression of the will of the electorate.  That's your right to vote.  And you also have the right to freedom of expression, and you need both.  
     The problem we find with disinformation is that you have certain expression that is contradicting the right to vote.  And that raises the question then, what would be legitimate in terms of limiting the imparting of information and the receiving of information in order to protect the right to vote? And how could we avoid violations of expression that would actually even damage your electoral rights.
     So this is a challenge.  And UNESCO tried to answer this to some extent in a study that we did very recently for the Broadband Commission on sustainable development.
     We looked at different responses, how you can have this balance between expression and limits on expression and electoral integrity but keeping the core of both rights together.
     And in this study, we identified five different kinds of responses which are not panaceas, but they help us think about the issue.  One is, of course, regulation.  And that has pros and cons.  And then there is self-regulation, which has pros and cons.  And these impacts on contents that goes at least in advertising and micro targeting.  
     There is advertising, how much can be spent to when advertise can take place, the degree to which it can be micro targeted on individuals.  And also there can be regulation and self-regulation about how credible content can be surfaced instead of the disinformation.  That's number one, regulatory.
     Second, of course, is the fact checking response.  Fact checking this information and publishing the corrections.  A bit difficult when you come to the social messaging because it's under the radar.
     The third one is right to education.  Of course, today right to education cannot just be about the electoral system.  It also has to be about how you need media and information literacy to understand the Ven diagram, the overlap and how you can discriminate between information and particularly when it is working on your emotions.
     The fourth area is media responses.  And we noticed that there is lot of collaborate media responses to really investigate the information to disprove it.  These are unprecedented alliances within the media and sometimes with Civil Society.
     And then you have ethical responses that includes a code of conduct amongst political actors to avoid using disinformation and to have accountability if they are using them.
     So that's five kinds of responses, there's probably more, but those are some that are interesting how to deal with this problem and how to keep that balance of free flow but also legitimate limitations, and keeping the integrity of the right to vote.
     Of course, the problem we face is a huge volume of disinformation.  It is difficult to identify this very fast-moving, politically relevant content.  And there is very little research that has been done as to how effective our responses are to this question.  
     So I will wrap up there just by saying that coming up quite soon, UNESCO will be working on electoral issues in Somalia, Zambia, Lebanon, amongst other countries.  And we are keen to work with people in whichever countries they are to try to bring some international perspectives on how to deal with the balance of information, the right to expression, and the right to vote.  
     It is not a simple issue, and I think my colleague in her video message, Sarah Lister from UNDP, will also comment on this.  With those remarks I hand back to our moderator.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, a lot, Guy, for these remarks, these opening remarks.  
     Now I will leave Valdemar to put the video of Ms. Sarah Lister.  Well, there is some little technical issue.
     Hopefully it is going to work.  Maybe I can try.  Let's see if it works.
     >> SARAH LISTER: It is my pleasure to welcome you to today's session on Elections in Times of Disinformation co-organized by UNESCO and UNDP.  
     I'm sorry that I can't join you in person for this important discussion, whatever in person means these days.  But let me begin by thanking our partners at UNESCO for excellent collaboration in organizing the session as well as for their continued commitment to supporting journalism in elections in times of disinformation.
     We are witnessing an unprecedented increase in information sharing.  Access to the internet and digital communication is rising rapidly across the globe.  In Africa alone, the number of internet users has grown five-fold in fewer than 10 years.  And the number of Facebook users has increased by an incredible 1,100% during the same period.
     Similar patterns can be seen across other regions, suggesting a significant shift in the way people are exchanging information and engaging with others.  However, as we can see also on an almost daily basis, there is a significant downside to this, too.
     In today's digitalized world, opportunities to seek, receive and impart information and ideas between citizens, politicians, and political parties are unprecedented with information related to elections flowing faster and easier than ever.  
     Precisely because of this ease of access and because elections constitute a cornerstone of increasing governance, electoral processes are particularly vulnerable.  There is a growing concern about how disinformation campaigns coupled with micro-targeting of political messages and sophisticated online advertising through social networks and platforms could affect the outcome of future elections.  
     How can these challenges be addressed?  How can we safeguard the integrity and credibility of electoral processes and protect the information value chain?  
     Clearly there are not readymade solutions, at least not yet.  That is precisely why UNDP and UNESCO are partnering to develop our knowledge further and we are conducting research in this field to be able to better understand these issues and adapt our programming accordingly.
     Although we are still at an early stage, some elements are already coming in to focus.  An increase in transparency including, for example, fact checking services, promotes greater awareness and ultimately leads to establishing proper response protocols.
     Greater cooperation between social media platforms and electoral management bodies or EMBs was well as other stakeholders leads to a better understanding of the available options to combat disinformation.  
     Comprehensive long-term information literacy campaigns are also important and can lead to dividends well beyond elections.
     At the same time, this unprecedented ease of information sharing presents huge opportunities, too.  For example, new technology can make it significantly easier for electoral officials to register voters as well as for voters to verify their voter registration status in real time.  
     EMBs can reach voters almost instantaneously with information about any last-minute changes or updates to the process, which is particularly relevant during the COVID-19 pandemic.  
     With that in mind, UNDP in close cooperation with the Electoral Assistance Division, part of the UN's Department of Political and Peace Building Affairs, UNESCO and others aims to support EMBs and other stakeholders in harnessing these new opportunities.  
     The UNDP, as the largest provider of UN electoral assistance, has on average 25 to 30 active electoral assistance projects at any given time.  We are, therefore, tapping into this the wealth of experience to learn as much as we can about this issue and share this knowledge with others.
     We are well aware that no one grouping or actor, neither the UN nor governance, nor social media platforms can address this challenge alone.  This will require coordinated, and above all, sustained action on the part of multiple stakeholders including EMBs, the media, Civil Society, political parties and tech companies.
     Most importantly, it will require the inclusion and active participation of entire societies including, in particular, women and young people.  As the proverb says, if you want to go fast, go alone.  But if you want to go far, go together.  
     We want to go far in combating disinformation.  We want to go far in promoting electoral integrity and advancing inclusiveness political participation.  And we want to go far in addressing the roadblocks we are facing in achieving the ambitious targets of the 2030 agenda.
     That is why we are joining forces with you today.  We want to hear from you how this issue has impacted your world in both positive and negative ways.  We want to ensure that a more connected world equals a more inclusive world.  
     Thank you for your attention.  I wish you a productive discussion.  Goodbye.
     >> MODERATOR: So now I -- first of all, I wanted to ask all of the speakers if they can put on mute their mic when they are not speaking in order to avoid some disturbances on the line, that would be great.
     And now actually we're going to start the discussion with our speakers, which I'm going to introduce.  
     So we have Ms. Laura Zommer who is Executive and Editor in Chief of Chicano, the first initiative of fact checking and verification of public discourse in Latin America.  This is part of -- she is a member of the board of the International Fact Checking Network.  And she is also a lawyer.  And also, she is teaching at University in Buenos Aires.  
     We have also Ms. Mathilde Vougny, who is Electoral Conflict Prevention Specialist at UNDP; and who works on the development of electoral assistance project globally which aim in providing supports for countries, national institutions, but also Civil Society, media, and other actors to conduct credible, genuine, and transparent election. So she is part of the UNDP Joint Task Force with the European Commission on Election Assistance.  
     And then we have Souhaieb Khayati, Director of North African Bureau of Reporter Without Border, the NGO working on press freedom and journalist.  But he is working -- so he is based in Tunisia, but he is working also in Magrab, so all the countries around Tunisia.
     And I believe we have William Bird, Director of Media and Monitoring Africa, who has worked in particular on the -- to counter disinformation online in the last election in South Africa.  So we're really very encouraged to know about his point of view.
     So as we all know, disinformation is -- especially in time of election is a very complex phenomena and which calls on the concerted effort of many stakeholders in order to propose adequate responses.  
     So this is why we have this great panel with this variety of profile to have these different point of views to see how we can identify this issue a little bit better and how we can propose good practice to tackle it.  
     So I'll start.  My first question is when we speak of disinformation, we understand it as information that is false, and which is deliberately created to cause harm.
     Now, we all know that it is not a new phenomenon.  It has existed through history including since time, the period that we have election.  But I wanted to know from your perspective, and then it is a question for all speakers, so it is what in your opinion are the new trend and aspect of this phenomena?  And how do you see it in your work?  
     So I would start this question to Laura, and then after Mathilde if you can give your point of view also on it.  So please. 
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: Hello, everyone, and thank you for this panel and this interesting conversation.  And thank, you, everyone that is connecting and taking part of this.
     As you said, disinformation is not necessarily something new.  What we think that makes online viral disinformation different from what we have seen in the past is on one side the volume of disinformation and also that the citizens might participate in spreading it without being aware of it in a lot of cases.
     What we think is before the audiences could receive this information via political campaigns or traditional media, but they were kind of just receptors and maybe share it with just their immediate groups.
     But now, or in the last years with social media, they can share with big groups.  These called friends that really, they are followers.  And in some cases, are now virtually participants in big disinformation campaigns that they and we not necessarily know who started.
     And then one of the different steps for us as fact checkers as opposed to the disinformation campaigns in the past, is that it is not easy to know the effort to what you are trying to make or to increase the cost of lying, you need disinformation campaign.
     This obviously means that fighting disinformation today and to fight disinformation today we have to take into account a lot of factors that were not part of the traditional public discourse landscape in the past.  
     And that includes, that part of our strategy in Tequila and Latam Chakia coronavirus work or effort during the pandemic is that the landscape today includes celebrities, includes perhaps models, musicians, actors, influencers as well as every citizen that perhaps had hundred or thousand followers and can be part of disinformation campaign without knowing it necessarily.
     And just to finish this intervention and to follow the time that you suggested, we also look into the volume of the disinformation that has increased so much.  We know that it is impossible to fact check each disinformation.  And all of the fact checkers around the world, nowadays more than 300, know clearly that we can't check everything.  And it is impossible that approach to attack or to battle this phenomenon.  
     So we need and we work on that much more media literacy on the side of audiences.  That is one of the most important solution for this problem.
     And another one is that we need technology to be quicker identifying the disinformation but also we need technology to be quicker to create the debunk and to spread it as soon as we can to avoid the repetition with that group and also with citizens that are not necessarily included in the campaign but have been part in some of that campaign.
     And also, we need, as we said, to understand much more of the psychologically on how disinformation plays with our bias.  And that is really, really important in some of our countries that are a lot of polarization, as you know.  
     And how that operate in different groups.  And when I'm talking about groups, I'm talking not only about different groups and parties ideologically, but also in terms of groups related to their ages.  It is not, at least in our experience, the same to work bias issues with old people or bias issues with young people.  
     Then that is more or less my first intervention.  It is not the same to show evidence on political subjects, that -- on health subjects that we did during all of the pandemic crisis.  And we need a better understanding on how disinformation work in each specific situation.  
     And at least in Latin America, there is not a lot of research or at least deep research related to disinformation during electoral periods.
     That is some of my approach or opinions related to that question.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Laura.  Please, Mathilde, we are very curious to hear you.
     >> MATHILDE VOUGNY: Thank you very much, Mehdi.  Thank you very much, Laura. 
     I will try to expand on some of what Laura said based on my experience and not to repeat anything because she already covered a lot.  
     The first point I think you mentioned, Laura, is we need to scale like sharing to big groups compared to small groups.  And the scale is like numbers, but how I see it in my work, it also like geographically speaking.  You see what I mean?  Like the news like the news, like a piece of news that would tend to be shared only locally like you have maybe ethnic tensions -- I work a lot in Africa so a lot of examples will be based on Africa context.
     So if you have ethnic tensions between two groups, in the past it would really expand and escalate to regional issues and national issues that everybody is discussing about, and that triggers like tensions at different level in the country.
     And now with new information landscape, you can really see like the information circulation completely changed.  You see like concretely like the interfaces are really like university towns, for example.  You have university students going to a bigger town like a regional capital, provincial capital, to study there.  And there is students from all of the villages coming and study here.  And they’re all like to use the social media and messaging applications.  
     And the information they would get from their village talking to their parents then they would like to distribute it to the students around.  And you would have this information on these tensions that were really local that is distributed through the regional and at national level.  
     I mean I observed it very concretely in Ethiopia recently, but it is something that you can see in many countries.  It's really a geographical scale.  
     So I guess if we look at something that's changed is how local news really expanded to national level type of issue where it was not the case necessarily before.
     The second like big change I feel is as much as we thought of, understood, and managed the communications around elections through traditional media and like more traditional media, the rapidly evolving environment online is making like our understanding of the dynamics and how information is shared really difficult.  
     If I'm -- I mean I'm not -- I'm more working on elections than on disinformation specifically.  But if I'm thinking about how we understood the topic in 2016 and 2017, with the Brexit, U.S. elections, and how we see it unfolding now in 2019 and 2020, the strategies are very different.  
     And I think, Mehdi, you pointed to the distribution of resource and impact of political and financial interest in there.  And there are huge financial and particular interests around elections in many countries.  And that contributes to bypassing the technical solutions that are found.
     So if we identified maybe like -- for example, WhatsApp.  You have a lot of people sharing information on WhatsApp.  And then in India in they managed to limit their sharing of messages on WhatsApp.  But then they will find like new platforms, new ways to distribute the information that are not envisaged in the prevention measures that are like deployed on the ground.  
     So we always like -- we feel that we're always a bit one step behind the new trends.  If I look at Philippines in 2019, the elections, you would see the political parties would use much less like the traditional advertisement platform and rely more on the, you know, the kind of nano-influencers, not the big figures that you would see speaking all the time but more middle range influencers, 100K followers, not two or three or four million that you would traditionally follow.  And so those strategies are always adapting.  
     I think we also saw it in the U.S.A. when you had a lot of like political advertisement and you had those international interferences.
     Here during the 2020 elections I feel you had a lot more like homegrown kind of sources of disinformation.  And it is on new platform and not necessarily on Facebook or Twitter.  So it's also about like how quickly this environment is evolving and the fact that we need to find solutions, but we are always a bit one step behind.  And that is kind of the challenge.  
     And it does pose the question of are the technical solutions like the priority?  Like because we see that there is always a new way to distribute disinformation, and there is so many options with the digital landscape.  So yeah, so that would come in the next part of the section.
     So I think I will stop here because I already spoke too much.  So scale definitely geographically speaking and then rapidly involving environment on my side.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Very interest, Mathilde, thanks a lot for these inputs.  And now could we hear from Souhaieb, and finish then with William.
     >> SOUHAIEB KHAYATI: Thank you, Mehdi.  I'm very happy to contribute to this discussion.  
     For the North Africa region, what this distinguishes disinformation during this last years is that it has rapidly spread through social media.  And in our country, we can mention especially Facebook where insults, defamation, or violence are extremely viral.  
     And in regards to the electoral competition and disinformation, what we have noticed in our region is that many candidates use social media to spread fake news and information during electoral campaign.  
     And even professional journalists and media outlets face many difficulties to cover electoral campaign where content and programs are completely absent and found themselves first to comment on disputes, disinformation, and fake news.
     With journalism it is possible to verify and check the accuracy of information.  And journalists, journalistic ethics impose regulation and self-regulation to journalists and media outlets.
     Journalists are no longer the only producer of information.  But quality journalism remains the only alternative to disinformation and our work with our North Africa Bureau of RSF is -- it's about building capacities to media outlets and journalists to make quality coverage of electoral campaign.  
     We began with Tunisia where the elections are a new process with the democratic transformation.  Tunisia faced four elections in a decade with -- I don't find the -- the regulation about media were not very clear.
     So most of our work consists in compiling media outlets and journalists to inform Tunisian citizens and to make the demonstration that quality journalism is the only valid alternative to counter disinformation.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Souhaieb.  Please, William.
     >> WILLIAM BIRD: Good afternoon, everyone, and thank you very much.  It's been fascinating already.  
     And not to -- I think some of the others have already mentioned some critical aspects and elements.  
     I think from our take, the fact that it is one of the greatest facilitators of disinformation is the fact that it is on this device, you know, it's on our mobile devices, it's something that has invaded our personal space in quite a fundamental and life-changing way.  
     And that has significance across every single aspect of disinformation in that we tend to receive it on that device which means that it comes very often from our friends, our family, our loved ones, people that are in our circles of trust that we are more likely to believe.  And it comes in different forms that are also very deeply personalized.
     So it used to be the case that there would be this greater sense of shared knowledge and a shared experience, whereas now with the micro-targeting and the kind of things that we're seeing that some of our other speakers have referred to, not only are they able to use specific networks to do things, As Professor Berger pointed out at the start, but they are able to target us on an individual basis and target us repeatedly.  
     Plus the fact that there's so much disinformation now.  All the people putting out disinformation have to do is they no longer have to and persuade you that their view is better.  All they have to do is create enough doubt in your mind about reality and you're suddenly placed in a position where you're no longer sure what you can do or how to act. 
     The moment you put a person in the position where they can't make an informed decision, that for an elections is like the death nail.  Why? You have to make an informed decision to vote, otherwise fundamentally you can't have a democratic state.  So it's those things that are then combined to add to that.  I think in addition to the fact that we're playing catch-up, as that was also mentioned, there is a lack of global accountability and accountability mechanisms for these things.
     So what we also tend to find -- and we have seen this play out so powerfully in the recent elections in the U.S.A. -- where you have got these massive platforms that have different rules.  
     So on one platform disinformation of this kind is removed.  And exactly the same information on another platform is allowed.  Again, it is not to say that that contributes directly to disinformation, but it does make its identification and combating and mitigating it that much harder.
     And you also then have got the scenario where you have got a global player up here -- and I say that, you know, because I'm down at the bottom of the continent of Africa in South Africa -- and they are deciding and determining the rules and the systems that should impact elections that are occurring in our country according to the rules and our constitution and our principles.
     So you have got quite a significant disjunct that occurs and each of those things allows for this virus really that is as insidious and as dangerous as COVID-19, for example, to just spread that much further and to also then further disempower your public.  
     Because, again, in the moment your public aren't sure what to do, then they've got a problem.  Two other things that I think have contributed massively to the spread of disinformation.  One is politicians now, senior leaders lie routinely.  It used to be something where if they were called out it would enough to shame and embarrass them and even potentially into resigning.  
     But we know that many of the leaders in some of the biggest politics in the world now lie as a matter of course.  They just lie, lie, lie.  And the moment they get caught in one, they just add on to it and keep lying and think there is no consequence to that.  
     In addition to that -- and that makes life very difficult, right, when leaders of ostensibly democratic nations lie as a matter of course and as a political strategy now.
     It means that how on earth are you meant to believe things that people in a position of trust are saying?  You can't believe them.  So why should you not believe something else that you receive on social media?  
     In addition to that, one of the most critical, critical elements that helps a democratic state function is, of course, media where they have to offer independent, credible, fair, accurate information.  
     So in those matters we've seen politicians now lying as a matter of course, we've also seen systematic and systemic attacks on media and on media freedom and on the media's ability to report.  And again, the moment you undermine media, it then makes it a lot easier for disinformation to spread.  So if your key countering forces are being prevented from being able to combat disinformation effectively.  So not only because of laws and they credibility being undermined, but big sustainability issues around media.  The moment those things get undermined means that it strengthens the hand, the evil hand of disinformation.  Thanks.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, William, for this explanation.  It is really extremely interesting to highlight that it is not only a technical or a problem of platform or -- but it is really also a political problem.  And that is very interesting to present it the way you did.
     Now I would like to go to another question.  I have to say we are pretty late, but I mean important is not the length but the quality of the discussion.
     But I will ask you if you can for the rest of the question, if you can do it a little bit quicker, quite quicker in order that we can go ahead with the different question.  
     Now that we had this interesting overview of some of the new challenges of disinformation in to the electoral process, I would like to know what are the good practice that you have been implementing at your level to tackle this issue?  And if you can give some specific example in your experience, that would be extremely interesting to share.  
     So now maybe I will start with Mathilde, if you can start with this question.
     >> MATHILDE VOUGNY: Okay.  Thank you very much, Mehdi.  And I will put a clock.  Yeah, quick.  
     So because we have a lot of speakers, I would focus probably on one main element. And it is coordination, coordination, coordination.  And I think it is always the same issue.  It is even the same issue with -- because I work a lot on preventing violence more generally, you know. 
     And what we see is that at the different stages of monitoring, analysis, verification, response and so on, you always like interface for coordination.
     And it is especially true in the context of disinformation because many actors mention, and many speakers mention it in interdiction and even in the presentations there is so many groups to be involved in there.  We have the tech side, the private company side, we have the information like media side.  You have the decision makers because eventually the response, the pure operational response comes down to them and clarifying the information.  Official communique, you know, about like the real information comes down to them.  
     And there is like the population, the influencers, like all the actors who have actually an impact on the information environment.
     So multi-stakeholder and like respective mandate and capacity.  Not like CSOs doing fact checking doesn't have the responsibility to issue a statement.  Like it is not the only origin that needs to issue a statement.  You know, some actors need to take responsibility at the institutional level.  
     Then William highlighted the issue of politicians and institutions that are playing that game, but obviously our role is how to make it work with every institution playing its role.  
     So if I go quickly to examples.  For example now I'm in Burkina Faso since a month, and I'm only here to do like control support on the elections.  
     In our project of support, we didn't have much on disinformation.  We did support for training of journalists with UNESCO as well.  But we didn't have it as one of the main issue because this project started already two or three years ago and nobody, you know, really highlighted it at the time.
     But when we arrived here and worked on the prevention of violence aspect, we see the initiatives to monitor violence in the country.  But also see institutions and CSOs and the media regulation authority that do this monitoring of social media and do the monitoring of media in general.  So they monitor this information landscape.  
     But they are not at the table of coordination with all of the actors that work on the monitoring of violence and monitoring of risks of violence and tensions.
     And so they were not in the response coordination groups.  So we decided, for example, to include to add a seat to the table for those actors for this very simple fact of being present and sharing the analysis on a daily basis.  
     Because otherwise what they were planning to do is maybe issue some communique on their own, maybe issue a report at the end of the elections.  But they wouldn't have the chance of having an impact on on the moment, on the day, and inform the electoral community to say, okay, we have a rising tension or rising issues on this aspect of the information landscape, you need to clarify this because it's your mandate.  
     And it's the frustration also of some institutional actors that were sharing with us the fact that they don't know on a daily basis.  They know after the election that those things were identified at the moments.  But don't get the reports.  They may hear it in the media, but they don't receive it like institutional.  
     So that on a short-term basis, it's very practical thing like make sure that all of the actors involved in monitoring and fact checking have really interfaces with those institutional actors.
     So that is an example that we put in place in a very short time frame.  In the longer time frame, so we're thinking about this issue of coordination, right.  And, for example, in Zambia we are putting together a much more agile framework where we actually connect those actors.  So we're looking at the moment at what are the existing pieces of the puzzle like who is doing fact checking and monitoring.  How do we include monitoring of social media indicators or disinformation indicators in the classic monitoring frameworks so that those different pieces can speak the same language and at the same time?
     So that is a really -- like a really important element.  How do you insert disinformation criterias in assessment and methodologies?  So we are trying to install this framework and plan for this deployment in order to have structures, existing structures of monitoring and responding to violence that include the disinformation aspect of things.  Because it is violence and rising tension, obviously it is linked together.
     So again I spoke too much.  But the point of my presentation now was having agile channels of communication and coordination mechanisms at the national level.  And that is what we are trying to do for the next electoral projects we are involved in.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Mathilde. And now I would like to hear, William, about his experience in the last election in South Africa.  So please, William.
     >> WILLIAM BIRD: Thank you.  So I think one of the points to build on Mathilde is that combatting disinformation can't be the purview of one entity or one agency.  You can't expect the electoral management body to deal with it on their own, nor can you expect the social media platforms to deal with it on their own.  
     It's something that really does require a multi-stakeholder approach.  And that's kind of what helped us when we formed a platform called Real411 where the basic idea was we wanted to make sure that the public felt empowered to do something about disinformation.  
     And we also wanted to make sure that inasmuch as we respect the platform's ability to have their own kind of guidelines, et cetera, they need to also respect the fact that we exist in a constitutional democracy and all of our media in election have to abide by codes of conduct, as do our political parties  so everyone has to play by the same rules.
     The only exception to that before we started this was the social media platforms.  So everyone else had to adhere to similar principles about, you know, not inflaming violence, et cetera, not putting out false information.  But somehow the social media platforms weren't there.  
     So we built a platform called Real411.  It's a public complaint platform where people can submit instances on digital media that they believe to be disinformation.  That goes through a review process, there is an outcome.  And if the IEC at the time felt that that should be removed from one of the platforms, they could ask the platform to remove that.  And if they needed to, they could get the -- they could alert the authorities, being the police.  And in other cases, they could then also involve the court if necessary, the electoral courts.  
     So it's a system that occurs as a kind of a midway that operated in partnership, we did it with the Elections Commission, which is then also supported by the media themselves and by UNESCO, I should add, and a range of partners to make sure that they had some kind of mechanism.  And it also meant that all content was adjudicated according to similar principles that were balanced with the constitutional democracy and, of course, protecting and promoting freedom.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks so much, William. 
     And can I ask Souhaieb now your perspective about good practices.  And that might be interesting also to know for the participant relation also maybe, I don't know, with safety of journalist.  Because a reporter who is out working, the reporter is also working very much on this issue.  
     And this is an issue during the election that disinformation brings often attacks against journalists.  So but that is one of the aspects, but if you can answer about good practices.  But please don't take too much time because we are running a bit behind.
     >> SOUHAIEB KHAYATI: Okay.  Thank you, Mehdi.
     So since two years, we started working on a project dedicated to train journalists in North Africa on media coverage of electoral process.  
     We have to imagine that journalists in this area are not familiar yet with this kind of media coverage and have specific supporting needs including the tools for fact shaping and dealing with this information.  
     And this support was also made to take into account the necessity for journalists to familiarize themselves with the national participation of electoral processes.  
     We began with regional journalists, and the focus was set on journalistic ethics during election periods in order to avoid difficulties facing -- for example, during the last electoral coverage and attacks from the authorities against journalists and media outlets, using them for spreading fake news and disinformation.
     With American journalists, we worked on the need to deepen their knowledge and good practices that we ensure then to be able to cover Morocco press code in order to avoid being confronted with penal and criminal code.  Cases are -- we are not so many cases in Morocco related to these difficulties.  
     For Libyan journalists, you know, and with the crisis in Libya, they shared the experience on the 2011 and 2014 election coverage.  And they will respond to the needs in terms of support for the upcoming election.  We thought we have an election in 2019.  
     In Tunisia, last year it was an electoral year.  And we were facing elections in the state of urgency for the media.  So NSF, Reporters Without Borders was able to be active and to respond to the needs of media with a practical guide for media coverage of election in Tunisia.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, a lot, Souhaieb.  Now I would like to know from the perspective of Laura and the fact checking, of course.  Please go ahead.
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: I'm going to be short.  I'm really allied with what Mathilde and William said related to that we need more coordination and collaboration.  
     Our experience from the 2019 presidential election in Argentina, related to that, it was amazing and with really good impactful results that can be useful for others.  
     We launched a collaborative process that is called Reverso which we brought together more than 125 media from all around the country.  They were the biggest TV station in the country, but also perhaps the small radio station in a small town in the north and the south.  And we worked together during six months just focused on this electoral disinformation.  
     And that allowed us, as you can imagine, to respond quickly-er because we have people in the field to look for the data and the evidence and the info that we did much more quickly than if we were in the capital of the country trying to do that.
     And also allowed us to spread correct or evidence-based information through an enormous amount of media outlets and reach the widest possible audience that we can imagine before that partnership.
     And related to what Mathilde said related to that we need to work together not just fact checking on the side, publication for judicial system and others.  So one of the things that was really useful from to gather experience was that when we identified a lack of info in the field, we explained that or just noticed that to the authorities to invite them to produce or to publish or republish info related to that.  
     For example, if we find two content related to how people can vote or not in a province, we know that there is something perhaps not enough clear for the public that would make the people that work on the disinformation easier to create that content.
     And then we explain or we just, I don't know, put an alarm to the authorities saying perhaps there's a lack of context here, it is good if you take care of.  And that not just be an answer and a respond after we identified, but also a kind of this is a framed problem and perhaps you should take care of because they going to continue disinformation in that part of the -- I don't know -- discussion or so on.
     And also, we did really big collaboration during the pandemic crisis with different countries, 18 countries and 35 organizations in all of the Latin American region.  And that allowed us to quickly debunk.  
     For example, if a Colombian fact checker checked something that after it arrived to Mexico, the colleague in Mexico has just add a new source from the country but not start from zero all of the debunk.  
     And then adding of what Mathilde and William and all of the colleagues said, articulation or collaboration is one of the main points that can be the solution.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, Laura.  I would also -- I'm receiving a lot of message reminding me that I have to tell you for the participant that you can ask question to the speakers and I didn't do that enough.  
     So please, there is a Q&A in the Zoom.  There are already two questions, but please don't hesitate because we will open that to the speakers soon.  
     Now I would like to ask a question a little bit more -- it is really about the influence of the COVID-19 pandemic during election and in relation with disinformation.  And I would like to ask more specific question to UNDP, to Mathilde, to see how in your experience the COVID-19 pandemic has affected the electoral process, the very electoral process?  For instance, the increase of mail-in ballot voting but also digitalization of online voting and mobile voting.
     And does it -- did this increase the risk of disinformation during this process?  So maybe you could elaborate on that, please.  
     >> MATHILDE VOUGNY: Thank you very much, Mehdi.  So I think it is what everyone anticipated when like the COVID-19 really blew up in March.  
     We had a lot of elections -- we talk about election years, right, so we have years with a lot of elections and then we have years where we have much less.  
     And typically 2020 is very, very busier.  In practice, a lot of people were anticipating that polling will need to be completely different and countries will change strategies, we would a huge increase in i-voting and e-voting, et cetera, et cetera.  
     What we noticed in practice is that you had several cases.  You had countries that had elections in the immediate aftermath of or really at the beginning of the crisis.  So I'm thinking Mali, France also had some local elections.
     But if I take the example of Mali, for example, it was I think end of March.  There were already cases everywhere, and they just went ahead.  
     You know there were two -- when we see the situation now in Mali, we can wonder if that had any form of impact.  But they went ahead with like the classic methodology and classic operations and some COVID distancing measures, et cetera, et cetera.  
     Then you have a few countries that postponed the elections.  I think it was a mixed group.  You had countries that postponed because COVID was a good excuse to postpone because maybe the operations were not ready.  
     And in that sense, it was great in some countries for making the acceptance for postponing.  So that was a really good thing for some countries.  And some other countries really postponed genuinely because they didn't know how to handle the COVID-19 crisis.  
     So France postponed, for example, the local ones.  But Ethiopia also postponed their elections.  And I think operationally it was good for them at the moment it was set up in the middle of the rainy season.  And constitutionally speaking, they didn't have a basis to postpone them.  And COVID was the emergency case that allowed them to do this postponement.  
     So for those countries, like all of the ones that postponed, eventually what we see is that they are moving ahead with the election as planned.  The operations are going to move ahead as planned.  For example, in Burkina and Cote D'Ivoire they didn't postpone, they had elections scheduled now, but the crisis is kind of behind them, the lockdown is over and so they're moving ahead with elections as usual.  Maybe a bit more masks and disinfectants.  But the rallies are going like normal rallies at the moment. So they didn't translate into, you know, changing deeply the operations.
     Now we have the case of the U.S. where ballot voting was already in practice, but it increased.  And I think this is where we need to analyze the impact of COVID on electoral operations.  
     It is less about the fact that it deeply changed the way operations are happening.  It is more that it is -- it creates this new element, this strange element, this change in practice that allows for disinformation to emerge.  
     So in the U.S., for example, the simple fact of having the COVID, it's introducing this doubt in the mind of people.  They are not sure of how things will happen.  It's not like the last years, you know, we are not in the same world and how it was done all the time.  So they think that things might change, and this is where like actors who are planning and planting disinformation can activate their strategies.
     So in the U.S. I think there were like calling campaigns of people informing voters that maybe polling stations are closed and they need to vote somewhere else.  And so they managed to exclude a lot of voters with this.  
     But it is less about the purely operational aspect than by the cyber threats.  And it all again comes down to the trust you have in the institution.  So trusting the Electoral Commission is the number one factor of credible elections.
     And by, you know, challenging the information landscape on what is said because there is already a lot of debate on COVID, what's true, what's not.  You know, there was already a lot of doubts around this.  
     And introducing like elections in a COVID environment, you are adding this extra layer of complication in how information is transmitted and you are adding extra opportunities for people who need to plant disinformation and, you know, like disrupt the process operationally speaking. So I would maybe refrain like this, and I will stop here.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks a lot, Mathilde.  Now actually I'm going to let my colleague Valdemar to handle the part with the questions from the participants, from the public.  Please, Valdemar.
     >> VALDEMAR CHRISTENSEN:  Yes.  Hello, thank you so much, Mehdi.  
     Thank you for the attendees that have raised questions in the Q&A box, which I have been following closely.  
     So I will just start with one of the questions and ask the panelists to help us in giving some answers to these.  
     So the first question is on if social media should be fact checked, would this then also extend to the comments on a post is the first question.  Anyone care to open?  Perhaps --
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: I can said what is happening today.  It is -- obviously, we are all the time taking into account that we want a robust public debate and electoral debate all the time and we have that in mind.
     And then in our case when some content is viral, we obviously pay attention about if it is a public figure or not doing that.  And when we are not sure about that, we can see where a public figure or a politician or a journalist or a celebrity that opened their own life in the social media, in some cases we blur the name of the author when we publish the debunk because really it is not necessary if we are not sure.  If that is a false or fake account or a real one, it is not necessarily good to show that name.
     But what it is important is to fact check the contents that it viral without paying attention if that appeared in a post, in an article, in a discussion format precedent or in a comment.  Because if the comment is making people, for example, during COVID pandemic make a treatment or a drug that is -- that can make harm to their health, it is important to fact check and to give the citizens for the public good data and not just leave it because it is in a comment and not in an article or a post.  
     I hope I was clear that at least that is our perspective when we approach the content.
     >> VALDEMAR CHRISTENSEN:  Thank you very much.  Any other panelists?  William, please go ahead.
     >> WILLIAM BIRD: I think in addition to that if you look at one of the things that disinformers do is hunt in a pack.  So there might be someone that would put out some initial kind of disinformation.  And then what you tend to find and certainly is the case of the work we have done is that you not only get disinformation, you get a link to other digital evils like hate speech and incitement. 
     You might get someone pushing some kind of nonsense, and then you get a whole string of others just jumping on that same bandwagon.  So anyone then who goes out as a fact checker, as Laura has just pointed out, who puts out something that's accurate and credible, you'll suddenly get a whole bunch of people jumping on them and accusing them of all sorts of -- if it's a woman fact checker in particular, then they'll jump on her and accuse her of being sexually, you know, easy, and they'll insult her particularly on a gendered and misogynist basis so that they kind of distract from what the real issue is.  
     Any time you see someone putting out disinformation, you then see a pack of these other people that are not necessarily disinformation in and of themselves, they might just go and say oh, that Laura, you can't trust anything she says, she's a stooge of whatever and whatever.
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: Noisy discourse.
     >> WILLIAM BIRD: They make a lot of noise so you can't hear else.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: Just to take into account because we didn't discuss it is we didn't think that disinformation is always related to issues. 
     On the contrary, what we see, in some cases it is satire pulled out of context or a real picture that is from the past or other country, then the disinformation phenomenon, it is not just a fact that you can catch it and convince the public that it is not in the way that is presented.  
     As William said, we have to pay attention to all of the whole of that type of campaign.
     >> VALDEMAR CHRISTENSEN:  Thank you, William and Laura.  Souhaieb or Mathilde, would you like to --
     >> MATHILDE VOUGNY: No, it's fine, I think William and Laura covered it.  Thank you.
     >> VALDEMAR CHRISTENSEN:  Let's move on to the next question a little bit in connection with this.  
     How will fact checkers affect people who make allegations against political candidates with no evidence is the next question.  Anyone care to answer that?
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: I can do it.
     >> VALDEMAR CHRISTENSEN:  Please go ahead.
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: I can start and they continue.  
     What we always said or repeat as fact checker is that it is hard to convince or to make people change mind when they are in the polls.  
     The people that are already really convinced and they are, I don't know, fighting for an issue or a cause, in some cases you show them clearly facts that are against their opinions or their beliefs and they are not necessarily going to change their mind.
     But -- and we know that, and we work with that.  But there are a lot of people that are not necessarily in that polls, they're in the middle, they are not necessarily pushing any agenda.  And in some cases, they are just surprised, or they are just affected because they saw a picture that made them be, I don't know, be angry or be happy and they share it.  
     And then we are focused on that middle people that are not necessarily the polls of the discussion of the issue.  But also I think it is good evidence for everyone, we are going to publish it, the document publicly in English and Spanish this months is that we made an independent research of the impact of our work last year during the electional period with Chicano and Reverso.  And the research was leaded by Professor Ernesto Calvo from Maryland University, and Natalia Huerte.  And what that research shows clearly with data and interview is that people don't necessarily change their mind, but they change their behavior.
     And when I'm saying that they change their behavior, they show with data that during the electoral period in Argentina when it was published that something is false the spread of the false content decreased.
     Because there were people that agree with that false content but decide not to reshare it because they prefer not to have the cost of being in the way of the liars or something like that.  
     And that shows a kind of small open window of perspective for the future work saying, okay, we are not trying and we are not going to change people's minds -- clearly not in the polls.  But if we have the chance when we publish fact checks quicker after some content is spread, if that make a lot of people not to share it, we are making, I think, an important contribution.  
     I'm not sure that we are going to change the people that are against the data of a candidate or a profile of a candidate, but what we are trying to do with our work is to allow people to be better informed and at least help people to the awareness not to be part in disinformation campaign without knowing it.
     >> MATHILDE VOUGNY: Maybe if I can build on what Laura just said.  
     I mean it is a very difficult question, and obviously regulating these kind of things -- like you don't want to repress too much like the public debate online either.  
     I guess to me, it also comes down to who is speaking and like what is the impact of this voice in the information landscape?
     Because as long as like the public, more the public and this middle category of people you mentioned, Laura, obviously you cannot do much.  You educate.  You fact check, you publicly fact check information, et cetera, et cetera.  
     But if it the voice is like the voice of another candidate, like a political candidate, the voice of an institutional president, for example, people who committed to some form of independence during the election at the national level but their voice is extremely strong and they have an extremely strong impact, then you need to go to what I think was mentioned, the ethical response to it like the code of ethics and those kind of things.  Usually they are not legally binding.  
     I have seen in some context you had some CSOs that were consistently, you know, pressuring candidates that were preaching the code of conduct and exploding them like blaming and shaming and that had a good impact despite a very difficult -- it was at Guinea this year.  I don't know if they did it in various previous election cycles. 
     But it was quite good.  They were like reminding everyone this person signed this code of conduct and what he said is clearly breaching those articles, so we expect consequences of one form or another. 
     So I guess you could also rely on those bases, but it is always difficult to activate those mechanisms.  But it is still one, one opportunity. Thank you.
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: Agree with that.  
     And just giving an example is that you are for sure the candidate that are in the middle and trying to create their legitimate about the truth, they are going to be perhaps much more open to follow that rules that the candidate, for example, Bolsanaro in Brazil, they don't even care.  
     I think that's the same problem that I found related to people that is really in the polls.  And then it depends a lot on the quality and the characteristics of the candidates if you can do more or less with fact checks or these type of sources, I think.
     >> VALDEMAR CHRISTENSEN:  Thank you, Laura, thank you, Mathilde, for some great answers.  
     In the interest of time, perhaps we will jump to the last question of the Q&A session here, but not a small one.  The question is should election disinformation in countries be tackled as a national or international/cross-border issue is the question from the audience.  Anyone care to -- William, please go ahead.
     >> WILLIAM BIRD: I mean I guess the answer is potentially both, right, which is to say to the extent that you may have foreign actors seeking to influence your elections in your country, then that is certainly an international issue and an issue of foreign interference in your elections process.  
     Also, we know that the bodies that we are dealing with here because there are massive multinational social media platforms, they necessarily are international.  
     And to the extent that I think you are dealing with bodies like UNESCO and others that are really trying to bring an international rights-based perspective to things, they automatically are kind of international.  
     So you want to have respect for the fact these are domestic processes and issues that impact your elections in your country, but at the same time, there is a very useful set of international rights-based principles around media freedom and understanding how to deal with these things.  
     And, of course, then there is the fact that they either might be foreign influence.  And/or is the fact that these platforms are, you know, are -- have -- are usually outside of the countries that the elections are taking place in.  
     So in South Africa, it is important that we have cognizance of the guidelines or standards that each of the social media platforms has, but that those are -- you know, we measure them against our constitutional principles and against those of our African, you know, principles on freedom of expression, et cetera, and those kinds of other useful African instruments.  
     I think you have got to have a combination of both of the approaches to how you deal with this.  And, of course, the reality is that you need again a multi-stakeholder approach to deal with these things.
     >> VALDEMAR CHRISTENSEN:  Thank you, William.  Any other panelists would like to elaborate on the question?
     >> MATHILDE VOUGNY: Maybe me for one minute because it's a very, very tricky one, and thanks for someone asking it.  
     I'm just putting on the table one of the trickiest example, you take Lebanon, for example.  Lebanon you need to really have political policies that are supported here and there by other like countries. And so you have like all of those interferences up and down the line both in terms of financing and it is just like all interrelated and come complicated the environment greatly.
     So I tend to agree with everything that William mentioned, but in practice I see like every time we are asked a question like what can you do, like what can we do to put it in place and mitigate this?  
     I have to admit that we have a lot of struggles.  We with work with the platforms like William mentioned.  Oftentimes for us it is really linked to the question of like campaign financing.  It is extenuating to that.  
     So we try to also work on that front because that is a real struggle.  So yeah, I would maybe add the campaign financing.  We are trying to work on that front as well because it is linked to receiving foreign funds and what fund is this and political advertisement online.  I just wanted to highlight this, campaign financing.
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: Just adding some perspective from the region from Latin America.  Making a kind of wrap-up of the last election in Mexico, Brazil and Argentina.  
     The environment about who was behind these info campaigns, they were really different in one country and the other.  And in defense on what William and Mathilde said related to the context of the country.  
     In Mexico, for example, we can prove or the fact checkers, the colleagues from there can prove that there were companies working with parties creating that content.  
     In Brazil, some colleagues from FOIA and other newspapers and investigative reporters for the country can prove that one of the campaigns from Bolsanaro creates some of that content. 
     In Argentina, they were not necessarily clearly making or participating in the campaigns.  And then what I'm saying is that it is not national or border perspective, it is all the time having your open mind, your mind open, sorry, and to have that what Mathilde said, the chance to be really flexible in the way you work, being flexible in your goal or your mission and your values; but be prepared to be flexible and quick to respond whatever you find it can be the most appropriate to find that group.  
     Because it depends on the election.  It depends on the candidates.  It depends on so, so many issues that I think there is not just one answer.  And in each electoral period perhaps it is useful when the people that are looking for the transparency during the elections to add a kind of report related to these info groups that were already put on scenario and that can help also other actors to find them with most success.
     >> MODERATOR: Well, thanks a lot to all the speakers, William, Laura, Mathilde, and Souhaieb.  And thanks a lot, Valdemar, for this session.  
     Now we have to wrap, to complete because we extended a little bit of time.  But I think it was very interesting honestly, this debate between you and the question from the participant.  I had another question that I'm just going to ask, nobody is going to answer; it's just a reflection for all of us.
     And my -- really my question I have, honestly, on the issue is that disinformation is so much driven, is so much based on emotion, on fear, on all of these very strong emotions. 
     How can we tackle only with cold-based facts, you know, response?  I'm honestly a bit skeptical.  It does have an influence, I'm sure, for, you know, right-minded people maybe, but we are emotional people deeply.  So it is I think a huge challenge that is not always addressed.  This disinformation is based on storytelling, on emotion.  And we are sometimes, I feel fighting this with little arms or little capacities and are very intellectual sometimes and we -- 
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: Can we --
     >> MODERATOR: I just said the question.
     >> LAURA ZOMMER: Emotion to our evidence base.
     >> MODERATOR: I think it is needed.  But I will thank you, and hope to see you in real at another opportunity.  Really thanks a lot, all of you.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-10-ws339-the-circular-economy-of-ict^^

 
     >> This is your IGF host.  Please be informed that this session is recorded and hosted under the IGF Code of Conduct and UN Rules and Regulations.  Please kindly respect that.  Please be also aware that the chat feature is for social chat only, and the Q&A should be used to ask questions.  Have a very successful session.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  I think we can wait a couple of minutes more because not everyone has joined.
     >> MODERATOR: Wiktor, I see Shawna Finnegan who is also an organizer among the attendees.  Can you promote her.
     >> Upgraded already.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: I suppose we should start now.  I see a couple of participants are not yet there, but I hope it is like Alexandra Lutz and Yunusa Ya'u that are not connected yet, but I suppose if they appear you will be able to upgrade them to the full participant.
     >> Yes, I will watch and once I see them, I will upgrade them immediately.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  Welcome to the Workshop 339 The Circular Economy of ICT.  The workshop is organized by Shawna, who is also connected.  But in the inconvenient time.  
     I'm an activist from IPC and also an academic from the Technical University of Catalonia.  I will introduce a little bit and then explain the structure of the discussion or the session.
     So, first of all, when we talk about ICT, we talk about things which have electrical power supply and many electronic components made with scarce materials and in exchange of electricity they deal with digital data and the process of data and storage of data.
     And the problem is huge.  The -- yeah, of course -- Andriette says, and we did it in other meetings, perhaps you can as the host perhaps upgrade everyone as attendees because I think it is more friendly to be in the same space and allow everyone to participate without any barrier.  Thank you for the suggestion.  
     So I know this has more hiccup when people get promoted, so let's wait until people join the room in equal terms.
     The computer-based systems tend to be cruel sometimes.  I mean in a normal meeting, you will not be happy to see some people behind the glass and the rest sitting in the meeting room.  And access rights makes things easier, or difficult, or they create a boundary that is not natural.
     Thank you for promoting everyone.  So, well, I was saying that the problem is huge.  Even though we are now 33 or so panelists, perhaps around us there are more than two or three times more devices than people in this meeting room.  And the same happens globally is that there are many more ICT devices than people by far on earth.
     And many more are being manufactured as we speak.  Some at least they work, but some no longer work but and they are still devices.  Some others are simply piles of huge hills of waste in landfills.  And that is happening and growing as we speak.
     Devices have very limited life span for the cost they require to be produced.  And the typical model is that devices are made, used, disposed, and that is what we call the linear model and devices can either be something useful, a useful resource, or waste.
     And then we could define briefly the circular economy or circularity as the goal to keep resources in use as long as possible. And then recover and regenerate devices so that we minimize, or we remove completely the waste, the concept of waste.
     So ICT devices are both part of the environmental problem, they consume energy, and they consume materials, they produce waste; but can be also part of a solution.  I mean digital can help produce other impacts but, of course, we have to find the right balance, let's say.  
     You know that, well, every time there are new models of devices being announced and consumers get excited, devices get abandoned because there is a new device and landfills also grow and grow.
     So we can do much better.  And not only much better because we think ethically that is correct, but also because the environment we are living beyond the limits of our environmental boundaries.  And then the more and more we experience effects of this environmental degradation.  
     So the idea of this meeting is to share different experiences, circular economy is partly unknown, and we want to raise understanding.  And we have several speakers, three to five, depending if one shows up, and the session was to organize the session the time left in three blocks.  One, to introduce some ideas from each of the speakers about five minutes per person.
     So we can spend one-third of the time-sharing views.  And then we can spend some of the time in questions and answers about the topics we introduce or other aspects that the audience can bring about.  
     And third, it is nice to share ideas, but I think it is also important to discuss what commitments, what actions we can do together or individually.  And collect some key ideas for the future.  Basically among three aspects.  
     One is what can be, let's say, what experiences can be replicated, what ways we can continue the discussion in a kind of multi-stakeholder forum for the governors of the economy in case we find it necessary; and what measures like policies, regulation mechanisms, incentives that can help improving to a circular or more sustainable economy of ICT devices.  
     So for that, I shared before and I also share again there is kind of simple like board where you can leave us with speak, you can share there.
     Key ideas you find worth highlighting.  You can also leave questions and later on you will be able to leave also some suggestions for future actions.  
     You can add in this link, you can add posit notes and also like highlight those who are interesting for you so we can also prioritize and discuss those who have more interests from the participants.
     So without any more ado, I pass the floor to Rozi who will give us her perspective.  Rozi, welcome.
     >> ROZI BAKO: Thank you, Leandro.
     Hello, everyone.  Among activists, I'm Rozi Bako.  And among academics, I'm Rozalia Bako. I'm a sociologist by profession, and my research interest is repair practices in the local community where I live and where I work.  
     Today is Black Friday in Romania.  I'm from Romania.  For me, it will be a Green Friday because I won't buy anything.  I think I have enough things and objects and devices and services.
     My focus today will be the repairability of devices and its context from the perspective of sustainable use of ICTs and I will be looking at regional opportunities and some local actions there that can be taken.
     And this is an occasion for me to give a glimpse of the forthcoming Romania report of the Global Information Society Watch organized and curated by the Association for Progressive Communications in which I'm a reporter for Romania since 2007.
     And also as part of the Circular Economy Action Group within the Association for Progressive Communications.  
     We are in the process of developing a guide on circular economy, and I developed a short case story from Romania, a good example on how the circular economy can be done with local and regional participation of multiple stakeholders.
     While communication -- the increasing environmental input is a reason for concern. The European Green Deal has set an ambitious goal for the European Union countries to be climate neutral in 2050 with no net emissions of greenhouse gases and the economic growth recovered from resource use.  
     For such a radical shift to happen, encouraging innovation and environmentally friendly solution in the energy sector, in housing, transport industry, should be on the policy makers agenda.
     As part of the European Green Deal, a new circular economy action plan was developed including a sustainable product policy framework.  And a special chapter of the document is dedicated to ICTs.  
     Implementing the forthcoming eco-design directive on energy efficiency, durability, repairability, upgradeability maintenance, the use and recycling, as well as prioritizing the right to repair for ICTs including the right to upgrade obsolete software, very important element when it comes to prolong the life of our devices.
     The European Commission is working on a circular electronics initiative to promote longer product lifetimes, as I said, including measures for energy efficiency, durability, repairability, universal chargers, better cables.  And improving the collection and treatment of electronic waste since it is the fastest growing waste stream in the European Union with an annual growth rate of 2%.
     Repairing things, including ICT, seems to be part of our daily practices.  It is not of the routines and the research that we are implementing locally shows the same.  
     It is not something ground-breaking to fix things.  It is just that there are several obstacles when it comes to repairing electronics and experts have identified three levels of barriers when it comes to implementing repair and repairability.  The first level is the legal and bureaucratic obstacles preventing accessible repair.  
     The second level is related to the price of repair compared to buying a new product.  And the third level is the consumer preferences not favoring repair, which is related to a growing consumer attitude among some categories of population and conspicuous consumption practices.  
     In order to enable the right to repair, experts recommend a step-by-step approach to policy makers in order to create an open repair environment.  The first step should be to eliminate the barriers on level one, the legal and bureaucratic obstacles preventing accessible repair.  And EU -- the EU action plans are within this framework.  So the regulatory framework should be an enabler of an open repair environment.
     What is the difference in terms of open and closed repair?  In open repair, consumers have a choice on who will conduct the repair.  In closed repair systems, they restrict consumers to repair shops provided by the manufacturer.  
     And currently we are in a system of closed repair.  In order to open the repair market advocated by independent repair shops and consumers, it is necessary to grant access to spare parts and schematics of ICTs.  And it is important to note that a closed repair environment shortens the lifespan of products due to the restricted access to authorized repair services and their high prices, encouraging consumers to rather buy a new smartphone, tablet, or laptop rather than repairing the old one.
     Of course, those who cannot afford, it is also a matter of affordability.  Those who cannot afford to buy a new one will try everything to prolong their device's lifespan not because they are so environmentally concerned but because they don't have the resources to buy a new one.  
     And there is another important element that authorized repair shops often mislead customers, telling them the device is either not repairing or they offer repair services but at the very high price which discourages consumer to repair their devices.
     In my case study developed for the circular economy, I presented a short positive example from Romania, I will just refer to it as a teaser, on educational campaign developed by a waste management company from Romania called Ecotique.  It's called Enter the Circular Solidarity.  
     It is a good example on how multiple stakeholders can work together in order to come with sustainable solution.  During the lockdown, only about the 60% of the children had full access to an electronic devices and electronic learning environment so something needed to be done so this organization in partnership with a Workshop Without Border, a social enterprise where people with disabilities are fixing electronic devices, they collected discarded computers and laptops from the companies and repaired it and then distributed it to those schools and NGOs in need of learning, digital learning tools.
     So that is for now.  My interest and commitment here is to learn more from participants and my fellow panelists on how digital literacy and environmental literacy can be weaved together.  For years I was doing it on separate tracks.  I work as an activist in an environmental organization since '94, 1994.
     But also started to volunteer in digital literacy programs.  And I think it is important to make environmental literacy part of the digital literacy agenda.  Thank you for your attention.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Rozi.  And now I pass the floor to Mireia.  Mireia, you can introduce yourself and speak. I don't know if you have slides you want to share, or I can share.
     >> MIREIA ROURA: Yes, I have some slides.  I was wondering if you were going to do it or if I have to do it.  I can pass if you want.  Hello, everybody.  Thank you, Leandro.  
     I'm Mireia from eReuse, Barcelona.  I am the same team with Leandro and with David Francesca who is joining this workshop as well.  
     First of all, I want to start my presentation with a point of reflection.  So can we say that our way of consuming as if it were what the philosopher can call an imperative, it's a form of banality of evil, it's a concept. 
     According to the Waste Monitor Agency, it might be because we are following the dogma of consumption without thinking if this is good or bad. 
     The consequence is that last year we dumped or burned more than $57 billion in materials, the extraction of which had generated suffering and destruction.  
     So we at eReuse believe that it is urgent to raise awareness of this problem.  The citizen has become just a consumer more than ever, and especially in technology.
     So what can we do?  The materials used in technology are valuable but have a detrimental effect on vulnerable communities with rights not enough represented.  And additionally, single-use consumerism has an enormously negative impact on our planet.
     In eReuse, we focus our models based on commons governance with shared partnership as a key structure to help reduce this negative impact.  So as you see in the screen, our model creates local ecosystems with many stakeholders with different roles that intercooperate to capture, remanufacture, and recirculate electronic devices for, among others, fight against digital inequality.  And we do it all under a commons governance.  
     This means that the management of the thousands of devices that we receive each year is managed with as a common pool with agreed rules, compensations and limits and sanctions.
     In this ecosystem, there must be an entity which acts as a referee.  With reference to Elio Rostrum Nobel Prize, the common good to be preserved is the use value of the devices.  So under a commons ownership of the devices the end user is not the owner of the device.  He's just receiving a service by using it.  
     So when this end user wants to get rid of his computer, he has to ask the circuit before.  And if this circuit considers that it cannot be recirculated again, then and only then it's recycled.  So can we pass to slide two, please, Leandro.  Okay.
     So we have a very good relationship with Barcelona City Council.  And we began by accepting thousands of computers from this public administration.  But soon we discovered that the public sector use of devices was much greater than the private sector.  So, therefore, one key lesson is to not become the landfill for the public sector devices because the use value is much lower than the private sector.  
     To have a sustainable ecosystem, we need to prioritize the devices from the private sector as an input but focus on both the private and public sector for the output.
     This focus helps to reinforce the public sector awareness of sustainability, and this can lead to more active green policies by the public sector such as green procurement policies.
     Okay.  Next slide, please.  Running an ecosystem can be hard.  Tools, protocols, technology are all needed.  So we have developed an open source support software to manage registration, inventory and traceability of the reuse pool of devices managed by the circuits.
     So through the different refurbishment entities and through this open source software, we call up details about the secondhand computers and their components to analyze their full life cycle until final recycling.  So we can calculate the environmental impact in addition to the reuse hours as well as the social impact.  Okay.  Next.  
     The chain of value or a circular economy model is greater than the classic charity because it delivers value through the creation of environmental jobs.  So one key point is that the end users needs to pay for the service at an affordable price, of course.  The question is, who pays the costs when we target the vulnerable communities?  It depends on the structure and support within its ecosystem.
     And to finish my presentation, my final question is about social impact.  Because we have distributed thousands of computers in Barcelona, but I asked myself how and what are they being used for?  So we need to continue with investigation here.  
     All in all, the model has been labor intensive to set up, but the benefits have far outweighed the effort.  So I finish here, and I pass the floor to Leandro.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Mireia, that was very clear, well done.  So now the next speaker is Yunusa, I see you are connected.
     >> YUNUSA YA'U: My name is Yunusa Ya'u.  (Distorted audio).
     >> MODERATOR: Your sound is breaking up, maybe you can switch off the video.
     >> YUNUSA YA'U: As I said, the communication solution but also practice as -- (distorted audio) of Civil Society organizing from the developing country like Nigeria. 
     But I would like to look at how digital inclusion in the context of COVID-19 and in the context of the (break in audio).  And explain out as we push for this -- (distorted audio).
     The most of this reflects this with the importation of secondhand ICT goods.  This is because first (break in audio).
     And secondly because of the (distorted audio) which is leading to the response to the demand for digital inclusion.  People respond -- (distorted audio), and two very promising action have been taken --
     >> MODERATOR: Sorry.
     >> YUNUSA YA'U: And it is increasing the redevelopment   of --
     >> MODERATOR: Sorry, I think it is really hard to understand.
     (Distorted audio)
     >> MODERATOR: Can you -- I'm sorry, but we only get one out of 10 or 20 words.  So can you --
     >> YUNUSA YA'U: So I'm not --
     >> MODERATOR: Can you share some text on your presentation because it will be easier to follow.
     >> YUNUSA YA'U: And that is creating a foundation for the cycle economy --
     >> MODERATOR: We lose most of your message, but if you have some text.
     >> YUNUSA YA'U: So I was acing that -- (distorted audio).
     >> MODERATOR: It is a pity we cannot hear such an important point from Yunusa Ya'u from Northern Nigeria when connectivity is not there.  
     It is difficult to be in a circular economy.  And what Yunusa was talking about is related to the additional problems in dealing with e-waste and repair and the situation in that country which is aggravated by these difficulties of communication.
     So perhaps we can try later on to connect back to Yunusa.  In the meanwhile, I think we can move to the next speaker.  And perhaps, if we are lucky, we can try again later on.  
     I haven't seen Alexandra Alix.  Are you there, by chance?  I don't see you among the participants.  
     If so, then we can move forward to Anders. Anders, can you introduce yourself?
     >> ANDERS ANDRAE: Yes, I can introduce and speak for a couple minutes, five minutes at least. 
     >> MODERATOR: Okay. 
     >> ANDERS ANDRAE: I have no slides, and I warn you about this, but I will try to speak slowly.  
     I am Anders Andrae.  Maybe you have heard something about me.  I have worked for 12 years, now more than 12 years at Huawei Technologies, a Chinese telecom equipment manufacturer.  
     And yeah, I work with life cycle assessment, eco design, substance management and these kind of issues, sustainability issues.
     So it is very interesting time now for this topic, and it has always been.  The life cycle assessment is very important.  It's has always been, but especially for the evaluating circular economy business model, it is crucial to get all these assumptions and data right.
     But still, due to even we can criticize the modeling.  It is essential to everything, every action we do, whether it is repair, remanufacturing, durability, all of this comes together in one score, maybe around carbon or around other indicator.  
     You always have to do these life cycle assessments before you can do -- before you can judge is this the good strategy?  We have discussed this a lot, Leandro, and we also understand that.
     So that is that.  I mean for the circular economy that we need to start, where is the importance?  High volume products like maybe in my field the wi-fi router or something like that.  It has a much higher success -- chance of succeeding with implementing the circular economy in a shorter time than the very small low volume specialized products.  That is how the economy works like that. If you don't have some other regulation.
     So it is not that we can rush into this.  Yes, we need just do it immediately, not directly for all the products.  Definitely the collection of all products, I think personally, and I think this is shown by the macro and micro that we have it for -- we need to collect more of the e-waste, not just landfill.  This is lunacy to just pile it up.  There are resources there that we can use.  Precious metals, critical raw materials and all of that. And this is also recognized.  
     So before we have remanufacturing of every product, we need to start to collect and see what can actually be reused because in all of this technology process, which is rampant, you cannot reuse 10-year-old, you know, micro circuits.  That is impossible.  So we have to look at the realities.
     But there are many indicator which are that can measure this problem.  The materials circularity indicator from Ellen MacArthur Foundation. This has not been published so much.  You have much more to do to publish and carefully evaluate these indicator with ICA is very important.
     And there is so many bolt-ons on this.  Today I read something about even in the data center refreshed source can also have enough energy efficiency.  You know, if modeled correctly.  
     So there's a lot of things that the artificial intelligence or the tools can try to help optimize this jigsaw puzzle, but still apparently not enough money in this maybe as in the energy efficiency. 
     Energy efficiency totally extremely important, of course, to solve the whole thing, but still way under resourced.  And then the material efficiency counterpart is the performance achieved with the amount of material you are putting.
     It is also, you can solve this.  And to finish with ideas which I have heard from actually the European Commission.  Actually, they have this Green Deal.  And the previous speaker talked about this, circular economy action plan.  This is very serious policy agenda, drastic new policy will come in just a couple of years in this area.
     So it is more than -- it is more than just the usual regulation on one product. This is a total economic problem strategy.  It is not only an environmental regulation, the green teams, it is -- yeah, I like these new words, extended producer opportunity, extended producer responsibility, but extended user opportunity and positive opportunity.  There they want to improve the market for recycled materials, but then you also have to also check with the ACA how much can you actually gain for this and for which environmental indicator.
     There are the product passport for each product sold, you know.  You have to declare how much recycled content and what is the durability.  So that is an interesting idea which they have.
     The CO2 rewards are planned for this to link CO2 targets to circular economy.  But then I argue that CO2 is important.  But the most important environmental indicator by far is biodiversity.  In every environmental indicator, raw material declaration, if it's raw material depletion, CO2, acidification has been linked to the extinction of species.  Because no ability to -- the biodiversity services without them, so it's over.  
     So there you need to -- the circular economies, bio-based and toxin-free, it's is all great.  But the biodiversity has to be an indicator which can never be compromised.
     Science-based.  We have the science-based targets.  Now we're talking about science-based resource use.  So you have indicator on product level.  So it's science-based, how much resources are there.  You have 10-15 additional depletion indicator, but then you need a kind of agreed, for the moment, science-based research, science-based energy efficiency also.
     And the European Commission I think seem to want to focus on the materials themselves as to the green chemistry.  I mean drastic decarbonization of the metals and plastics and ceramics, all these building blocks.  If you decarbonize them, but then I think it's a little dangerous to say just decarbonize them. What are the rebound effects and side effects of decarbonization?  Are there any other effects on biodiversity?
     And, of course, we have now this linear waste management.  You have the end of use phase waste management.
     But then it has to go from the waste management to truly, because it is circular economy. But for that, we are quite far to reach an agreement that we should have a circular economy because it has a lot -- it's criticized a lot about relying the conflicts between durability and reliability and safety. 
     Product safety is very important.  Yeah, prerequisite for every product for the safe handling of the consumer.  And then you -- what is most important in the eco design regulation.  You also have that that the performance and the safety regulation are kind of more important and they more low risk than this.  
     But there is more to do definitely.  It is very interesting the tools we have now to check to -- to check this problem.
     And yeah -- and also this is not new but, yeah, the proper design for planet safety, planetary boundaries we have already.  But I think these kind of messages will be more important.  
     Circular economy is one issue we can tie this together, but it is hard to understand where are we now.  That we need to make sure and be able to make sure sustainability more or something.
     And but my personal idea is that biodiversity is under researched and this is -- we need to have -- if we have carbon reduction, we also need to have, you know, biodiversity safety, something like that.  I'm finished.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Anders.  A lot of ideas that are worth maybe to discuss.  So shall we maybe open the floor for questions or comments?  
     You know, the circular economy, it is very extensive.  And there are many processes involved.  And we tried to cover some and some viewpoints, but if you have a question or comment also about something that we have missed in the landscape, feel free to speak to ask the floor and maybe you can raise your hand and ask questions.  Or maybe the speakers want to clarify any aspect that was missing.
     I see a comment about the lockdown as a good time to collaborate and suggest a new macroeconomic design.  The mention about the planned obsolescence.
     In fact, obsolescence has been mentioned as well that it is not like fruits that evolve over hundreds of years, but devices are 10 years, old device is no longer like useable sometimes.
     And asking for --
     >> ROZI BAKO: May I answer?
     >> MODERATOR: Yeah, go ahead, Rozi.  Feel free.
     >> ROZI BAKO: My camera doesn't work for some reason.  I don't know why.
     >> MODERATOR: But we can hear your voice.
     >> ROZI BAKO: Oh.  It was important, I wanted to show you.  I don't know what is going on.  I wanted to show you a very old phone I'm using that I can describe.  It is a 2015 phone.
     Related to -- devices, yes, Leandro, you are right, we are surrounded by many digital devices from many different generations.  And we can choose what to do with them.  Should we discard them and make them top the landfills or prolonged use in a way that is reasonable and practical?
     For instance, I use my six-year-old phone to make digital recordings.  I record interviews with it.  It works perfectly.  I can also use it as a hotspot.  Last year when I was in Tunis at the Rights-Con conference, I bought a data SIM for my phone and it is true that it works only under 3G, but it was perfect.  And I could use my very old phone as an internet resource at the conference for myself.
     So, I think we need some ideas on how can we from a consumer perspective, how can we prolong our device's lifespan in this way.  Or on a higher level when we think on a -- on an organizational level how an organization discards the products they have a larger impact.  I think it is important to consumer level as well.  
     It is an educational activity to educate consumers reusing their devices and prolonging the device's lifespan, but we have to also look at the bigger picture as well.
     And as Carlos Alfonso mentioned in the comment section, that there are real difficulties like servers are very energy consumer sources and they are really difficult parts of the problem when we want to work on circularity.  
     Let me give you another poll from recently remarkably a telecommunicator from Romania launched a repair campaign called give a new life to your device.  And they are launching repair services for the consumers.
     Previously they only launched a campaign how to collect old devices and encouraged consumers to buy new ones.  Now it is a shift.  It as mentality shift as well.  And even from the perspective of big players, it is important to mention these good practices because they might be copied by others.
     >> MODERATOR: In fact, what you mentioned, links with some of the comments in the discussion that it may happen that your device is no longer useful because the frequency bands might be moved to 5G so to make room for selling new devices and means that older phones will not find the best station to connect and be used.  I don't know if anyone wants to vocalize the discussion on 5G.
     >> ANDERS ANDRAE: You cannot use the old phones on the networks.  They say it is the same as 4G phones, you can use the 3G.  At least that is an option about 5G is incorrect.  
     The obsolescence will not be driven by that principle.  It will be -- yeah, as the usual stuff that you won't -- that you think you need it.  Yeah, yeah, I cannot live, have my old one just because there is something new now, you know.  So this is the principle.
     >> MODERATOR: It might be the case, but at least in my area, I mean my old Nokia phone from 10 years ago doesn't find because they are being replaced.  Maybe it is 2G.
     >> ANDERA ANDRAE: I think it must be 2G.  But I think the discussion is also how many years it should, for example, the mobile phone, be able to live?  Not 20 years, maybe not even 10 years, but maybe five years or five to seven years.  That could be a discussion, what could be the expectant lifetime, technology lifetime.
     It should be forever.  That is what the earth demands.  This is one thing I think about that if they should have this, if people don't use it as long as they could anyways.  That's it.  If they break down before the technical physical lifetime, that's a problem.
     5G is a big topic.  Maybe we need 5G to solve some other issues also.  The resource efficiency of 5G could be quite high.  Enabling, you know, pipe inspection with drone, things like that, so then you save fuel and resources.  
     It seems it has some energy consumption, but it also enables something, and it is also very energy efficient.  Joules per beat is like 25 to 100 times more energy efficient.
     And then how we prove these enabling offsetting cases.  I think it can be done, but that is not all.  But I think it's up to the individual, mostly individual choices.  The circular economy is about individual choices, at least in countries which have a prolific collection infrastructure like, for example, Sweden, then it is up to the individual how circular you want to be.
     >> MODERATOR: Yeah.  But, for instance, I see also a comment in the chat that people is more willing to drive second-hand car even if it is more dangerous than a phone.  But and they can last more than 10 years, of course.  I see -- and people love to keep their cars working despite they are older and older.  
     And the older they are the more valuable they become.  And perhaps with modern electronics that is not the case.  And old 20, 30 years cars ideally, I mean people are very proud of them.
     Of course, they are not capable of doing wonders like modern cars that have so many features and people love them.  As you said it is a matter of choice in letting individuals to decide about the usage of their devices.
     It is a matter of choice.  And I encourage you to come back and bring some contributions to the board.  I see some of you did it.  So maybe we can also -- any other comment?  
     Or we can move and talk about what we can do for this.  If you look at the board, there are some ideas, questions and action items.  So we can clarify whatever you are interested.  
     But we have to make sure that we get -- we have some conclusions that allow us to think about, for instance, do we need a governance for the circular economy?  Is that something needed?  Or not?  And if so, is it part of the IGF to that?
     >> MIREIA ROURA: I think governance, more in because we are -- our reverse supply chain of electronic devices is now very old tech, so I think that information does not flow between all regions which means it is according to the principle of maximum economic profit without taking the others into account, no?
     Simply because they don't have the information about the other intermediates.  And cooperative ecosystems and governments allow information to be shared and to take decisions that maybe they are not the most profitable economically for the sector, but it is the best for everyone and for the long-term.
     >> MODERATOR: There is comments in the chat about the repair economies that are quite prevalent in many parts of Africa.  
     And that is like we can try, if Yunusa can speak again because that was mainly the topic of his speech.
     >> ROZI BAKO: Maybe he can add the comments in the chat box.  
     And my internet is unstable, and that is probably why I cannot switch my camera on.  Repair and repairability and upgrade the life of devices and the questions addressed on how can we put this message forward to different stakeholders.  
     Yes, the IGF is such a space where we can encounter people from the technical community, educators, Civil Society activities, policy makers.  I think it is -- this is one of the spaces where we can speak the same language even if we have different perspectives, we can bring this positive message.
     And I do believe that case studies guides like the circular economy guide we are working on, Leandro, are good tools to promote the different ideas to the public, to the general public and to the policy makers.  
     For policy makers, maybe some other format for our instrument such as policy briefs summarizing the research results and mainstreaming the key ideas and also success stories from other parts of the world because it is also inspiring to see how different regions are in country -- and countries are.  working on the same issue.  This is important to get inspired from these.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  I agree that IGF is designed for a discussion about the internet and definitely ICT devices are the key ingredient.  
     I don't know if the audience or speakers can comment about other possible forums?  There are many.  And probably in each one of them there is an opportunity to discuss about one aspect, but some degree of coordination among them would be really useful.  And even when we talk about IGF, there are different instruments.
     There is a comment about IGF to work together with World Economic Forum and new think tanks.  It was mentioned before the foundation that works on the circular economy and one aspect they have worked sometime is about the electronics or computer-based devices.  That could be another.  
     We are in the decade of the big, required efforts for mitigating climate change.  Anders before talked and he is active in the ITU-T group on circular economy.  
     And recently there was an approve the recommendation of the trajectory of 1.5 degrees from the IPPC implies a linear reaction of more than 4% of environmental impact on the ICT sector every year.  Which is -- which goes in the opposite direction of how the sector is evolving.  Definitely we are not in the right track.  And also sometimes we talk about ICT, but ICT is -- it builds on materials.
     And builds on energy.  And energy comes also from other sources which are not that green still.
     So yeah, there are some comments here about mobile networks.  Because, yeah, when we talk about devices, we tend to talk about user devices and ones we own.  But these depend on the network providers and that is some mobile operators and base stations and internet servers.  And that is a part of the problem as well or the challenge.
     There is mention about the growth.  Frugality is not having more but rely on less.  I see Michael is willing to talk.  Please go ahead, Michael.
     >> MICHAEL OGHIA: Can you hear me?  Great.  Thank you so much, Leandro, for giving me the floor.  
     So I want to say when it comes to thinking about the IGF as a space for this, I have been advocating for a very long time that the IGF is quite an ideal place, to be frank, to be discussing things like ICT sustainability, circular economy as it relates to the internet and electronic devices.  
     I think it's wonderful because my thesis and a lot of my experience kind of revolves around the fact that there are so many of these conversations happening, but in many different places.  This is the siloed approach that is often referred to.  
     A good example of this is there's a community that I joined last year called the Forum for Sustainability Through Life Cycle Innovation, FSLCI.  It's based in Berlin. 
     But it, too, is a multi-stakeholder community that is meant to bring together different organizations and individuals, researchers and whatnot working on lifecycle assessment.  
     And I went to their summer school last year, and it was incredibly eye opening.  But the thing is like practically nobody there was anybody that was working on necessarily digitization or working on ICT sustainability.  
     So it is was a really good way for me, for instance to bring our perspective to them and for me to get their perspective.  So it's a good example, I think, of a community out there that is not necessarily engaged with the IGF but is one that we should be reaching out to.
     So I suppose my kind of thesis or my call to action involves this, is that to me the IGF represents a great place for convening, for coming together, for bringing together all of these different perspectives.  And then we can then figure out what needs to be done, what work needs to be done.  
     Already there is a proposed BPF on environmental data.  And that's fantastic.  That is one side of what I call the square.  I'm creating this thing in my head where it goes if there is four points on the square, one point is data.  One point is ICTs themselves and their ability to enable sustainable development or enable more, let's say, greener digitizations.  But then there is the opposite side, the third point, which is obviously ICT sustainability in and of itself.  
     But then there's the fourth point.  And that is, say, the sustainability of organizations, things like procurements, things like decarbonizing their supply chain or their operations and whatnot.  All of these things are interconnected.
     But at the same time, there is a lot of space to take each one of these in its own right.  
     The same goes to the circular economy.  Making sure that we are bringing together, you know, interested individuals and organizations that are interested in this, but also making sure that we have a very clear ask, a very clear kind of path forward, so to speak.  But of course we can only do that through consultation.  
     So I really kind of implore everyone to think about the different communities.  Who is missing?  Who is not part of this conversation?  And then use the IGF as the space, whether it is the national and regional initiatives or the global IGF as the space where we can bring them together.  
     That is exactly what we're doing on Monday, for example, somebody I met at the summer school, Pia, she used to be a board member of FSLCI.  She's a well-established Chilean circular economy expert working in Latin America.  She's actually going to joining on Monday in a session I'm moderating, we will be talking about, and Veronika who is also on this call will be there as well.  
     It is discussing how does this multi-stakeholder effort to create a more sustainable ICT ecosystem, what does that actually look like?  How do we get there?  Because the research is there, the ideas are there but now we need to talk about implementation.  And the only way to do that is talking across communities and the only way to do that is if we have at least one central place to bring everybody together.  
     If that's not the definition of the IGF, I don't know what is.  And thank you so much for doing this.  And thank everybody for being here.
     >> MODERATOR: I totally agree with what you say, and it would be great that we use this time together to define a common mission and set of values but also to decide on continuing this discussion further through, I don't know if Dynamic Coalitions or Best Practice Forums because definitely the topic deserves it.
     Because IGF is a space that is active during a few weeks over the year, but we need to find some way to continue the discussion and also start the action because it is time for doing that.
     So it is great that -- I mean, if you are involved in, any of you involved in any further discussion during the IGF, the chat and the support is a good place to share the links because we need to keep this discussion on.  And also to reinforce what the IGF has done this year that has put environmental topics as one of the key priorities.  So we have to make sure that this continues and gives results.
     I see other comments about different business models.  For instance, we typically think about consumer electronics or personal devices or digital devices, but also there are the work environment and the governmental environment, public procurement is very successful and the selection of devices for work.  
     And it is driven by completely different principles.  And public procurement is many times aware of all of the implications from the circular economy because they want to perhaps buy at the best price but also not be part of the exploitation of the environment and of people, both in the manufacturing and then in the disposal of the devices later on.  
     Or during the COVID pandemic we've witnessed, as Mireia mentioned, that governments sometimes see a solution of buying new laptops for children.  But then when they go to the marketplace, they find that the supply chain is broken.  
     And then the only way to go forward is by reusing devices that were there and were operational recently.  And then that is the only way to really supply any devices for users.
     There was a comment here about guiding the space and, of course, about ineffective action, and we have to find effective ways to move forward.
     >> ROZI BAKO: I think an important stakeholder to be brought to the discussion table beyond the consumers that was already mentioned, those consumers or the end users of the supply chain, independent repair shops, independent repair organizations are also deeply involved in the whole process of the circular economy.  Because their interests are largely bridged with the closed repair environments.
     >> MODERATOR: Yeah, yeah.  I mean in the last years has been, at least I know in Europe, the European Right to Repair Campaign with partners like I Fix It who promotes a kind of like approach similar to free open source so citizens when they buy devices, they should have the right to know how to maintain them and how to repair them.  
     And sometimes this -- you mentioned in your speech before that sometimes it looks more like a closed source model where your device doesn't seem to be owned by fully you but the manufacturer has a lot of power in it.
     Recently, for instance, in the ITU work with Anders, we were involved in the -- in one study about selling, let's say, the service instead of the devices.  Servitization in which case the ownership is shared between the supplier and the user.  And then the device can be returned and can be reset and prepare for another user.  And that promotes more durable design.  
     But at the same time, also creates a stronger dependency on the manufacturers perhaps haves.  So servitization is also way of circularity with potentially some drawbacks.
     In the case, for instance, of e-waste, I was looking at the global e-waste monitor and one of the, for instance, actions is that there are countries with no e-waste regulation yet.  So this is a risk because it is an opportunity to export e-waste.  These guys has operational devices and then without the e-waste regulation that becomes a major source of pollution because they get dropped and forgotten.
     So I encourage you to try to translate your comments and action items in particular to this board so we can produce our report at the end.  
     I see already a link to the 266 Session on Monday.  Comments about collecting from -- obviously that the challenge of community decentralization to transfer and collect e-waste.  
     For instance, in ITU I'm involved in one discussion about the role of universities and equivalent training institutions in helping emerging economies to create sustainable practices of E-waste management and also all of the aspects that appear before like probably procurement and inventory management and repair and anything related to extending the lifespan of the devices.  That is also important work to do because developed countries in the end end up having careful regulations where some other parts of the world do not have.  
     I don't know if you are aware, but they couldn't make it for this session but there is an NGO called Electronics Watch which is looking at the manufacturing and public procurement of ICT devices.  
     And it seems that public procurement is very strong because in these procurement contracts they can include clauses which make sure that manufacturers comply with labor rights and also with environmental rights.  And then everyone benefits from this because if manufacturers become committed to respect those limits, they do it for every device, not only for those supplied for the public institutions, but also to the normal citizens.  So this is also an interesting way to introduce incentives that benefit the environment.
     I see a note from Jorge about this topic.  So I mentioned about toxin-free and circular comment in years.  Anders, do you want to explain your comment?
     >> ANDERS ADRAE: Yeah, I see the Swedish politician comments, so that seems to be the vision, toxin-free bio-based circular economy.  I don't know how quickly, but as fast as possible.  
     But then we have to discuss is this possible?  What speaks for that?  What speaks against it in reality?  We haven't reached that.
     Biobased may have its own problem with land use and biodiversity issue.  To implement circular, yeah, maybe it is possible with the new business models and but then you may have the latest business models from the top, you know, top -- I don't know what actually to say, but I'm very much fond of the actually what is theoretically possible, the actual exact truth with the economic system we have so we don't fool ourselves.  
     We also have these rules and all of these books that yeah, we don't have any problem.  The lifetime, life expectancy of everyone in the world is going up, so we also have to think about the absolute top down perspective prospect and the human health.  Is it getting worse?  Is getting better?  That is one.  
     So to put everything in perspective is also -- but -- so also this is a hard question what actually is possible?  Is this what we are doing now, is this just incremental stuff?  Eco-labeling system, may be ready in 10 years, what will that lead?
     >> MODERATOR: Yeah. But, for instance, the current situation shows that what could, it could be physical things we really didn't expect to happen.  So there is the potential for not only incremental change but also environmental change.  
     One topic that I wouldn't like to leave without mention is that we tend to typically think about devices and environment, but sustainable development goals have to do with dealing with inequality.  And people suffer inequality.  
     In previous workshops, there was a discussion about the intersection between environmental rights and human rights.  And we define rights in terms of human beings. 
     And we have to make sure that the lives we lead and the devices we enjoy apply and appear for those who can connect and those who can interact through digital means.  
     But as we saw before, Yunusa had big issues to convey his message.  And in terms of connectivity, we're talking about half of the population in the world is unconnected or is partially connected.  
     And the solutions should work for everyone, not only for those who are able to participate in these remote forums that have good connectivity.  
     So this is also -- I mean inequality and social justice is an important thing.  And I see a contribution from Shawna on gender feminist perspective and intersectional issues.  And one comment on the footprint of the internet that I recommended you to visit.
     I don't know if anyone wants to comment about the gender dimension of the circular economy and how efforts are unequally distributed across different economies but also across gender and in different populations.  
     Yeah, this is also raising the question of the importance of having data about -- we have opinions, but also, we can collect data about the durability of existing devices.  And this is information that people should know to be able to label and aggregate information and to know which brands or models not only how repairable they are but also how durable they are.  And yeah, as Anders says, there is labeling coming related to that.
     But also citizens cannot only collect information about how to repair the devices, but also about what is their experience so we can also incentivize manufacturers to produce better more durable devices.
     So I think we are close to the end of the session.  And I would remind -- I mean there have been a lot of ideas, I took several notes.  But I hope you have a better understanding of all of the different aspects on the different let's say stop points in the circular economy trip and the entering and leaving materials and energy that appear on it and how everything is connected.
     And I hope also we can continue the discussion on how to -- how to strengthen and how to continue discussing about the governance of the environmental sustainability of ICT technology, and in particular the approach of the circular economy, but there are others.  
     And I encourage you to keep coming to the upcoming workshops.  As Rozi mentioned before, there is one session on Monday in the APC booth on the introduction of the GIS watch, the Global Information Society watch analysis which is in this period or this year it is devoted to environmental sustainability like it was 10 years ago.  
     And also the introduction of a circular economy guide that is a first release of the draft document.  And then you can come and learn and also contribute ideas for the final version that will be due the beginning of the next year probably.  
     Shawna has shared here the link to the booth.  And so you are welcome on Monday to come and visit us and discuss and continue the discussion.  
     You have my e-mail or my contact in the session.  But anyway, please if you have any comment that was not covered, please send me a message, and I will be happy to include it in the report.
     And I think this is the time for the end of the session.  So thank you so much for joining us.  And see you in the upcoming sessions on environmental sustainability.  Thank you so much.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-11-ws100-best-environmental-practices-across-the-internet-value-chain-raw^^

 
     >> MODERATOR: Hello everyone.  It is half past 9:00 so I think we we're ready to begin.  I hope you can hear me well.  So thank you for being here with us today and to discuss with this important topic of the environmental impact of ICT.  I'm Anais Aubert and I work at ARCEP where I'm the deputy head of economic analytics and digital unit.  And I'm also the co--chair of the group the European today we would like to analyze concrete illustrations of best practices developed to increase the efficiency of each block of the internet value chain and we will deal with both from the view point of energy consumption and also life cycle.
     We will talk about best practices but, of course, the presupposition is not that everything is going well.  On the contrary, but we would like to highlight what and how we can do better.
     So, to begin with, it is important to note that we would like to focus on the impact of the sector itself.  We do not question at all that ICT could have positive impacts for climate action but we will consider how we can minimize the negative impacts of the sector itself.
     For this, first of all, I would like to underline a few figures on the impacts of the digital sector on the environment.  So first of all note that ICT as a whole represents 8% to 10% of the electricity consumptions and 2% to 4% of carbon emissions at the global level.
     And ICT emissions could increase up to 40% of global emission by 2040.
     Second of all, data centers are also by 2025 as all air traffic.  And when it comes to digital devices, they are the main source of digital environmental impact.  Note that to produce a mobile phone 60 different (break in audio) and 22-kilogram of materials are needed to produce a microchip angling 2 grams and life steadily decreased between 1985 to 2015 and the useful life of a computer today was reduced from 11 years to only 4 years.
     >> Sox considering these facts, we believe that we need to develop a truly integrated and innovative solutions to meet the UN 2030 agenda targets .  That is why we are here today to discuss about actions.
     And so we will come today four panelists to discuss these issues.  So we have Ruiqi Ye from green piece.  Paolo Gemma from the international telecommune union.  Agnieszka Skorupinska from Vodafone and Gauthier Roussilhe a designer and researcher focusing on digital design and environmental impacts of the digital industry.
     So thank you very much all to be here today.  And Ruiqi, from F. you may, we will begin with you.  Thank you for being here, Ruiqi.  And we are glad to have greenpeace on board today.  And can you tell us about the issue that you are trying to tackle regarding energy consumption in particular and what you are doing in east Asia as an NGO in that regard.  Go ahead, Ruiqi.
     >> RUIQUI YE: Thanks.  I'm very happy to be here.  Is my voice okay?  I would like to introduce a little bit about our project on the data center work in China.  We have been focusing on the potential of ICT sector and renewable energy since 10 years ago around 2010 and started with the U.S. office and we started looking at this work in Asia around 2017.  We were looking at Korea, Taiwan and China at the time as well as the U.S. and see how these four regions can interest corporate procurement of renewable energy.
     Moving from 2017 to 2019 we started the project in China specifically looking at China's own ICT sector and growth and carbon emission trajectory and how we can help the sector in China to move towards 100% renewable energy.
     So I think we have all heard introduction pretty well why the ICT sector is facing the carbon emission challenge specifically from the large energy consumption and depending on the grid as you probably all know, China is pretty coal heavy, coal reliant so the ICT sector here is also very coal reliant.  And in order to bring China towards to meeting its Paris climate goal like the ICT sector is one of the very important sectors that needs to address its carbon emission as well.
     So in addition to just our scale of the carbon emission in China and also in the growth of ICT sector here, we also probably all know that China's ICT sector is growing very fast and that is why this market is especially important if we are talking about global carbon neutrality and we are looking at the sector overall and China is an important battleground.
     So the good news is we have seen some really positive trends since 2017.  First of all, as the national level China has pledged to be carbon neutral by 2060 in late September this year.
     So that and by 2030.  That overall is the country plan. and with that, as a background, we foresee a fast energy transition in China.  And with that also being said, the ICT sector here we also foresee rapid growth in the digital economy in the future.  So how to combine the low carbon transition towards carbon neutrality and what the role ICT sector can play in China is what interests us the most.
     So I would like to talk a little bit more about our work here.  We mostly focus are on corporate engagement work.
     Just with a little bit of sector analysis and sectorial study just so last year we released two reports.  One specifically looking at the data centers energy consumption and its carbon emission.  Currently the data center sector consumed about like 161 kilowatt hour in 2018nd.  And it is roughly 2.35% of the country's total electricity consumption similar to Shanghai city.  And what we found is although it might not be as large as cement or other sectors combined, actually the growth is what is concerning, the trend.
     From 2018 to 2023 we are seeing that the sector grow by 66% reaching about 260-kilowatt hour.  It is more than Australia's total electricity consumption in 2018.  So we first by just really trying to mapping out and understanding what is the energy consumption level of the China overall data center.
     And then we have done other report looking specifically at company-level performance.  It is a series of report called Click Clean.  Previously in 2013, 2014 and 2015 we had the click clean ranking looking at how U.S. IT companies what is their renewable energy commitment and procurement look like.  And now in 2019 year and early this year, 2020, we have a report specifically only looking at China's big IT companies such as Alibaba and with the collocation companies. so we are looking at these Chinese big ITs and what is their current level of renewable energy commitment and procurement.
     What we found is only one company has made a hundred percent renewable energy commitment.  That is Chinn data group.  The rest of the big guy wants haven't mademy commitments yet and we only see one company setting a carbon goal that is Huawei and the rest haven't done anything yet.  Compared to five years ago we are actually seeing more companies buying renewable energy even though they don't have a public goal.  Like Alibaba and chinn have entered into something in the province. we are seeing a gap of the companies trying to buy renewable in the market with different scale.  The scale is relatively still small but they are trying to explore the market.
     However, in a long-term vision and carbon neutral goal and is hundred percent renewable energy goal they are still lacking behind their peers.  A lot of the global companies using European and the U.S. telecom companies like Apple and Google and European telecoms all have 100% renewable energy goal.  That is a little bit gap.  So that is the second report that we have done checking at the company level.
     So we understand we have been talking to companies that it is not like they don't want to procure renewable energy.  Sometimes they don't know how.  And also the renewable energy market in China is still in the process of developing and opening up.
     So we don't have a lot of material to procurement mechanisms such as a 20-year PBA contract here yet.
     So we also host some of the capacity building workshops and we are trying to bridge the Chinese companies with the EU and U.S. companies where maybe the UN and U.S. companies have more experience in the renewable energy market and we are trying to bridge the gap by hosting these workshop and bring more national experience to China.  Those are some of the work we have done surrounding trying to move the data center and IT sector in China towards 100% renewable energy.
     So just some final notes and observation of how corporate actions can help in moving China to low carbon or carbon neutrality in 2060 there is a lot of interaction between global and local in the ICT sector.  We see Amazon setting a 100% renewable energy goal a long time ago for the data centers around they have upgraded the commitment early this year.
     And then we see that AWS starting to buy renewable energy project in China this year.  So they have 100% -- 100 mega watt solar project.  So these global companies with their commitment will have an impact in the local renewable energy market.  The same as Apple.  They committed to bringing the supply chain towards 100% renewable energy.  They have started the renewable energy fund in local market, too.
     So these progress have been with inspiring a lot of the action from the local company.  Alibaba, wondering how the Apple and AWS do it and what are we missing here.  The interaction between global and local is interesting.  And we are also seeing Chinese companies going towards foreign markets like the spec ITs and enter into the U.S. market or EU market and they are being asked about their current level of carbon emission and renewable energy percentage of renewable energy.  So the higher expectation in the foreign market are also sending pressure or sending or driving some of the local company's change.  And finally, I would like to also mention that it is not just global to local and local to global.
     And because China is very large, so different province have different level of progress in terms of the renewable energy market.  There is also a layer of local to local impact.  I mentioned that Alibaba and Chinn has done a deal in the province and they have been studied a and me by able to scale up and replicate in another province.
     These are worth paying attention to.  These are the potential impact that I see from corporate action, you know, in terms of driving local renewable energy market mechanism, driving new market mechanisms and also implementing the market mechanism here.
     And all in all, that's all I want to say for now.  And looking forward to hear some other perspective on this.  And I think global standard and expectation on the sector is high and I'm interested to see how we can apply more of the global expectation to localized work.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Ruiqi.  It was interesting and huge amazing work that you are doing.  Thank you.  And I'm sure that you will have a few more questions at the end of this session.  As you mentioned, you talk about the international level and global level.
     So I would like now to give the floor to Paolo Gemma from the ITU.  Thank you, Paolo, for being here.  As an international organization, you have the global level and you work on international standards and tools.  So please can you tell us more about this approach?
     >> PAOLO GEMMA: Okay.  Thank you, Anais.  ITU is a UN nation agency to be clear what is ITU.  We are around big membership including 153 the administration more with 900 private sector company from the ICT world.  So operator and manufacturers.
     We work a lot in the past in working group where working party, sorry, where I am the chairman and we develop in the past recommended standard for mitigate effect of climate change in some case and guidance on mass solution for telecomsite and data center and telecommunication boon that we have just published last year.
     We developed some years ago and I think in future we will update best practice for the data center to reduce the input of the data center.  And okay, now are moving on the circular economy point that is one of the bigger topic to reduce the impact of the IT in the future.  And the idea to have a computer to have a longer life.
     Better maybe to recover all of the substances inside.  A standardization level.  We need to develop a common understanding of what the design just to avoid the stranger issue.
     And the discussion of different topic on what is circular and what means circular.  And also what we try to have some KPI and how to set is a part of the circle or not.  This is something that we are developing.  And we hope that in future we will continue on this way to help companies to be more (?) in the future.  Redeveloped recently a series of document.  One is a standard with some report just for only Paris agreement setting a target for the ICT sector.  A document made by ITU in collaboration with (?) and MSTPI so we give for the ICT sector to be clean and reduce CO 2 emission if I remember well in 2030 by 50% and then go completely neutral.
     Following this document, we developed also some guideline, one of operator on how to reduce the emission and we just over the one month ago for the manufacturer.
     So first try to reduce at least some action to reduce the consumption, sure.  And this is the first step to become more energy efficiency, with respect to what they are now in different sector and not only data center but (?) and so on and sure we use as much as possible renewable energy.
     Which should be a big issue because as we know, some operator just now have 1% hundred percent renewable energies available but some other no because it is promised to -- and we see a big challenges for the future ooh I think we develop also a framework for the countries to integrate the national climate change adaptation.  So in a sense how to use ICT to help people on the climate change.  How to combat the climate change.  That means all of system and but also build infrastructure more resilience because it is what we see with the effect of climate change is something that exist particularly.
     And we cannot want to enter on this discussion, but very effective but very -- atmospheric like thunderstorm is becoming more and more harder to expected to survive through this around this is something that we are making.
     For only this we are also helping some countries to implement in (?) some of our recommendations, some of our work and suggestion.  We are working also on e-waste management from some countries that is also a very big issue on how to recovery e-waste and how to manage E-waste and so on and on this we offer a series of standards and guideline on how to implement e-waste management in countries giving some objective.
     And with some final look is completely separate from the rest but in reality that is the first step to the circular economy.  Because to become circular economy manufacturers can design and can be recyclable and work for a long life and not just one year.
     But, and (?) with all time this is a very big challenge in the future because it is hard to convince people, normal people not to put away use the cell phone just in way to go to recycling system.
     Because ITU is working with you will a of the world.  Also developing countries and so on.  And which the situation is very different.  The solution could be very different with respect to Europe and this is something that would be very big challenge for the future in how to solve some issue also in energy point of view because it is -- as someone okay, I am frommure rap, I am from Italy so I know the Italian situation but that is very different.
     And it was nice in ITU see the different problem that they have because the solution working from Europe cannot work from China or from Africa or from Asia.  We need to find a good solution and also be a little flexible to adapt to the current situation.  If we think to write a standard that is working only for Europe is not our goal and we fail our activity on this.
     So we need to when we want the standard we need to find the sense and agreement between all of the people and up all of the countries involved, not only one.  This is sometime very big discussion on this, okay.
     And as we said normally ITU is contribution driven activities.  We work on the contribution from our members, from our delegate.  It is not something posed by us or my be or by the director of ITU.  We are looking for contribution from all of the people.  We look to work with GreenPeace if possible and all the other people here, it should be nice to work together with all of you.
     And this is all.  If you have a question, please I can answer later.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  Thank you so much, Paolo.  I imagine that it is quite complicated to find consensus and solution that could be shared at the international level.  At the European level it is complicated so at the international I can understand it is a big challenge.  Thank you.  I would like to welcome Agnieszka Skorupinska from Vodafone.  You are from the private side.  Tell us more what your company is doing on the issue and how the run the business taking into this account this environmental impact of the sector.
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: Thank you, Anais.  I'm very happy to be here.  I do represent Vodafone.  We are present in India and all Australia in joint but overall 24 environments covered by the network.  We see the complexities of the geographies in terms of environmental improvements and tools available.
     Our motto is to connect for a better future and we are optimistic about how technology and connectivity including 5 G can change the future in a positive way and make sure it does not come at the cost of our planet.  Our steek sector has an environmental impact.  We do not shy away from it.  In Europe compared very often to the airline Indus tre.  The difference is that we believe that our impact is more easily solvable.  I will try to explain that a little bit more in detail later on.
     Our two material issues of energy and carbon emissions and e-waste.  We take a global approach across all of our markets but markets are encouraged to move quicker and be more ambitious where they come.  We have a good example with Kenya.  Our Kenya brand signed up already last year and Vodafone is a group only join the community in two week. the challenges vary depending on country.  So Europe operations for instance will be 100% renewable by July 2021.  And African operations by 2025.  Previous speakers mentioned that, indeed, is depends very much on the local market situation.  So whereas I mentioned Kenya being a good, we had troubles for instance in South Africa where we don't have access to renewables and so on.  In Europe it is easier because of the current political and because of the EU leadership in green aspect and so on and so forth so we see well how important it is, this political momentum on this issue.
     In terms of target settings, our focus is on energy efficiency renewable electricity and elimination of network waste.  We believe it will help to mitigate the environmental impact of the growth of our business and our customers' increasing demand for data.  I'm happy to share with you after the session our last annual report where you can see that energy consumption stayed flat despite 49 increasing mobile data traffic for instance thanks to energy efficiency improvements mainly due to AI and smart metering.  It comes with additional (?) but we see is as an opportunity.  We see increasing environmental incidents.  Last year we had the infrastructure damaged in Mozambique for instance because of cyclones and we see the customers trust and appreciation by the green propositions and green products and we see it as a business opportunity because with our Internet of Things business covering we committed to reduce the customers' carbon emissions by 350 points from 2020 to 2030.  And we loose want to shape the green ICT movement rather than simply foul the regulation.  In terms of concrete examples in the field of energy efficiency the main focus on data Sten and we do via energy management.  So if we have got for instance powers and data centers platform that enables monitoring and automated optimization of power and cooling systems and management of the technology systems and radio equipment.
     And renewable energy mix we are technically economically available.  We are installing onsite renewable generation and where not possible we use PPAs and then cover the remaining consuls by current refewable or Orrin.  And network waste.
     We have 2025 target for reusing and recycling and reselling 100% of equipment.  We created internal marketplace so that all 24 markets can exchange equipment they want to share or that we have the secondary use of certain equipment internet.  Devices.  Another big topic of the session.  So of course, we do not have full control of the system.  We can maybe do 30% of the value chain so we do collect phones.  We offer device care and we recycle.
     But all of the initiatives should happen in cooperation with the manufacturer.
     What we do, in spite of all this restrictions, we have launched red loves green.  Red is our logo.  Initiative.  So it is a customer offer on Eco friendly accesslies and we have a partnership with (?) and we launched half-sized SIM cards with half of the amount of plastic used to produce it.  It is provided to customers in several European markets already and we are progressively replace the use of full size hard holders across all Vodafone markets.  Shows that one good story with be and then spread more widely.
     We, of course, work as an industry as well in GSMA and we are currently working on initiative to give the consumers information according to the methodology on green products. which is quite misleading so in a given work because we all try -- it didn't work because we all tried it and now we decided to join up forces to create jointly and unify a little bit.
     And finally, we also do a lot of work internally as well because we believe we can all reduce our internet related impact.  Reshare advice at the individual level.  Using smaller devices and wi-fi and user -- and with the video just to conclude the industry is taking action.  And as said in one of the latest economies, green energy is 21st century power that will make geopolitic td and I think we can all sign up to that.  Thank you.  I will be here happy to answer any questions.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Agnieszka for the examples and for giving us insights about the initiatives and we can see that it is possible to act.  Thank you very much.  I'm sure we will have a lot of questions.
     You can -- everyone can ask question in the Q&A and we will take the question at the end.
     So, now I would like to welcome Gauthier.  You have won working some time on issue and an expert of web design but also a division of the value chain.  Give us your opinion about issue and what we could do to tackle it.
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: I sent some slides.  I don't know if we can go to the first one.
     >> MODERATOR: You can share your screen.
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: Okay.  Great.  I'm trying to share my screen.  Let me go back.  Okay.
     So you should see.
     >> MODERATOR: Yes.
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: To introduce what we are talking about, or to give the perspective of what we are talking about, it is important for me and also from the French perspective to show there is more than one factor.  We are not only talking about carbon emission there.  And we to understand it that where we need to prioritize.  And what is the most important action to be taken?
     It was important to this have graphic showing you where actually the impact seems to be happening.  Four factors.
     >> Ers here talking about the perspective of NC methodology.  Rehave the chance in France of digital service experts and have some organizations working on mapping the impact of the digital sector.  The first thing is to understand where the impacts are going between manufacturing and use.  So far, we are not able to -- the end of life in LCAs so we are still missing that part.
     So far, we kind of have an idea where it is going in use.  We don't use electricity as a factor because it is not a factor.  It is just a fact of energy and we need to look at the source of energy.  We look at primary energy consumption instead of electricity.  We look at emission and what we call mineral resources consumption.  Not renewable sources consumption and water consumption.  You can see there is still like we still need to work on the number there, on the data.
     That is just when it comes to energy it is half and half between manufacturing and use.  And then most of the impacts really when you look at resources is water comes from manufacturing.
     And then JG and energy are half and half with use.  So knowing that, we also need to look -- we need to look which kind of digital activities and actually making these impacts.
     That is why when you do LCA methodology and even when you look at energy intensity of data trans mission you will look at three different polls that are data centers, networks and user equipments.  And we know now that most of the impact comes from the user equipment.
     It is just because there is lots of them.  In France, from some resources that we have, we assume there is right now on earth 34 billion active equipment right now.
     And the fact is we are shipping on average 1.3 billion smartphone every year.  It has an impact.  And yet also we are supposed to also deploy billions of connected objects since that will come at a cost that will be mostly supported or that will be seen on the manufacturing side.
     Which is where we should actually look a lot right now.  And it is also important to know that even if all these impacts are coming right now and we start to than before and we have a lot of improvement when is comes to energy efficiency materials or energy efficiency methodologies but yet these improvements doesn't mean that we go with the efficiency of use.
     I quite like this graphic.  It is focused on the U.S.A.  And maybe before it should be worth while mentioning that the European commission just released a big paper on the energy consumption of the data center in Europe and they estimate that the consumption increased by 44% in eight years.  So we are consuming like 73 Tara watts Kim low watt and eight years ago it was 50.  So even with the incredible improvements of materials, the energy consumption is still increasing.
     There is a rebound effect here.  So and also to come back to the U.S., that is a graphic mostly from the U.S. and it has to be understood in the very specific network infrastructure existing in the U.S.  But even if the bandwidth of the average speed in U.S. has increased a lot, at the same time, so the load -- the page load time has not decreased it has increased over time in less than nine years.
     So we are also facing there is a question when it comes to use.  We do have more efficient materials.  More efficient services.  But yet we are thinking from the perspective of abundancy and material abundancy and energy abundancy and bandwidth and calculation point abundancy which is not the case in many, many countries as it was said before.
     It is interesting to be a bit more cautious when we think of what we can do with energy -- with technical improvements because there work ha has to be done and regulation that has to be done and that is why we need a better understanding of the impacts and setting limits to specific options in technological developments.
     And to phrase my -- actual that I is the phrase -- that is the sentence is summing up my results right now.  But I think that is kind of the gold to answer here.  But I wanted to from Iowa is that way work what does the digital Eco sis tell meaning infrastructure for services look like in or for a world stabilized at plus 2 degrees and how do we go there?  And when we assess new technologies and new developments and new ways of doing, we should get (?) because right now the digital ecosystem is not making it.  We are way off Paris agreements and the targets.
     So how do we get there?  Because right now if the GHG emission are increasing at the gross rate at 8% or 7% a year, if we follow the Paris agreements we should reduce them by 5%.  So we have a 20% gap right now.  So how do we get there?  And we can't assume that digitalizing other sectors will reduce the GHG consumption and energy.  We need proof of that.  We are assuming based on microeconomic projections which is not really physics.
     And I was also asked by Anais and acertain to talk about the GAFA and see what we can get from the GAFA or be inspired by the GAFA.  I mean as a French person we can only say that France isn't frail when it comes to the digital system.  We are (?) by American services and that is why you can see all of the traffic.
     So like 55% of the French traffic is in the. and other one set of additional services and user experiences for earth and that the one leading us to a specific way of thinking about the digital ecosystem but any are not the digital ecosystem, when we are doing one part of it but (?) and the fact is all of what we experience in western Europe has digital services are based on specific economic model basically say ads or equipment.
     So we also need to think that we got to follow inspire or be inspired by GAFA because they don't share the same goals.  They are economic gross targets that may not be possible to reduce how should we use if we follow Paris agreements.  It is up to actors and regulators. to act.  And not to follow these actors.
     And finally, I have been working for the past three years on how is it in terms of the crisis is shaping a way of -- a new way of doing digital services and basically if I can sum up right now what is the practice as a designer and researcher and consultant at this Level there is two basic principles there that we need to follow.  We need to reduce the footprint anyway of digital services and infrastructure and we at the same time we need to respond effectively to needs expressed by the user, not push on the user.  And at the center we can interrogate what they need?  Is it truly needed or just used to something by the other models like one proposed by the GAFA?  And in terms of operational goals the first thing to do is service that promotes A. increase that expand the equipment and impact in the digital sector.  So if the service is not designed with that in mind, it is also failing to address the impact.
     And also you need to increase the life span of the service by making it relevant and making it easy to main tape.  It is really important to think of maintenance right now when we think of digital development.
     And also one goal that is joining is we optimize for the most difficult condition of use.  We do not assume that everybody has iPhone 12 and 5G.  We are optimizing for the 3G on old equipment and if it is working for for instance scenario then it will be working for everyone else.
     And then we don't break users depending of the social and economic conditions.  And also the thing that is quite fantastic when you are working with sustainable digital design is also a fantastic key to a also produce the good practices we need to sustain and foster in the digital system.  Data awareness.  Accessibility and free software and so on.  It is also a way to put all that in order.
     And finally and most important you need to measure before after and during the project.  Do running audits during the prints and you need to know if you are doing is the right way.
     And basically what you to in a daily basis when doing all of that is you arbitrate the reduction and model the reduction of the resource consumption and impacts of the given use but also times you are hear to say that we need to invest a bit more energy, a bit more GHG emix and a bit electricity for a specific use because it has to be done because that is where there is the most value.
     But also you need to manage the overreduction.  And, yeah, I think I will stop there.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Gauthier for this insight.  So now I have 10 minutes to ask questions.  We took a bit more team but I think it was important for you to say everything that you needed to say.  So please to I'm talking now to the audience so you can ask question all the question you may have in the Q&A box at the bottom of the screen.  And we will take the last 30 minutes to discuss about your question.  And so I will use my last 10 minutes to ask question and during this time please ask all your question you may have and we will select them.
     I have one question for the panelists.  So we discussed about the level of intervention and so we can see that an international level of action is needed but that the local level it is also very important.  So what is your opinion of the good level of intervention?  Is there a good level of intervention?  What about coordination and cooperation at the international scale on this issue?  And is there a good coordination between stakeholders and how to develop a truly integrated solution on this issue?
     I don't know, maybe Paolo or Agnieszka you want to say something about it.
     >> AGNIESZKA SKORUPINSKA: Should I start?  It is a global issue so I think we all agree that global response is needed.  What is interesting to see is that the EU took really this climate leadership as the key initiative and, you know, the green deal was announced last year and you can see a series of various announcements now by China and Japan and now hopefully the U.S. whether be back on climate track, too.  I think it is good to have some sort of leadership that can achieve a domino effect.  That is my perception from the point of view and EU diplomacy is working quite well.  We are present in Europe and Africa.  But all of that with respect to local sensibilities and characteristics in order not to be perceive as an imposer or something.
     But some sort of push is important that the EU is taking the role and now it is up to every region to maybe react and see how they can feed into this.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Paolo, maybe you want to complete?
     >> PAOLO GEMMA: Speaking about the green deal is interesting of what is happening around the world during your last meeting we receive a contribution from Korea about Korea deal so they are implementing, starting a green deal similar to Europe with some time different thinking, different implementation and so on.
     And this is good and at ITU we want to make like a place where to divide and share experience on this.  But we want to collect different experience to put all at common factor to help a different country to move on this.  This is also something that is our hope.  We also want to have -- be a place where people can share experience on this topic.  The issue is really very high level topic, but we can solve only if we work all together, not separately.  But as we said, a lot of time please consider it should be not only one solution but a lot of small solution that can create the mass to reduce the CO2 emission and have a better world always.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Sharing experience, it is something important that maybe Ruiqi, do you want to develop a bit?
     Because you said that sometime it was difficult for the company to know how to act for environment.
     >> RUIQUI YE: Sure.  Yes.  I definitely agree with the first speaker that it as global issue so the carbon neutrality goal is important.  And we are definitely seeing the EU taking a step ahead and China joining is a very big country with a lot of carbon emission, it is a strong signal to internal and domestic IT companies.
     But also just with the ICT sector globally I think there are a lot of experience that EU and U.S. companies can share to Asia or like Chinese companies in terms of how to do the resource hundred percent recycling and reuse and with the renewable energy as well.
     Sometimes the experience sharing is important to strengthening the sector confidence and expectation to go in that direction.
     Even though there are a lot of localized differences in these markets.  But overall, if the peers see their global peers are moving towards that direction I think it sends a strong signal that is pretty helpful for the Chinese or Asian companies to see.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Gauthier, do you have something to say on in.
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: I think I have -- so far.
     >> MODERATOR: That's okay.
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: I think that my perspective here is more from the French point of view because what we have right now is that France has done good work on green so far but we have a lot of good work this French and I know that German is also doing good work. so we also have issue of communicating between countries in the EU.  And the fact is we need a common place to share perspective what we are doing between communities.
     But I see a lot of potential in the EU going forward with this topic.  We have what we need to go forward pushing what it means to have green IT policies and also to emphasize something is to have more research to that.  Because to be fair we don't have that much yet and we need so much more research.  Not only on ways assess the environmental impacts of the industry but also the pollution impact.  We are very bad also, if you go to the LCA literature, you cannot really see if ICT is actually providing energy consumption.  So that is the fact we need in both cases because if we need to arbitrate because it is what would p ha in the coming years considering both sides but also a big into assisting local impacts.
      assessing local impacts.
     >> MODERATOR: And do we have literature on the impact of ICT for green and other sectors?
     >> PAOLO GEMMA: If I can speak, we published the first standard on our series on SCA methodology just indicate which is in part of ICT on our website.  This is the first standard but it is what we try ised to sum -- some idea, some shared idea on this.  We hope that in future we will be sure and evolution because this is very, very as Gauthier said we need more research and more common idea on to what to do on this side.
     Also we publish with time a standard looking not only globally but more on e-waste, on which is really moving from equipment to service with the server, big as the discussion.
     It is I think here but people think it to go to then the realization and saw what is e-waste really mean and should be always.  As IT tool, now we are work at digital intelligence from the emerging technology from the environmental point of view because we think that the new technology have can a good impact on the way ICT and other sector but we need to consider what we are implementing digital intelligence.  Mean some calculation and some dataset in some way and some place.  We need to see the balance between the benefit when we implement the new technologies.  We see something, but it is a little to be considered.
     But it is one point with but it was never done in the past in reality and now we are in this situation.
     >> MODERATOR: I talk about this because it is not the focus on the session, but it is often a counter-argument that the people used to underline when it come to the impact of the ICT on environment.
     So that was underline that lots of things remain to be done in order to find the right balance.  I don't know Gauthier, if you want to add something.
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: I think Agnieszka wanted to say something.
     >> AGNIESZKA SKORUPINSKA: I wanted to add because, indeed, Gauthier made a lot of relevant points and I agree with him on most of them.  We are again, la day fair and we Hud have more and more devices but also they are being used and to go to your point about the enablement, the devices are used to save carbon emission was to save carbon emissions elsewhere.  We do not have sigh enfiscal cliff fiscal research but we do our own measurement with the help of carbon trust.  An external sustainable audit firm and they try to see what is the impact of!  Connected lighting for instance in the city and there are findings from one of the Spanish cities that shows that the street lighting fell by 68% thanks to that and you have a variety of examples and smart logistics.  So optimizing road management can allow fewer consumption being done up to 30%.
     So all these things are happening and reare trying to measure them and I think that the taxonomy exercise at the EU level and the recovery digital and green work stream will also help to somehow realize and have more data around that.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: If I can follow is that right now I'm work on analyzes (?) how the sector could reduce carbon emission by looking at the targets around looking at some of the produce ITU.  Also based on the 1.5 projects and (?) and the fact is it is quite hard to understand how the projections are made but I understand it that it is projections and mixing sometimes LC As and mixing macro economic projection.  So far a bit uncertain about how digital industry can reduce carbon emissions.  If you take the cup on the RCA, you see the true reduction.  And the more you put in the cup the less there is the reduction and you can see rebound effects.  That is the concept right now.
     And I think we didn't take enough time to consider if digitalization in any case at any time is useful or working regarding Tran goals.  And to go further with that something that we really need in other global aspects datasets for RCA.  Public data.  Something that is not privately owned but that can be used to do RCAs on the common dataset.  That would be quite fantastic think if we could have that.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Thank you very much.  So I will come back to the main focus of the impact of the ICT.  I see we have one question from the audience.  I don't know if the panelists can see the question.  But I whether read it out loud for everyone.  Are there any specific partnerships or collaborations that you all identify are missing from your respective work?  There is a lot happening in in this field but most conversations tend to be siloed.  What would help your work?
     Maybe greenpeace, you would like to begin, Ruiqi?
     >> RUIQUI YE: Thanks.  Sorry, can I clarify on the question.  Is it requesting partnership that is missing right now?
     >> MODERATOR: Yeah, are there any specific partnership or collaboration that you identify that are missing today for your work?
     >> RUIQUI YE: Since we are specifically focusing on the energy part of the IT sector I think with China's big IT abroad in the market and in other southeast Asia markets and these regional level of low carbon standard I think we need to talk about that.  I know the EU has a lot of discussions on this a largest sap but I think with the new markets we need to be focusing on them a lot since they are growing rapidly and it is important that they are looking at carbon right now but new infrastructure.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Maybe Paolo, I see you unmute.  Maybe you have something to say on this?
     >> PAOLO GEMMA: From ITU perspective, I think what actually the partnership that we are missing now is from other industry.
     Because into reality what is happening, we think from IoT point of view, we are introducing ICT in other industry and not only in ICT.  So this is a little missing the counterpart because we arwriting the standard for IoT and we have no participation from I don't know, the trans port industry or the right industry.  This is something that is missing.
     What I see is that there is a lot of forum and a lot of company and a lot of globalists working on different aspect sometime in competition wanting to have but this is something that we cannot have to progress.
     So find the way to collaborate between the different organization should be a fantastic way to progress.  It is not so simple.  And I agree about the RCA.  But I am not a -- I read and follow the discussion that we have inside the queue and in our organization about RCA and when they are speaking if you don't have a fixed Rule you cannot tell what you want, it is incredible always.  And for this, we really need for standard not only from ITU and other, we need a standard differentgy.  I can set what is a fantastic goal and they might say this is bad so we need the common understanding.
     >> MODERATOR: Gauthier do you want to say something?
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: I can only say that for me the main thing that we need to follow is to (?) when it comes to digital products and just knowing how to do is the additional service is o so tricky.  If there is not common data shared alodge the value chain it will be hard to get results that are relevant for everybody.
     >> PAOLO GEMMA: Can I ask answer about the public data.  We start in ITU to have idea to build a database I think eight years ago but we failed because there is this data owned by some company that sold and so we -- it is impossible to have this data hub because of the way business that is -- but it is the reality I think.  Okay.  We can try but this is the reality.  Unlikely.
     >> MODERATOR: And what is the collaboration between IT and other European commission and so on.
     >> PAOLO GEMMA: We have a great with the European institute and what the technical line standard.  We are working together to a standard.  And okay, we have a collaboration sharing topics with Sanelic and IC and we try not to -- how you said, any time thinking so there is a sort of collaboration.
     But it is not so easy because it is to collaborate we need to be (?) and sometimes there is big competition between standard organization.  From my personal point of view, it is crazy.  When I start to do this collaboration with ETSI I'm active in point side and we are in two different room with the same people and discuss the same thinking and have different as a result.  That is completely crazy.  That is completely crazy.  This is why we to collaborate with the organization is a little more difficult because there is a competition and different membership and different economic pushing because ITU and -- free of charge.  Other organization selling the standards.  So this is a really big point.
     And for me strange to have a standard topic and spend the morning, a lot of morning really.  Obviously it is -- I don't know if in future it will be changing but the service is actually -- we have to go with what we have so.
     >> MODERATOR: Actually it is true that it is rare to see that we have competition in stap standards and stuff like that.  Maybe you have have competition with the competitors on the topics and maybe it could be productive on the side.  What do you think about it and what did your collaboration and competition with other private companies?
     >> AGNIESZKA SKORUPINSKA: It is an interesting question because we do all want to differentiate and show that we are best-in-class.  But I mentioned the example of rating our headsets and phones.
     And when we were doing it on the individual level, it didn't really work.  You have different market sensitivities and standardized procedures.
     Now we see that cooperation works better which is an interesting learning.  So let's see how this goes.
     Of course, the more standards we have -- I keep on -- touching the button.  So the more standards we have, the more certainty we have as well because it is not an easy exercise for us either to see what really -- what is really solid data and you know, we don't want to be -- we don't want our sector to be accused of brainwashing or something.  We want to -- we want to make it right.
     But it needs to happen at the whole value chain level because as I say we are just part of it.  We need phone manufacturers, onboard.  Other sectors.  You know, like Paolo mentioned energy and trans port all that digitized them 70s.
     It has to be a big exercise and it is a very tough task.
     But, yeah, it is the only way out, I guess.
     >> MODERATOR: Yeah.  And in fact, regarding data driven regulation at we believe in data driven.  We have the problem of privacy for beginning.  And after we need to the data we could collect.  Do you have an idea of which data we would need to incentivize citizens maybe to change their behavior and maybe orient the behavior of the companies?  And what could we do to collect this data and should we change something in the law at the European level?  Or maybe at the international level but how could we do that?
     What would be your idea on proposition on this?
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: If I may.  The fact -- I think I'm not really sure about putting it on the side of the user.
     Because they don't show that much responsibility in the manufacturing.  They impacts they can not do much much in the manufacturing.  Maybe the user is the person dig in the ground to get minerals.  Also change of perspective.
     The fact that you might as a user of a smartphone the impact when it comes to minerals energy and water and so on is to get all of that because right now we just focus on energy, carbon but resource and water are fundamental and in many countries in which there is mining exploitation there will be water complications.
     And I know I don't know how like in China how it is going buffet must for like in Mongolia for the extraction as that caused in many places in China and I know it might be quite hard to focus on the resources consumption from the Chinese point of view.  I know more the south part but not the north part.  On the user part I would not push that was hold on it.  The only thing they can do is to keep the equipment as long as possible knowing that they have been designed not to stay, not to be working that long.
     But the fact I mean when we look at the life span of a phone in France, of a smart phone is 22 months something like that.  It is going up because of sales.
     But there the main thing you can do, keep your stuff longer.
     >> AGNIESZKA SKORUPINSKA: If I could add one thing.  I agree that not too much burden should be given to customer.
     Where we still see gaps is a general education on climate challenges and consequences of your actions.  So for instance when we offer recycling possibilities in the various markets we can maybe three or four markets where there is high uptick and others prefer to keep their phones in the drawer for instance because they don't fully grasp what are the consequences and options.  We should really also do the major educational campaign we did recently a study with your institute and only 54% of people interviewed and it was 13 countries in Europe and a thousand people per country.  And we tend to talk in the bubble and don't integrate in the country.  We are not yet the green champion.  We need to localize a lot and communicate better and educate better.  There is the fake news and information on the internet and things that a Google search is the same energy as boiling a cup of tea.  Is some education knee need to do to make this work.
     >> MODERATOR: Yeah, Ruiqi.
     >> RUIQUI YE: I want to add something.  I think it is quite an interesting question to asked because in China I'm seeing still in the energy consumption and carbon emission a lack of transparency from big IT and telecomcompanies.  I think we are talking about different stages of sustainability here at the global level.
     Our ranking surveyed we are look at 16 big data center or co--location companies and like eight collocations and eight public cloud service companies and probably only four among the 16 has released any electricity consumption and only one or two released carbon emission data.  Even just the really basic level of transparency is still lacking in the China market.
     And these are big companies.  You know, like the Alibaba and Chinn and they are rising quickly.  I think it is important that at the global level different markets should hold these big companies all accountable.  Like we set the global expectation and standard.  Just to to leave that here.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Gauthier, maybe you had something?
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: Just to jump on what Agnieszka was saying.
     The question of education for the sector is quite specific because we also have to remind that maybe on the global infrastructure that came with the discourse of being dematerialize.  It never happened before.  You cannot access this course when you are making roads and so on.
     And so we also have to come back on 30 years of discourse of developpization and the first maybe educational project is getting people to (?) of the digital sector.  And not put them responsible for something that they don't really see or something they don't really or not feel them guilty for something they cannot even see.
     I think the education about digital is very important because it is very specific to see the (?) and if we can do something on the user level it is pretty much that.  We have to show them how does it work.  Like in high school where in France like whether it is technology class, students will be -- will learn how to use Microsoft Office.  They would rather learn how to repair smartphones or what is antenna and how to look pore that rather than treeing to use Microsoft Word.  We need to learn the -- that is the first case educational project of the digital sector and then maybe understand the impact.  But they knead to learn what the server it.
     >> MODERATOR: That's true.  A question of education on this topic.  So I see that it is 10:56.  So we have four left minutes.
     Maybe to conclude you want to say a few word of conclusion and maybe each one could say a few sentence about the main message that you want to leave to the audience on the topic.
     I don't know, maybe Ruiqi, do you want to begin?
     >> RUIQUI YE: Thanks.  I think it is clear that the ICT sector and the IT sector overall has an important role to play in the world carbon future.  I believe at a global level a lot of the companies have -- to 100% renewable energy and with the rising Chinese companies could follow and scale up their current action.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Maybe Paolo, you want to follow and to say a few last words?
     >> PAOLO GEMMA: I think what we need all of the companies collaborating and share experience as much as possible at the global level and to share the common understanding of what we are making.  I'm a little aware what these we said with the U.S. company and the European company are so advanced.  Sometimes we have a little different opinion on this because we need to make clear between what is efficiency for energy because efficient could be very, very fantastic.  And which vary on consumption.  Not always going the same direction.
     If you look on 5G, said it would increase the efficiency which is true.  Increase the efficiency around 100%.
     But the problem is with the bandwidth with data is increased 1,000%.  So with the power consumption of 5G as I think you know very well is higher than the 3G and 4G.  We need to be clear and give the same clear message to the people and share the information.  This is very, very important on this.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Agnieszka?
     >> AGNIESZKA SKORUPINSKA: I would not be an industry representative if I didn't conclude with the sentence that the -- is not a solution we should allow the technology co-development but in a regulated and climate sensitive way.  And we should work all together as institutional and international institutions and governments and citizens and businesses.  To make it work.  I keep having in my head this motto of the board game I don't know if you know it, it is in the loop.  Board game and they say tell me and I will forgot.  Show me and I will remember and involve me and I might understand.  I think that concludes well our discussion.  Thanks.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Gauthier?
     >> GAUTHIER ROUSSILHE: I will o conclude with the question put before if think about the perspective of the regulator or even the industry leader, I should always question myself one when presented a new technical solution does it hold the answer is it an ecosystem that answers the question what does the digital ecosystem look like?  Does it fit or not fit with the data available now?  And when you go from this per spect investment you also understand it there is a huge gap between where we are right now and where we should be in 30 years.
     And you also understand that many models that we have right on the digital industry does not fit.  We cannot continue with the industry shipping 1.4 billion smartphone every year.  And the model that come with that.
     I also to shift and to change.  So it is not even about the (?) any wore.  We are not going if the right direction so we need to change the economic model and then we need a lot of research on that.  And it is also a question of what we think of progress because if you think of just making affordable phones for 5G and so on yeah, you need a lot of research but to do a smartphone that would last 25 years requires as much research as much financing and new economic models and as much regulation that the other one.  You just a different way of thinking of progress including in the crisis.  And to finish with what Paolo was saying and also in terms of the perspective, 5G doesn't answer the question.  It does not show us what is the digital ecosystem looks like at 2 degrees.  We are just putting the coin into the (?) but we are not answering any question regarding sustainability.  That is a fact.  And even the issue of Huawei what is his name, I think like in 2019 in the conference that even 5 G is not what the sectors are needing.  That is also interesting discourse in the industry and there is like tensions of progress.  Reshaping the industry.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I just have to conclude and to thank you one more time.  To you all for your contributions and your very interesting participation today.  So I have to wrap it up so a lot of work has been done but there is still a lot of work remaining to be done and we need collaboration and data and more research and studies in order to know what we can do to achieve the UN agenda and only plus two degrees Celsius.  So I think we can be optimistic but we are still need to work and the noble implementation is needed and we need adaptation at the global left am transparency and we need to work on data.  Thank you very much for being there today.  I hope you Ren learned something about this important topic of environmental impacts of ICT.
     So thank you so much.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-11-ws231-youthsustainability-creating-change-through-collaboration^^

     >> MODERATOR: So on my watch it just turned ten after 10:00 UTC so for the sake of keeping our time and getting as much information in as possible I say we will start.
     I see there are still people coming in and our panelists are also at the moment not complete, but I would hope people will join us.  Please excuse if we have to improvise a bit.  This is a challenge, as you know, for people to join across time zones and with the setup that we are in.  But I hope this will all work well.  So once again, welcome to Workshop 231.  
     We are talking about Youth and Sustainability: Creating Change through Collaboration.  My name is Elisabeth Schauermann.  And I'm with the German Informatic Society.  This year, I coordinated the Youth for Sustainability program in which I will elaborate in a second.  
     But before I do so, please let me introduce my co-organizers of the session, Emilia Zalewska from the Youth IGF Poland.  And she is also with Legaltech Polska.  And Emilia, if you want to wave into the camera, now is the time to do so.  
     And my second is Jenna Man Hau Fung, who is with NetMission.Asia.  Jenna, if you are there.  Perfect.  
     Emilia and Jenna will also moderate the chat and the Q&A.  So if you have any input and questions, those are the two who will get back to you.  
     In the next 60 minutes, we want to explore different angles on how we can work together to towards an effective multi-stakeholder collaboration for digital sustainability for and get an understanding of what young people specifically should do to foster the discourse.  
     The premise of this discussion and this question is that we have seen in the past few years especially it has been young people who have left a mark and really opened our eyes to the importance of climate action and environmental justice.
     So this is where I kind of want to -- where we thought we could marry the environmental justice initiative's ideas and the network and the expertise that we have in the internet governance matrix of the IGF.  
     And this was also the rationale kind of for setting up the Youth for Digital Sustainability program this year.  We wanted to extend this momentum and really give tangible input to the internet governance sphere on digital sustainability. 
     Last year the German Informatic Society organized the Youth IGF Summit in Berlin, and we saw that sustainability and different aspects of sustainability was something they were interested in, concerned with, and that they had a lot of expertise on.
     And so this year, 50 young experts from all WEOG regions have collaborated across 12 time zones, 32 countries, and came up with 12 recommendations for a more sustainable internet.
     These recommendations also cover several aspects.  They touch upon environmental sustainability but also social and economic aspects and also give input to the internet governance aspect of it.  
     I will link to the recommendations in the chat now.  So if you want to have a look at them and let us know what you think, and maybe have them as an input for questions and statements later.  You can do so now.
     Soon you will also be able to find background papers on all of the messages on our website YIGF.  We were able to hear from several people who were involved in drafting the sessions, but also get outside expertise and perspectives in and we'll hopefully hear from you, too, our participants.  I'm happy to introduce the speakers -- although I'm not sure if everybody is here. 
     By planned order of appearance, it is Raphael Reimann, Rasmus Andresen, Edmon Chung, Josaphat Tjiho and Lily Botsoye.  We will hear from all of those.  
     One thing I want to address is while we have the diverse and thematic and regional lineup, so to speak, we are now definitely lacking gender diversity on the panel.  
     Unfortunately, we had some unavailabilities and one of our non-male speakers has fallen sick.  She called me earlier and she is now being tested for COVID-19.  So I hope she will be better very soon.  And we as moderators will try to kind of balance this out with a focus on more gender diversity with the interaction from the floor.
     So yeah, with that -- no, one more thing.  We are also interested in what your background is.  So if you could let us know what your affiliation is, what the initiative is that you are with.  Maybe this has also to do with digital sustainability or to track environment.  So this would be very interesting to as you have more time to fill out this questionnaire or give input.
     The panelists' input shall be five minutes maximum.  So I ask you, my dear speakers, to respect the time count.
     And participants, you can always post your questions to the Q&A and interact in the chat, and we will have an opportunity to exchange on your inputs later on.  
     Our first input comes from Raphael Reimann, who is one of the working group members of the group Greening the Internet of the Youth for Digital Sustainability program.  And he's also an organizer of Fridays for Future in Germany.  So he could really give us some insight on how environmental advocacy and youth work intersect and what we can learn from the future and how we can bring that to the internet governance sphere.  
     So, Raphael, I would like you to take the floor and elaborate a bit on your work and lessons learned, so to speak.
     >> RAPHAEL REIMANN: Thank you very much, Elisabeth.  
     I'm Raphael Reimann, as Elisabeth already said.  I am 20 years old.  I'm a student from Germany.  I worked on the Youth Sustainability Program the last couple of weeks, and I'm also Fridays for Future organizer in Germany.  
     And in my input, I want to give some insight into how the climate and internet governance movement are connected and what the internet governance movement -- especially because I'm new at the internet governance movement than I am to the climate movement.
     What the internet governance movement, and especially the youth part of it can learn from other youth movement such as Fridays for Future.  So I want to show three ways the movements are similar and where they can learn from each other.
     So I think one big achievement that Fridays for Future movement has done is moving a very important topic, which in the Fridays for Future case is climate change, from a marginalized expert group into the public, into the mass media to be discussed in the wider public.
     So the first learning I would take from that for the internet governance space is that the internet governance space should take the respective internet governance topics, find a language which is accessible to everyone, which is also something we have discussed in the Youth for Digital Sustainability program, and we have put some insight in our background papers if you are interested to read them.  
     So the space should take a language that is accessible to everyone, not just tech savvy people or political decision makers, but those people that are essentially affected by the internet and data regulation in the end.  So the end users, if you will.  
     So the internet governance community has to find a way to frame their topics such as data security, accessibility of the internet, the ethics of artificial intelligence or digital privacy so that each and every one of us understands how these developments will affect our day-to-day lives and our society as a whole.
     So the second learning for me is that because of the cost of technological development and whether it is good or bad is often decided by the regulation which restricts the technological development.  
     We have to have experts in the field explain the consequences of certain pieces of regulation to the public and then have a big grassroots movement which amplifies those expert voices.
     So to give an example, with the climate movement and Fridays for Future, what we have essentially done is amplifying the voices of the scientific and expert communities which were already there.  We haven't made up any news.  
     So the scientific consensus on climate change was already there.  But we took the consensus and the scientific voices that were calling for actions against climate change for decades now but were not heard by the media, to the public and made it so that politicians and the public in general heard about what the scientific community had to say about climate change and actions that have to be taken.
     And the internet community needs to find a way to amplify those voices.  
     Another thing important for me in the Youth for Sustainability program, I have seen what great of an impact it has if you have a diverse group of people discussing such a global topic that has implications for everyone.
     So just to connect to the Fridays for Future movement because that is where I am from, we had Fridays for Future global movement, but we still are very European-centric, and we are dominated mostly by white people, which is not good and we are aware of this.
     But it is a reality we have to face.  And we then have to take some mechanisms to actively work against that non-diversity within such a movement.  
     So I think it is important for the internet governance movement that it actively works towards amplifying less privileged voices and also has mechanisms to ensure that it gives a space for people from all of -- from different backgrounds to ensure that this -- that this is not as Euro-centric as we have had in the past.
     And I think that it is not only a question of justice, of social justice, but also the different kinds of views on the same topic can be so impactful, which I have also felt in this program over the last couple of weeks that it is a really positive impact just to have people from different kind of backgrounds instead of just white men trying to have regulations governing the world or the internet.  
     So yeah, those were my three inputs connecting the climate change movement and the internet governance movement, especially on the youth side.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Raphael.  I hope we can elaborate on some of those mechanisms that we can maybe think towards in the future and how we can extend what we have seen this year working very well.  
     But next up, I would like to ask Rasmus Andresen to take the floor.  Rasmus is a member of the European Parliament for the Green Party, and he has been engaged in politics from a very young age.  So has also knowledge on how we can shape policies as young people from his side.  
     We are very happy to have you, Rasmus as a number of parliamentarians in internet governance is only rising a bit over the past year.  And from our perspective and I think from a lot of people's point of view, it is crucial for effective digital collaboration to have you and other parliamentarians as part of these discussions.  
     So I would like to get your input and your insight on what the like ideal role and responsibility of parliamentarians could be in a common effort from digital sustainability?  Are there any good practices that you can refer to?  And if you have time in your five minutes, maybe you can also touch upon what we have heard from Raphael in terms of what we can learn from youth initiative specifically on this topic.
     >> RASMUS ANDRESEN: Yes.  First of all, thanks to you, Elisabeth, and to all the others for inviting and participating in this discussion.  I think it is the right moment to do so.  
     Though I had some technical problems so I didn't hear everything Raphael said, but I guess there will be possibilities also to discuss our remarks afterwards.  And then maybe I can jump in there and comment also a bit later.  
     But first of all, I would like to say that the topic you have chosen to build a sustainable digital sector is a quite important one.  We had last week in the Industry and Research Committee in the European Parliament a debate with the Commissioner, Vice President of the European Commission, Margrethe Vestager, about different digital topics.
     And I asked her also a question about what kind of measures the European Commission would like to take to build a sustainable digital sector, you know, that both fighting climate change and making Europe a digital sovereign is our priorities of the new European Commission.
     And, of course, they also would like to link these different topics together.  As it is right now, we can see that especially with the COVID, share of CO2 emissions coming from the digital sector is much higher, for example, than coming from aviation.  Even in other parts, the CO2 share is reduced.  But for the digital sector, you can see that there is a lot of problems related to that.  The share of CO2 emissions from the digital sector will raise in the next year.  
     So there is a lot to do and my feeling is that even though there are some ideas already in the political discussion, but it is not like you have a plan for how to handle it like you have a plan, for example, to handle the building sector or mobility.  There maybe it is more of a question of to do what we know we need to do.
     But on the digital part there are still a lot of elements where I guess everybody agrees on how important this is, but nobody has a very strong plan for making the digital sector more sustainable.  
     The EU Commission had set the goal of the making the digital sector, and especially the data center climate neutral by 2030 because we know that is one of the most important issues there is how to handle the situation related to the data.  And the data center because we know that they need a lot of electricity, so this is a really important topic.  But there are others as well.
     And for me, it is a combination of regulation where we need to ensure that, for example, companies are doing what they need to do so that we can build a sustainable digital sector.  
     But on the other side, also because we are not there that we are having every kind of good solution already, no.  We also need a lot of innovation, and that means for me that we need also to invest in research, that we need to come up with new innovative solutions where we also can have young startups, for example, working on these kind of solutions.  And this is one of the reasons why I think it's good that you have chosen or that you are discussion this because I mean it's also up to the young generation to ensure that this will happen.  
     And this means that we, first of all, need to raise our voices like Fridays for Future is doing on a lot of different issues when to comes to global warming.  And on the other side, we also need to transform the digital sector.  And for, this also innovative solutions work of researchers but also from startups would help a lot because we can't wait on Google, Amazon, and others handling these kind of problems.
     I would like to mention more thing.  As a member of the Green Party and the Green Group in the European Parliament, we are organizing some events about that.  So we will have a big Congress next week, we are starting a campaign called Digital for the Planet campaign where we actually are addressing a lot of these issues, and where we want to discuss these kind of solutions with experts coming from different areas.  And there I would also like to invite you.  
     We are also trying to start some research projects, some studies with some universities about these kinds of issues.  And there I think we have a lot in common.  And, yeah, we should start with the discussion today, but we should continue with it in the upcoming weeks and months.
     >> MODERATOR: Definitely.  Thank you, Rasmus, for your insights.  And maybe we can share later some links to the campaign and what the Greens are planning.  
     Because with this group there has been a lot of, you know, energy and thinking that went into this topic specifically of digital sustainability.  So I hope we can find a way to follow up there.  
     I also liked how you kind of gave us this trifecta of action that needs to be taken.  Regulation on the one side and then innovation and then also advocacy and campaigning and awareness raising.  
     With this, and also because it was mentioned by Raphael, I would like to give the floor now to Josaphat.  Because we have talked about the European and EU realm, but I think we need to also further the discussion, go a bit beyond our Eurocentric view on digital sustainability.  
     So Josaphat is our next speaker.  He wears many hats.  He has been part of the Youth for Digital Sustainability working group for social cohesion.  And he is the vice president of the Internet Society Chapter in Namibia.  
     And Josaphat, I would like to hear from you in a few minutes how you can see this discourse translated into Namibia, and maybe if you are comfortable to speak on other African countries and regions as well how we can do that.  And as you have a background as an actor and you've been working with art, maybe you can also tell us a bit more about that part of your advocacy and your capacity building.
     >> JOSAPHAT TJIHO: Thank you so much, Elisabeth, for the opportunity.  And good afternoon, everybody. 
     As Elisabeth has alluded, my name is Josaphat, and I'm the vice president of the Internet Society Namibian chapter. 
     And just to give a bit of a background about Namibia is that Namibia as a country, through the government we have been hosting different types of discussion and dialogue about bridging the digital gap in the country.  
     This has also been alluded into different strategies and plans within the country of where one of them is the National Development Plan of Namibia which also encompasses a component on how we as a country can leverage and try to really make technology as advanced as possible.
     Our government through the current president has come up with a five-year strategy which is called the harambee property plan, and that also touches on some of the key indicators and some of the key issues that we as a country needs to go in terms of digital and also in terms of technology.  
     And discussion has also been there through the Namibian ICT Summit and also through the Namibian Internet Governance Forum on the importance really of digital sustainability and how we as a country can work and leverage on that.
     But, however, to be quite frank, and I think it was also alluded by the previous speaker is that there is not much of strategies and not much of information on how we as a country or how we as a world can also try to really leverage on this and have clear strategies and way ahead to address these.  
     Specifically in Namibia, some of the barriers that we have been having or also that we currently have is the fact that even though we have as much ideas and see the importance or really having digital transformation in the country, we unfortunately also do not have a digital strategy or a digital plan in Namibia. 
     And also in terms of moving digitally, there are other components that we also need to encompass and also need to think about.  And these components need to serve some sort of policy and deals to sort of like guide and protect us.
     And in Namibia, other factors that has also been hindering this is the fact that as a country we do not have the data protection deal which makes it quite difficult for an individual to sort of like protect your data online.  
     We also do not have the cyber security bill.  We also do not have other components such as the access to information law.  Also, these are some of the things that we are also struggling with as a country because how do we move digitally if we do not have the access to information law data, or how do we move digitally if we don't have the data protection bill and so forth.
     Moving into the continental wise is that through the African Union, we came up -- or Africa as a continent there are bills or there are some sort of information that sort of like guides or have indicated some key strategies and areas on how we can move as a continent.  And some of this is the Agenda 2063 Plan, where by the year 2063, which we as young people foresee it as way too long far to go, there are indications around that of where they have been trying to really see how can Africa become self-sustainable in terms of digitally also.  
     And then number four of one of the points on the Agenda 2063 is that we aim to have an e-university talk which aims to accelerate development of human capital, science, technology and innovation through increasing access to tertiary and continuing education in Africa.
     The Pan-African E-University also aims on working on that.  And some of the key indicators or some of the key action plan that came around that was, first of all, of creating of an annual consultative plan for policy dialogue.  And the aim around it was really to bring together once a year the African political leaders, the private sectors, academia, Civil Society, women, youth, media as well as community and faith leaders to discuss development and constraints as well as measures to be taken to realize the Agenda 2063.  
     And I think these are some of the things that -- where digital transformation should really be encompassed in and also to be discussed in.
     Moving also in terms of we or me as a performing artist, besides my passion for technology and engaging on issues of technology, also the fact that of art plays a crucial and very important role in conveying information.  
     A lot of people see art as a tool to really try to engage on, to really try to convey the message.  That has been through poetry where you talk about real issues of digitalization in poetry in a language that a person can be able to relate to emotionally, intellectually and so forth.  
     Performing arts also plays a crucial role, especially here in Namibia, because it is one of the element that is being used to sort of like convey the message.  First of all, we try to convey in our own dialect languages because not everybody is conversant in English and so forth. 
     So how do we then convey real critical issues real issue in continent, be it COVID-19, be it digitalization in a performing art manner so that people cannot not only be entertained but also be educated at the same time.  
     And another element that has been or working quite clearly in terms of the young people, and specifically in Namibia.  Because as young people, we are more accustomed to seeing visual in terms of reading books.  You know, when you look at your Tik Toks, when you look at your Pinterest, and when you look at all of these other social media platforms you see there is an element of art associated around it.  
     And I as a performing artist in Namibia have also been trying to really use my art in terms of poetry, in terms of performing art to try and convey information.  
     And I think that is one of the components that we really want to try and work around to convey information and also to be included in such platform, in such initiative of digital sustainability and so forth so that we can also try to see where are the different avenues that we should work around and use in conveying as well as also having a digital strategy moving forward not only in Namibia but globally as well.  So I think for now, I will stop here, and we can engage further.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Josaphat.  You know, the notion that we need to effectively and accessibly communicate and convey information on the climate crisis and environmental issues has also been one of the recommendations of the Youth for Sustainability working group.  
     We need the internet because, as also Raphael has mentioned, and Rasmus has touched upon, the information output is one important aspect of it.  
     Rasmus has to leave soon so I would like to maybe do a quick round, and I would like to go back on one question or one idea maybe that has also came out of our discussions with the representatives of the European Commission is that there has been steps taken by the EU, for example, the export of e-waste has been banned.  
     So, Rasmus, can you maybe with what we have heard from Josaphat, the agenda that has been discussed in a multi-stakeholder way in Africa, albeit not being very ambitious in terms of the time frame, where do you see opportunities for interregional exchange and policy development in terms of digital sustainability?
     >> RASMUS ANDRESEN: You mean in a global context between the EU and other parts of the world?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, if you can elaborate, that would be great.
     >> RASMUS ANDRESEN: Okay.  I mean for me there are two things.  
     First of all, we need to know which way we would as European Union we want to go.  And then, of course, there is -- there are lot of elements like you mentioned e-waste and others on the prospective of a circular economy, which we know that there will be some action.  And there had been some strategies already which also from my perspective always have to include a global perspective.  
     And I mean you can't address these kind of questions without having a global perspective.  So this is obvious.  And then, of course -- and there I think also the European Union should be better is that we need to cooperate and do it together.  
     So as European Union we shouldn't just have it in mind what it means for the world, but we need to develop that with stakeholders like you have here now.  Not just within the EU but coming from all over the world. 
     We need to address all of the different kinds of Civil Society because we know that maybe in some countries we are collaborating with, should collaborate with, maybe their Civil Society is not included in the discussions like we would like to see them included.
     And, of course, we also need to address the industry.  Not in a way that I think we should do what the industry wants, but we need to ensure that the industry is part of the discussion.  Because without the industry and also a global role and global responsibility the industry has, we won't solve the problems, let's say it like that.
     And there, for me, next year will be key because from the perspective of the European Union we have negotiated our budget in the last weeks.  We are having a lot of possibilities to spend some money on fighting global warming, but also on the digital sector for upcoming years.  And now we need to specify it much more.  
     And this is what will happen in the next months basically where the Member States and the Commission and the Parliament, of course, will do the work.
     And there we need to come up with, first of all, maybe formats where we can develop on that together and where there also is space for some innovative solutions so that we can ensure that we are doing something now where we know that we need to do that, or where we can agree on that we should do that.  But that we also need to have some space for innovative solutions.  
     And yes, of course, we need to do this together with other parts of the world because we know that the way we are handling the digitalization has a big effect on many parts of the world.  
     And maybe now there is also the transfer -- I'm also thinking a bit about the political situation in the U.S. where we at least will have an administration in the future which is, yeah, ready also to have some international collaboration.  Which doesn't mean that we are agreeing with them on everything, but still now there is a possibility again to discuss it.  And that is I think also very important.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Rasmus.  
     And I'm totally with you when we are talking about maybe we need to change things up a bit and the way of finding solutions has to be in an innovative way to so that we can find innovative solutions.  And the multi-stakeholder exchange that is really built into the Internet Governance Forum with the Civil Society and the private sector and governments coming together could maybe foster some exchange on that.  So thank you very much.
     >> RASMUS ANDRESEN: There is a question in the Q&A.  I don't know, should I write it, or should I answer in written or should I answer it?
     >> MODERATOR: Yeah, maybe you can answer it in written because it is a specific question on the EU.
     >> RASMUS ANDRESEN: That's okay, I will do so.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  
     Because with that, I would like to go on and give the floor to Edmon Chung, who is the CEO of the DotAsia organization.  
     And Edmon, I'm hoping you can give us a bit of insight on the discourse on digital sustainability in the Asia-Pacific region and also specifically internet governance as this is something you are familiar with and active in.
     >> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you. Thank you, Elisabeth, and thank you for having me on.  
     Definitely a very timely and important topic.  At the -- just I guess starting off with the AprIGF, the Asia-Pacific Regional IGF, we have a session on sustainability.  But I want to say that this is definitely a very new topic to be discussed.  And many of the issues that were touched upon by other speakers are very pertinent.
     In terms of the session that happened at AprIGF, it is called the internet environmental impact and action-oriented dialogue.  A lot of discussion focused on data, not in terms of data centers, but actually collecting data.
     So one of the interesting things is that this is a community that would have the means and the technological means to perhaps help develop better environmental data, sensor networks and other types of collecting more data for addressing the environmental issues.  
     And then also touched on a very interesting topic, which is algorithms, I think different people mentioned about AI.  Algorithms that need to be cognizant of environmental impact when sort of decisions are being suggested, especially with AI and so on.
     So these are kind of interesting topics that were discussed.  And then engaging the citizen data initiatives, that was brought in from Taiwan.
     And then also the collective action part will come back, which I think to me is the most important part is how do we have really a multi-stakeholder approach in this.  
     But before this session, actually back in 2016, DotAsia supported, we worked on a project called Ajitora which is a tiger project.  That was -- that also held a session at IGF which looks at a very different aspect of sustainability and the SDGs.  
     Actually, the Ajitora project was created right in 2015 when the UN adopted the SDGs and 2016 when it was put into action.  The Aji project was launched in 2016.  
     And what we talked about at the AprIGF in 2016 is the impact of the internet on illegal wildlife trade, which is a surprising topic.  You know, most people would be quite surprised to know that tiger consumption worldwide is actually increasing rather than decreasing because of the convenience of the internet.  
     And that brings another type of aspect.  Of course, Aji program doesn't stop there.  It's really more of an education program for kids on SDGs, and that is why the cute tiger that was adopted.  But it spans not just education but also policy because illegal wildlife trade also requires policy address, and I guess the aspect of energy.
     And that is where I think personally I see more -- most important in terms of responding to climate change with respect to digital sustainability is how we power the network itself.  The network has proven to be quite, you know, resilient under COVID but the power that a lot of parts of it might still be using pretty dirty energy.  And that is an issue that we need to address.
     And this brings me to the last part, which is another initiative that we have been supporting which is one-shared.world.  Which -- you know, it's looking at the multi-stakeholder approach for other issues.  Because if we look at the pandemic that we are in, we know almost, we are pretty clear, it's pretty clear that the UN system or the government-driven system just doesn't work.  Just doesn't work for something that is global in nature like climate change.  
     Because if the countries select their leaders properly, the leaders are supposed to take the country's best interests as the priority.  So if every country takes only their country's own best interests in priority, we won't have a global agenda, we won't be able to solve climate change.  
     And that is why I think to me really the multi-stakeholder, the global multi-stakeholder approach can make an impact and hopefully starting the conversation here is the right step towards the right direction.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Edmon.
     It is really fascinating to see how things appear in my personal sustainability discourse doesn't come up a lot, which is wildlife trade and illegal destruction of wildlife is fostered through the internet also.  So thank you for giving us this insight.
     And looking on the time, I would now ask our next and last speaker in the lineup, Lily Botsyoe to take the floor who has graciously accepted very last minute to join us to get us out of an all-male panel, which I touched upon earlier.
     Lily also is very active on different spheres, wears many hats.  She is one of our Youth for Sustainability working group members.  Also the organizer of the Youth IGF Ghana and has been the youth voice in the main session on environment during the IGF.  
     So the perspective I would like to get from you, Lily, is really how different youth initiatives in the IG space can work together and collaborate to foster this topic?  
     Because leading up to the IGF and the Youth IGF Summit 2020, there was a survey put out by the IGF Secretariat on what are the key things that young people would like to see.  And environment actually ranked very low with many of them.  
     So maybe you can give us an estimation of how we can raise the interest of the young people.
     >> LILY EDINAM BOTSYOE:  Right, hello, everyone.  Apologies, I joined a little late, and I had to commute and find a way to make it to this session because it is as important that we are having this now.  
     So we know that from my part of the world really what you are getting to understand about the internet and the environment is that it is not more from just the issue of the usage online and trying to connect the last billion and trying to connect the unconnected in my part of the world.  
     What We are seeing now is that the internet is as important -- its usage and development is as important in our offline activities because inasmuch as you are reaping the benefits online, there are some things that are certainly happening that we have to be conscious of.
     If you want to -- like from Ghana where I'm coming from, I normally talk about the e-waste situation in a place called Agogo Shi, and I talk about how there is so much happening that people are not aware of.  And I think that is the conversation.
     Maybe from times past have been what have been the issues and why people are not hearing the awareness you are creating.  I think it has to move from making people scared that the world -- something is happened to the world to equipping them with skills on how to contribute.  
     So if you tell a young person that look, you are having greenhouse emissions and this is happening and that is happening, it's so farfetched.  But if you let them know that look, as a matter of agency we are able to do this to change what you are seeing, so it moves from the fear, moves from instilling fear in people to giving them hope that there is something that can be done.
     So you are able to let even the lay person who is not even schooled know that your activities if changed from this angle to another one is able to help us in a certain light.  So you're telling someone who is going crop hunting in Ghana that look, we know that you are getting this for a living, but are you able to use this in a way that is more sustainable so there can be more work for you to do and thus having more income for your family that you are trying to feed by the activities that they are doing.  
     It has to as a matter of agency move from the instilling fear to where we are letting people know that there is something that can be done about the situation.
     So in our communications we have to use a very varied approach so that you can reach all.  You can use the infographics, you can use audio, you can use video, you can even role plays, you can have examples that are happening elsewhere and show to people so they can understand.  
     And in our deliberations in our Youth for digital Sustainability program, we've come to understand that communication in greening the internet is as important as the actions that follow.  
     So what are we communicating, first off?  How are people understanding it?  And what is the opportunity to contribute to shape it?  
     Now it moves professional the individualistic approach to more systemic.  So you want people to know what they can do as a person.  Might also reach out to the institutions that formed the stakeholder groups and let them know that this is what we can together even as a system so we can rewrite the story from the very grassroots and people can understand fully.  
     Now in having this conversation out there, we want people to be aware and continue even in their home countries this conversation.  It shouldn't stop here on the IGF.  It shouldn't stop here in our various conversations and groups.  
     And the reason is this:  In Ghana alone, the informal sector contributes to 90% of e-waste recycling.  And they're not given the right to it.  So the informal people who are outside the very formal systems are those who are setting the stage for us. 
     And we have to start from that angle to rewrite the story so people can understand that once you have the informal sector and the formal sector in solidarity and working around a certain aim, everybody is onboard and you are able to understand the conversation from not just the technical bit, from not just the conference bit, but on what is on the ground.  
     So in order to get traction, the communication bit is important, and moving the conversation from just -- just the fear part about what is happening to now the action-oriented part which says what can be done?
     And that is what we are seeing happing the IGF with young people during Youth for Digital Sustainability and all the other sessions that have happened.  So the story has been changed, but it shouldn't just be in the speaking, it should go to the grassroots where the informal people are and whose activities are really relevant in the fight for sustainable internet usage.  Thank you so much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Lily.  And thank you also for pointing out an old motto, so to speak, which I want to second is that we need to think globally but act locally and regional when we think about digital sustainability.  Although it is a global issue and there is cross-border inequalities that we are seeing here and cross-border effects of our actions, we really need to meet people where they are in their circumstances and from their different sectors and backgrounds.
     So maybe we can elaborate a bit more on that with our other speakers as well.  
     Raphael, how do you reach people where they are in your work with Fridays for Future?  What are some tried and true strategies on advocacy, environmental advocacy?  
     And while you prepare your answer, I would also like our participants to share with us what has worked for them in the Menti and posting to the chat.  You should be able to see the questions what are the strategies for sustainable advocacy and what works for you.  Now over to you, Raphael.
     >> RAPHAEL REIMANN: Yes.  So because we are working mostly towards -- so we have like two groups we are trying to address.  
     One, because we are a youth movement, we are trying to address young people to join us and join our movement.  But then we have a different group we are trying to address which is basically all of society.  
     In a way that we are saying climate change is here, it's happening, and we have to do something about it.  Mostly we are addressing politicians.  So those are two different groups we are addressing.  
     The first group, young people to instill hope in them and to instill the feeling of what Lily has said, which I think is very important, to give them that feeling that something can be done about it because we are all just a movement of young people here we are.  Most of the know about us and what we are standing for, come join us.  This is really about what Lily said about positive communication, about hope.
     But also about this main thought of grassroots movements in general which is that we don't need powerful people to join us.  We -- if we are a lot of young people and we don't have power, each person for themselves.  But if we are a large enough group, we can be powerful, we can go to the streets, and we can demand changes.  So this is the communication for young people.  
     Now if we are talking to politicians and we are meeting with politicians regarding specific regulations, then obviously we are communicating quite differently.  We are not going to the politicians and saying hey, climate change is happening, but we together can be hopeful, and we can change it.  But we go in there and tell them that they have the tools to change it.
     The science has said it for the last couple of decades.  And we communicate with them in a more demanding way because it is essentially what we are doing, we are demanding a future.  And we are demanding political action.  And that is how we are talking to politicians differently than to those we want to get behind our movement.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Those are, I think, also quite accessible ideas, right, for how to engage with different stakeholders differently.  
     I would like to hear from you, Josaphat and Edmon alike, as you are both very much part of the internet governance spheres in your regions and globally.  
     How do you see that working out in the internet governance spheres?  Do we need to maybe adapt certain strategies that were mentioned?  Can we learn something from the idea of if there is only enough of us advocating for a certain topic maybe it doesn't matter so much who is in the group, or do we really have to think this differently and maybe find ways to address different stakeholders in the internet governance sphere?
     >> EDMON CHUNG: This is Edmon.  I'll just jump in first, I guess. 
     Just building on what Raphael was saying, I think this -- we are looking at transformation, we're not looking at service providers or content providers to wake up one day and say okay, I'm going to use clean energy, right?  
     I mean so the grassroots part is important for both politicians and governments in my view.  And especially sitting here in Hong Kong and at the -- well, at the -- at a different kind of a social movement, it is very important to get to the critical mass and allow people to be willing to voice out the concern.
     And the way I see it is that whether it is big corporations or governments, they are usually more conservative.  And conservatives don't really see transformation that way.  I mean a way that I like to describe it is that the conservative can never see how a caterpillar turns into a butterfly because it is impossible to gradually turn.  
     But what the movement helps, and that is why we need to talk about it here in youth, is that when the butterfly comes, it means that the critical mass is there supporting those ideas.  And suddenly government or big businesses, they would see oh, it was a butterfly all along.
     And that is where I think, you know, we need to build, we need to know that as much as we can talk to governments and big business, without the social and kind of movement support, we will never get it done.  That's sort of my view.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Edmon.  Josaphat, do you want to share as well?
     >> JOSAPHAT TJIHO: Sure, yes. Thank you so much.  
     I totally agree with Edmon know that there is really need to be a bigger movement for different stakeholders to come onboard and really engage on these issues.  Because, for one, to really try and address these issues, that we need as many people with the same mindset and the same passion to address the issues.  
     There's also a high need for stakeholders, for public and private partnership because this whole thing requires a different dialogue.  It requires not only idea sharing, not only a movement of people moving up and down, but it also needs resources for this to be able to become effective and working out well.  
     Another thing was that discussing like this in open dialogue, you know, to really talk realistically, physically, and also come up with tangible result, not only result on papers but result that can be able to bring about change is one of the things that is needed.  
     Lastly, what I wanted to touch on was as countries, as continent and so forth, we have different treaties and different conventions and so forth that we made agreement to.  So we need to try and make sure that we hold our governments and our citizens and all these people engaged and to also be accountable.  
     One of the biggest ones which we as internet Society of Namibian Chapter has also made  a submission to in the current universal periodic review of which it's a United Nations mechanism where UN Member States review other UN Member States on different issues and human rights issues. 
     And through the Internet Society we did come up with some of the recommendations on how Namibians should be held accountable or how some of the issues that are not being addressed by the Namibian government when it comes to human rights issues are being addressed at not just a national level or a continental level but at a global level where other UN Member States can also be able to know, understand, and also see how they can put pressure and how they can be able to amplify to make sure we have the needed outcome for the development of not just human beings but also sustainability.  So yes.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Josaphat.  And thank you to everyone.  
     we are two minutes away from the end so I would say we can wrap up now.  I have also seen a few inputs to the Menti, this is still open so if you want to formulate ideas and strategies on how you advocate for digital sustainability and environmental justice in the digital sphere, let us know because this will go into our report and our follow-up work.  
     Because the one thing I think that became very clear is that it doesn't -- it needs more than just a few IGF sessions, and it also needs more than having an environment track once and then kind of fizzling out.
     What we can really see is the momentum and a lot of interest from different stakeholders to come together and also get decision makers in a political level, the private sector, see where we have to be global and where we then have to transfer to more specific context.  
     So I'm really happy that we got to have this discussion and this exchange. I hope we can follow up on that and also get those involved that have not been here in this room now but who are maybe distant and working in their respective contexts because this is really what the multi-stakeholder approach is all about, that we address each other when it makes sense and when it is relevant.  
     And I think digital sustainability should be a very relevant topic going forward for all of us.  
     So thank you for joining.  Thanks, everyone, who was listening in as a participant and also on the livestream.  We will keep on working on this.  And if you want to learn more about the Youth for Digital Sustainability program, you can find information online on YIGF.eu. 
     And with that, I would like to close right on time and wish you all a wonderful day wherever you are.  Goodbye.   
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-11-ws299-building-digital-security-for-journalists-raw^^

 
    >> MODERATOR:  Tell us about that attempt and what you make of it.
    >> HELENA DIAS:  So they have the same mechanics of happening.  They use throats and also information.  And to do wit, the Congress has been working on a law project, called the fake news project, the fake news law.  And it was supposed to be a compilation of what happens on the platform, what information and what people are sharing.  Be despite the good ideas, it has become something that we are afraid of.  It leads the responsibilities of judging, and it has concepts, the processes that are viewed from the communications that are used with the science.  And the project collects mechanisms of transparency.  
    And it's a complex situation.  The debate about this law.  Because how can social media platforms be regulated throughout threatning the freedom of expression.  How can we fight this, without threatening freedom of expression.  So this is not the debate that we are taking.  
    >> MODERATOR:  She is wondering is there no definition being used to limit the application of the law.  And what you are saying, Helena, not necessarily, because now it's encroaching on the right of freedom of expression.  
    I'll just throw you right into the conversation.  I had to introduce you to the others.  But you're hearing Helena, and she is talking about how authorities in Brazil responded to the fake news problem that we're having on social media, which is in a way embedded as well with the challenges that people are facing, these attacks on social media.  She is saying what is happening in Brazil is border line spooivl stiffling FOE.  What has been done in Germany on that front?
    >> JENSEN GYDE:  Thank you.  And apologies for me being late.  I had to redo my link and this took a while.  Currently, we are discussing a law that our constitutional courts here found unconstitutional so far with regard to the work that our secret service is doing.  And protecting sources for journalists, for example.  And we currently are having a debate on -- to which extent journalists need to talk about their sources, for example, when they are researching.  So, maybe I can just tell you my pint of view so far.  I think it should be enshrined in our law that journalists do not have to give up their sources.  Because that is one of the main aspects of the freedom of expression but also the free work that journalists and the very much important work that journalists are doing around the world.  And I think what is stims forgotten from the German Government side is that Germany plays a role and is a role model for so many countries in the world.  And if we are discussing these kind of rules and regulations.  Or maybe also talking about -- that investigative services are -- should be available or the back doors for them should be available in messaging apps, then countries that are more repressive, such as China or other countries, are taking this as an example for them to basically create laws that correspond with ours, in a way, but do not have these regulations that we might be having in Germany.  So I think it's not a question on leaving back doors open for investigation purposes, but rather making sure that our investigation services are properly equipped with personnel, with staff, with resources. 
But not trying to -- to take out freedom of expression and the freedom of speech, which would be one of the details if we have a back door open and if Government -- well, basically asks of companies to leave back doors open.  We have technicalities or we have experts on how this technically could work.
    >> MODERATOR:  Exactly.
    >> JENSEN GYDE:  But experts say there is no possibility to leave back doors open.  That can only be used by officials or persons with no good interests.  
    >> MODERATOR:  What you are basically saying is journalists in Germany are running into the same challenge.  One of the things that you rely on, which is anonymity of resources.  It seems like the lawmakers are having trouble.  Does Civil Society have alternative options that they can bring to the table?  What other alternatives can be considered in terms of, you know, bridging that gap?  We need to regulate this space.  We need to protect people but we also cannot stifle free speech.
    >> LISA DITTMER:  Well, regulation often happens very fast with little consultation with Civil Society or little consultation.  There is maybe a brief period where we are enkurmed to give a statement, but we rarely see this having an impact.  And so far I think both big tech has been disinterested at large when there is not enough public pressure we have seep that with the US election and the major worries about what disinformation can do.  We have seen that they can step up when they have to, but this has to happen from mostly from the US audience and a lot of public pressure.  That has to change.  We have seen this happening.  These digital spaces have added large freedoms especially in countries where there is not enough media freedom in general, and sometimes Facebook and Twitter can act as a positive means of giving people an added space for information exchange.  But the companies have not been aware of the way that they shape and reshape the way we communicate with each other.  And they have not done enough to protect Human Rights on the platforms.  They act with a naive sense of bringing goodness to the world but we know that they are not doing enough to react to the Government pressures, especially when they are' authoritarian in nature.  Woof we have seep Germany with a law that was one of the first attempts after 20 years of up changed regulation to recalibrate the balance between the self regulation of big tech and Government pressure.  The issue here, I think, is for one we don't really see more transparency.  We don't really see more Civil Society engagement and more ways of people who are largely affected, to really have a voice in the way we shape regulation now, such as journalists. 
And we don't see enough leeway for independent authorities to check in on what these practices look like.  So now we are under public pressure with things like the oversight board.  But these are driven by public pressure.  They are not driven by Civil Society and they are not driven by the ideas that are there.  I think the key points now are greater transparency, more often an effect of Human Rights law on moderation, a dealing with disinformation and certainly very haphazard, fast efforts to just pile on pressure to big tech to did something.  Pressure is not enough.  We need more research and more conversation on what we he can expect the platforms to do in the big tech digital space.  
    >> MODERATOR:  I take that message to Parliament, right?  Let's inclusively society.  Let's have more transparency as we put together the regulations.  
    Holmes, I want to come to you.  Hong Kong is an interesting space.  We watched pictures that we couldn't believe what we were look at when we saw the protest ors in the numbers.  The streets were rivers of defiance in Hong Kong.  We saw young people determined.  And we also saw that the brutality that came with it, how the police clamped down.  That is what we were able to see.  But there is another platform and social media is part of that.  Take us through that situation in Hong Kong now.  
    >> CHI HANG CHAN:  All you are seeing is the below the surface reprisals against individuals.  In particular, we are seeing that police are arresting and charging people based on something that they did in the digital spear.  One current example would be using that am digital examination that is evidence of a crime.  We are saying for example last year people were using the popular messaging app telegram.  So if you made a call for protest on telegram, that message might be used as a basis for incitement.  And we have seen, actually, that multiple channel administrators of these protest channels have been arrested.  But more than that, China passed a national security law that applies to Hong Kong.  And that criminalizes things like secession.  So this actually broadens the scope of potential danger.  Because we're taking about not just digital communication, but also digital materials, so if I drew this protest flier other poster, and I would send it to somebody and put it in a group or on social media, that can form the basis of a crime.  
    So from my view, as a perspective of the journalist, the first thing is I don't want to get my sources into trouble.  Under the national security law, the maximum penalty is possibly life in prison.  
    But the bigger cultural shift here is that because of this heightened surveillance on the dim tall sphere, there is a chilling effect and there comes how do we manage to talk to these vulnerable groups and bring their stories to the world when they are not so confident talking to the press anymore.  Trying hard to cover their tracks and they are scared of the reprisals that may come from what they do or say in the digital space.  Is 
    >> MODERATOR:  Thank you for bringing that out.  The implications, and the now you'll face the challenge.  It's going to be difficult to get people to talk to you because of fear of what might happen.  Life in prison for some people.  
    Andy, this is where you come in.  Because you are saying that from where you are sitting, from the big tech perspective, you are building the -- the platform, let's call it that, to how people like Holmes and people like Helena and people like myself, explain how you are building a more private Internet.
    >> ANDY YEN:  For us, it's all about ensuring that private communications are possible.  Today on the Internet, they say that nothing is private, and I think that is a big problem, because it really limits the ability of transmission, which is allowing the flow of information and to give us progress and freedom, and Democracy and Human Rights.  
    So there are four pillars that we need to ensure the privacy and the security that is needed.  One is technology.  It's very, very important that you adopt the technologies which ensure, from a mathematic standpoint, that information and data is secure.  One best way to do that is end-to-end encryption.  That's what a lot of other services around the world are using.  End-to-end encryption.  It's important to have mathematical and legal guarantees up the chain.  Like you saw in Hong Kong, the passage of a new law changed the legal environment.  And if you have a mathematical guarantee, it's encryption is important.  
    The second element is education.  There are a lot of people in the world today who are simply not aware of threats.  When it comes to physical threats, you can see this in real life.  But you know, the issues of Facebook and your data, the issue of Government surveillance, this is critical.  So that is part of education.  
    Third, you have to have a strong framework to protect privacy.  We have to make sure that it's a fair playing field and that all the technologies that help security and privacy can be allowed to prosper and help people.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much for that.  You're in an interesting place.  So you sort of are caught in the middle.  And this is something that you pointed out, big takers does not provide privacy.  Let's look at the criticisms that we were talking about.  It's taking pressure from people basically to get big tech to get along in terms of assisting people in this conversation.  
    But, are now in this unique position where you are increasingly seeing and pressure from Government.  And not just Governments that we say have authoritarian regimes, but even in European, to sort of build the back channels so that state actors can access the information that you would normally be trying to keep hidden away.  A big particular that is up naturally for privacy and now increasing pressure from Governments that are more or prostate surveillance.  
    >> ANDY YEN: They are are incented for more invasion of privacy and more data harvesting.  
    On the Government side, governments are in a accepts actually in favor of that business model, because the more data that tech collect, the more data is potentially accessible to Government, and that is part of the problem that happens with tech.  Because if you give all of your information to the tech company, this is also available to Government authorities.  And this we see not only in countries like China and Russia.  But we see it even here in the EU.  So for example this month, there is a draft council Resolution on encryption.  And it's going through the EU Commission right now and may get approved this month.  It's an organisation that is seeking to provide access, back door access to the systems.  
    And from my view it's dangerous, right?  Because we know there is no such thing as a back door that only let's good guys in.  Once you open that, it's something that anybody can exploit.  And we hear about this scheme either for privacy or for security.  But that's very, very deceptive.  It's not a matter of privacy or security.  It's a matter of privacy and security.  What people don't realise is that privacy and security, there are two sides of the -- they are two sides of the same coin.  
    Things that are secure are also private.  
    Threats are moving online, more and more crime is happening online.  So, in fact, defending the security of citizen, you need the technologies that provide privacy.  And if we can -- so we end up with that privacy, because we don't want to build weaknesses in the systems, because it would weaken the Internet for everybody.  So it's not really privacy versus security.  It's two efforts that need to go together.
    >> MODERATOR:  That's interesting.  What is it, from your perspective?  Is it privacy versus security or is it that you are doing both things at the same time.  I'm interested to know.
    >> JENSEN GYDE:  Andy depicted the debate that we are having in the European Government.  I would say the same thing.  It's the same side of the coin.  It's not playing out privacy versus security, or however.  Our Government tends to argue that way, and currently I am within the opposition.  And so I can talk that way.  
    However, I think it is not about trying to limit our authorities within a litigation or within their cases they are trying to focus on and -- but it's whenever we are talking about the right to encryption and my past colleague, Jimmy Sholes, what who is been leading the Committee on digital agenda in our Bundestrag, he says there needs to be a right for encryption.  Because when we bring this debate to the analog world, nobody was there in the first or to think about opening letters to people.  However, if we have the possibility to just read messages in the digital world, that tends to be a rather lower threshold to just reading messages or wanting to just maybe take a sneak peek of that.  And I think we need to change this debate back to it is not normal for us, for authorities, to try to invade a personal space, which is also the digital space.  
    I have also a right to privacy in the digital age.  
    So I think it's more also a question on how old you are to reflecting that digital and real world or analog rights are the same.  And I think the next generation, and some of us belong to this generation in the Government sphere, but also from priv sectors and Civil Society, need to remind politics, Government, that this is the way we need to think and talk about.  And it's not -- it's not the '60s anymore, where we would be seeing when a letter has been opened.  So, there is no justification, in my opinion, to create back doors that can be used by authorities, hackers, whom ever.  There need to be other ways to ensure that authorities can do their job.  But also journalists and people can stay private and safe and do not have to disclose their sources.  And this is what I'm fighting for, alongside with other colleagues.  But I think it's rather a question of mindset rather than just a question of how to address this topic.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much for that.  And I think you answered Ivan's question, he was asking why the EU is breaking into encryption that was protecting journalists.  And the argument has been laid in terms of Governments prioritizing privacy.  How they protect countries against digital threats.  
    Yes, I'll rope you in, to get that Civil Society perspective.  So you can see how the debate is going.  Andy says it's two sides of the same coin.  But how you see it, is it privacy versus security?  
    >> LISA DITTMER:  I think it's a whole generation that has grown up with this false contradiction.  It's always been clear that we have a basic and human right to privacy and this needs to be protected.  And the fact that we are reframing this debate in line with the debates that we are having about terrorism and new security and International security, that we're suddenly questioning this right and it's not self evidence that this should be a key right and that we have to protect that security and everyone's security.  This is not a techie debate.  It's a broad society debate.  Surveillance has become a niche topic just a digital right are seen as a niche topic by a lot of people.  So we are grown too used to being surveyed.  Now it's the past 7 years and many problems still exist, and if anything it's very much in the nature of security services to the world powers.  But we're not really see a debate over whether this is necessary.  Just calling out terrorism seems to be enough to call for more and more powers all the time.  When we're not really checking in on does this help security services even to do their job?  It's a big argument to have.  But they have to proof that these need these powers.  And we have seen it lately and in lines of the attacks that caused this debate is that security services were overwhelmed.  They had friendly available information but they were not able to effectively share these bits of information between different departments.  And they failed to connect the dots.  So if anything, having more powers to intrude to people's data would not have helped in the first place. 
    But I think we need to renew that sense of outreach for people at large.  And not just in journalists or tech specialists or NGO specialists, but in society at large as to whether we want to have a right of privacy and when we want to make sure that our rights are protected and not just our security interests.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Here is a suggestion.  That more surveillance doesn't mean more security.    Did I hear somebody who wanted to say something?  Sorry.  I missed out on that.  
    We can still go on.  Helena, please don't feel like you are being blocked from making a statement.  
    People are saying how do we protect journalists from big tech?  Maybe journalists are trying to do stories on the big companies and maybe it's impossible for them to do, because they go against you and prevent you -- they can look at when you are doing and perhaps inpeed your work.  So we have the big power follow technology companies that are difficult to monitor because they have the tools to stifle somebody's work.
    So okay.  What I want to do now is point you to the fact that we are going to be breaking into rooms at some point in the conversation.  
    And that is because we would like for us to actually discuss some meaningful ideas.  You guys really are engaged in this.  You have been.  And so we're not just coming here in the name of discussion, but we want to see if we can come to some concrete ideas.  
    So we will be breaking away into groups.  We have four broke out rooms that we will introduce you to in a few moments.  But I want to go through my notes and see that I haven't missed out on anything.  
    Helena, I want to bring you back into the conversation.  Everything that you are hearing, do you have some take aways, something that you want to add to the conversation for everything that has been said?  I'll open the space to you now, Helena.
    >> HELENA DIAS:  I guess the encryption debate here in Brazil is starting.  People don't use it mostly.  Some of us use it a little.  And we have not been discussing it in the public.  So I'm interested in it, because it's something we need to learn about, to prepare ourselves.  Because the debate wee will arrive here some day.  But we are not having it here right now.  We are still learning.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Fantastic.  And I do want to talk to you again, Holmes.  We want this contrast between Hong Kong and China.  It look like there is a transition taking place, free society or another sense.  Give us the contrast and that will be the final thing until we break away into our groups.  
    >> CHI HANG CHAN: In China, it's constant surveillance.  It's also a culture of self censorship that has rolled around this notion of constant surveillance.  Hong Kong is semi autonomous and has a separate internal system that is free.  But the anxiety is that Hong Kong is moving closer to the model of the mainland.  And I've touched on how people are anxious about their communications for the whole digital security.  But one aspect is -- which ties back to the discussion that we have had so far is the role of platforms and what they do in the face of an authoritarian regime like China.  
    Now, in the case of Hong Kong, after the national security law was passed, notably Internet giants, Facebook, Google and Twitter among others said they would suspend or halt accepting data requests from the hopping Congress Government.  So we see that, on that front, at least for now we are not at risk.  But that is only a stop gap solution and this relies on the self regulation and will of the Internet giants.  So we are thinking about the relationship of big tech and what happens down the line if the Chinese Government exerts more pressure, will the big tech be able to stopped up against that as well?  So that is something that is looming in the horizon for us.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Very interesting.  And we should be watching that.  Thank you for that.  Guys, now we are breaking into our stations.  Now, if you scroll down to the audience on Zoom, on YouTube I'll get to you guys in a moment.  But if you look at the bottom of your screen, where all the icons are, there are four breakout rooms for you.  We absolutely are for freedom of choice here on this platform.  So you can choose which group you would like to be a part of.  Our panelists we are allocated you specific groups.  So you stick around on where you want to go.  Ever else, you are free to decide.  There are four groups.  One is defining the responsibilities and that has a lot of the contributions that are being made on the chat, a lot of thoughts towards that.  Best practices, global standards and future.  So you are welcome.  And I'll say to you what we are going to do now is for the next 15 minutes, in your groups, just pick out one person who is going to represent your group.  This person will give us feedback about what you have discussed in your session.  But basically, get into the conversation under the banner of these four themes, depending on the group that you are in and we are looking for your feedback on the basis of everything that you have.  
    Now it's just gone, 24 after 10 a.m. that is the place where I am in Berlin.  Then we will indicate to you where you go.  But it's simple.  Just go onto the broke out group session and click as to what group you want to be in.  And you can immediately go into that.  
    So, go another to our friends on YouTube.  You have now the permission to take a bit of the walk for the next 15 minutes.  Get something to drink.  Stretch your legs, be back in 15 minute because I'm sure you are interested to know what others were discussing as they have broken out in the groups.  
    So, Lisa you go to the defining of the responsibilities.  
    Holmes and Helena go to the best practice group.  
    Gyde go to the standards and Andy go to the future.
    >> LISA DITTMER:  We might have problems.  I can't see the rooms either.
    >> JANSEN GYRE:  I can't see options, either.
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Sorry to jump in.  In some devices are not updated clients.  It seems that you can see the button.  So it's better to just put the session in the chat and the host will be assigned.  
    >> MODERATOR:  So if you are not able to get into a specific group, indicate in the chat where you would like to go and we will put you into the group.  Thank you so much.  That's a good idea.  Some people are populating some of the others.  So let's look around in the chat.  And we will place you where you want to go.  One of them is defining the responsibilities.  That is group.  Group 2 is best practices.  Group 3 is global standards.  And group 4 is future.  
    Lisa will be in group 1.  She is going to the defining of the responsibilities.  
    Helena and Holmes in group 2, best practices.  
    Gyte is in the group 3.  
    And Andy is group 4 that is the future.  So I'm watching the clock now.  It's just approaching half past the hour.  So we will come back at a quarter to the hour.  
    We will add Holmes to the best practices as well.  
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Just to clarify that the breakout rooms themselves are not captioned.  Not streamed, and not recorded, as in any on site meeting.  When people come back here, the streaming will continue in this room and the captioning.  
    Thank you.  
    >> Apparently, you have Lisa asking Dittmer asking for room one.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Right.  We have a few people to allocate into groups here.  Luis, are you able to assist us for that?  
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Not at the moment.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Best practice is a very good one as well.  I encourage people to go threw there.  It's an interesting one.  Somebody is asking for a reminder.  Group 3 is global standards, Gyre Jensen is there.  And group four is the future.  
    Group 1, defining the responsibilities.  Lisa is there.  And best practice, Holmes and Helena are on that one.  
    Bear with us, it's taking us a while but we are manually allocating people to groups.  We will also keep that into consideration.  
    So let's have you go to group 1, Almyra, if you can do that, with some urgency.  
    Leonard would like to go to group 3.  
    >> Group 4 is just two people.  So group 4.  
    >> Put the rest of us in group 4.  Group 4.  Please.
    >> Okay.
    >> And everybody else.  
    >> Yes.  Thank you.  
    >> Okay.  Thank you.  
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Captioner is kept here.  
    >> That is done.
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Don't close the breakout rooms.  Don't close the breakout rooms, please.  Keep them open.  Why did you close them?  No.  
    Can you please make me a host?
    >> Okay.  
    >> LUIS BOBO:  I apologize.  It seems that the rooms were closed by mistake.  They should not have been closed.  So let's reopen again please, and everyone please join again.  
    Please make me host.
    >> You are host now.
    >> LUIS BOBO:  No.  Click on my name.  I'm not host.  Sorry.  You have to accept.  Click on my name.  Luis Bobo and make me host please.  
    >> You have to bear with us.  Technology is like that.  We all have to be patient.  When it works, it's amazing.  Sometimes you get a few hiccups.  We are in good hands.
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Most of you should be able to rejoin automatically.  So sometimes the button is on the bottom, and sometimes it's hidden in "more," but it's there.  Sometimes people are not update and they cannot see it.  But please try to join the rooms now.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Fantastic.  There are a few people.  Many people seem to have gone to breakout rooms.  Mess around on your screen and something should come up.  
    And then I think those on mobile, we will just allocate them to the groups.  Thank you Luis and company.  Just allocate them to groups where there is not a lot of activity.  But Gyre has a specific group she needs to go to.  And she needs to be in group 3.  
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Who?  
    >> Gyre Jensen.  
    >> MODERATOR:  I'll go to group 4 and you can allocate everything else to the groups.
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Jensen is in group 3.  
    >> LUIS BOBO:  This is a message for the hosts.  So I will give you back the role of host now.  So, yes, are you there?
    >> Yes, I'm there.
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Do you want to close the rooms at a given time or just people are done when they want to be done?
    >> At a given time.  Let's just take from now maybe 15 minutes from now on.  Could be do that, from now on 15 minutes and they rejoin like the last time, where they automatically come all back.  That is the easiest.  And we need, after that, since we have some problems now, another maybe -- when they all come back, maybe 20 or 25 minutes.  It's the final -- the panel will be closed then.
    >> LUIS BOBO:  I think that can be fine.  The only thing is I'm not sure why you started ten minutes late, because we have to be tight.  But I think the room is free.  If the captioner can stay for ten minutes more.
    >> That would be great, so it's not cut off in the middle of something.  We are sorry about that.  Starting ten minutes late to break up the session.
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Yes, I understand.  Thank you.  
    >> Luis are you there?
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Breakout rooms end at 10:39.  And they break at 10:50.  It's in 11 minutes.
    >> LUIS BOBO:  Maybe I stay here these ten minutes and then grant you the host role.  So we will simply -- sometimes it's tricky, these platform, you see a red button and the red button and they closed the rooms.  
    >> They are discussing in the rooms and that's the most important thing.
    >> And that it's not cut off in the middle.  That's very important.  Also they started ten minutes late.
    >> LUIS BOBO:  I understand.
    >> Thank you very much.  
    >> MODERATOR:  I missed you guys.  I hope you had meaningful conversations.  Thank you.  You are incredible for bearing with us.  
    Technology, let's not forget that it brought us altogether.  People are here from all over the world.  People are able to engage in conversations.  For the most part.  It held out.  And we are thankful to the hosts.  Thank you for what you have done to help us on this platform.  I do want us now to get into the state where we are reporting back on some of the things we have been saying.  
    I hope that as you were in discussion, you picked out an individual in your group who in a few words will summarize the discussions that you all had.  So, I would ask now, the person who has been selected for group 1, who is going to be reporting back on group 1.  
    >> Put your mic on and we are ready 
    >> We started discussing initially the proposal was, and I think it was evident in my chat as well.  Having specific laws, so that they are not too broad and therefore misused.  So, ensuring that journalists are carved out when there are specific privacy or encryption related acts.  
    But that does not mean that I'm advocating for pure protection for journalism -- when individuals as a journalist is also involved in a criminal capacity.  For example, misuse of child pornography.  So my proposal would be to ensure that the law is very specific.  
    In addition to that, having, say, for example, a time limit.  So the Government has the responsibility to make sure that they are not introducing regulation that just lasts forever.  There should be a time limit and it should be reviewed ever couple years, depending on the security threat.  
    The second point that was mentioned was cyber awareness across the community, starting with journalists.  So it's a primary issue as she -- for example, in Turkey.  There is a big cyber capability in the defense sector, but there is not enough cyber awareness and resilience by the community and journalists so that they can protect themselves online.  
    And then we had, from Ivan, local awareness and addressing it at a local level.  Often we see people being targeted where their personal information is being misused.  And I think Lisa used it as an earlier example as well.  So raising awareness as well.  
    Defamation laws should play a big role.  It comes down to Governments.  Defamation across the globe is a complex legal issue.  So if we have more strict laws protecting journalists and their internal information being misused that would be a great value.  Maybe it's not something that the technical side has to do.  The Government has to do it and there should be a push.  
    In addition, I also advocated from the tech sector there should be a push to ensure that the legal framework of the government is introducing, and I think it would be difficult to argue against national security, because it's such an emotional topic.  So I think rather than just focusing on fighting the encryption act, we should come up with mitigation ways of dealing with it.  One could be to ensure that the legal framework that allows lawful access to encrypted data, without dictating technical tech solutions from the Government.  So the technical sector should be open ensuring that you don't get to dictate the solutions.  Maybe it can be used, but the Government shouldn't dictate it at the end of the day.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Thank you.  I don't know what I enjoyed more, that contribution or the Australian accent that I love.  So that's summing up the conversation that took place in the group defining the responsibilities.  
    Who will wrap up for best practice?
    >> KAMAYANI:  This is Kamayani.  It's the smallest group.  I think we are going to go swiftly what group one said.  Because we had the same discussions as well.  We talked about the fact that there needs to be a U.S.  Intervention in the form of having some International frame work or guidelines.  
    We also had a discussion that there are countries with dictatorships and countries like mine where they are Democratic but they are not functioning that way.  And the whole issue of data encryption.  And the fact that we need to have more awareness on digital security.  Digital security workshop.  That is another effort that you can take up.  And we need to go beyond the language barriers.  
    Because, you know, in India, it's very important.  We have journalists in remote areas.  We are talking about the accessibility of the Internet as well.  It's a huge big issue.  But digital security workshops to happen more to make people more aware about it, so they are secure themselves.  And to have an International framework which would be making the Governments as well as the big tech companies also accountable.  There has to be a basic minimum within which we cannot be negotiated with.  The freedom of speech and the right of the security of the journalist cannot be negotiated.  So that basic framework.  Maybe the countries could adapt it wp their context and add something more.  But there has to be a basic framework which nobody can negotiate with.  
    And we discussed about it, it was a small group, about the what's app.  Everything is in what's app, although the Government has said you cannot forward.  And the whole area of fake news.  And we were told that in Brazil, what's app was discussed.  So getting together was great.  So that was our conversation.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Thank you.  I almost want to say, don't turn on your video, because your voice, you remind me of -- you fall in love with the radio personality.  You never see this person.
    >> I cannot put on my video.  It's so bad the Internet where I am.  I'll just go off.  
    >> MODERATOR:  We will all have our picture of who you are, and we can listen to your voice.  You talked about WhatsApp and the impact.  I'm from -- I'm seeing that WhatsApp is the medium where people get their news, and how people mobilize.  And your voice is so energetic.  So that was best practices from the small group.  But we appreciate the big contribution that you made.  
    Global standards.  
    >> JENSEN GYRE:  We forget to appoint a spokesperson.  So if nobody is against, I'll sum up our discussion I'll be happy to do that.  We had a small group.  Alexandra, is that okay for you?  
    >> MODERATOR:  Thumbs up.  She says okay.
    >> JENSEN GYRE:  So I can add to what has been said from other colleagues.  We talked a bit broadly about what are the difficulties at the moment, when it comes to global standards.  We take into account that Human Rights are not so much falling under a sanction regime, if Human Rights are not protected or enshrined as it should be.  
    We talked about the definite need for an International framework of journalists trying to pet better collect each other.  And I think reporters without borders is doing a fantastic job in connecting journalists.  Because sometimes they don't have the means or networks or contact to also connect to other colleagues in other countries, so the way education works also taking into account that the next generation needs to learn about their rights.  They also have in the digital age.  How to use their devices.  How to protect their privacy in a digital age.  I think it was Alexandra who said that people know how to protect their health, when they engage in sexual relations.  So this is the same thing that should also be part of the educational system when it comes to data protection, to digital protection.  
    And the last thing is that we were a little speechless, and I'm happy to hear from other colleagues also, with regard to best practices when it comes to making countries abide by their laws that are already existing.  
    This is in my opinion one of the bigger questions that we have not been focusing too much on.  What happens if countries are over and over not abiding by the laws that are existing.  And one focus should maybe be or could be that we have a Special Rapporteur on the protection of journalists and press freedom at the UN level.  That is something that I think also reporters without borders can been advocating so much or so long for.  And I think that could be one piece of the puzzle to a broader solution that we have not come up with yet.  
    >> ANDY YEN:  Governments need to be more inclusive.  
    These are all very common topics, fake news, social media.  And the conclusion of the session, we have to bring more people in from Civil Society, from journalism and technology and make them part of the conversation earlier on.  Typically, how we think of it in the past, it's a challenge in the court, it goes to the people's rights and the discussion -- it goes to the riots and problems that happen there.  It's better to have discussion in advance and the new laws are passed, in order to ensure proper covering for all of these issues.  It would be fantastic if Government could be more inclusive of bringing different groups to be part of the laws.  
    >> MODERATOR:  More inclusion coming forward.  So that was a group that was discussing the future.  Thank you for that.  And please, these are meaningful contributions.  We have noted some of these down and we will compile a report perhaps that people can consider.  So we really do value these contributions that you have all made.  
    So we are now approaching the end.  And I wanted to give our panelists here, just a final word.  Right?  So we have a few minutes to go.  Helena, Lisa, LHolmes, Gyre, your closing statements as we had the conversation broadly.  And then we will wrap up.  
    Start with Holmes, then Andy, Helena and then Lisa.  
    >> CHI HANG CHAN:  Continue to pay attention to Hong Kong, especially the digital role and the reprisales that are taking place there.  Because they are possibly a sign of things to come, with the rise of China and their tendencies.  Hong Kong is like a coal mine and that's a test case.  And one of the solutions that might help them, might have wider wider applications of all that we are looking at.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Thank you.
    >> ANDY YEN:  My closing statement is really that, you know, the next five, ten years, is going to be one of the most critical periods for the Internet.  A lot of very, very important issues are being registered and discussed right now.  And the outcome of these discussions really will set up the path of how freedom, Democracy, develops in the digital era.  So it's important that we all look at it closely.  It impacts our lives and also the future.  And we have only one chance to get it right.  If we get it wrong in the critical space, the reap percussions could last for decades.  The discussion is not black and white.  There are a lot of nuanced and deep arguments here.  So given the topic, I want to iterate the importance for everybody to be an active participant in building a future together.  
    >> MODERATOR:  So we are in a critical phase.  The decisions we make now will go on to shape the future.  Thank you for that.  
    And these conversations are to important.  Who was next?  
    >> HELENA DIAS:  I guess the conversations are so important that we have to pay attention to the discussions that have been lawmaking in each country and in the International level.  Because it will affect our lives.  The journalists work and Democracy.  So I guess we need to watch and have Civil Society participation.  
    >> MODERATOR:  I'm so proud of you for staying awake.  It's super early where you are.  Let's keep our eyes on the laws that are coming through, regulation.  Let's not take our eyes off of it.
    >> JENSEN GYDE:  This is one of the bigger tasks for politics and politicians in the world.  Talking about their existing legislation but talking about the legislation in European and our countries can be exploited by regimes.  
    Keep your eyes on what is happening in Hong Kong, but also in Belarus and Turkey and Russia, in Brazil, because I think we only can connect and that is what we also try to do a better job in connecting to other politicians worldwide and exchanging views.  And taking the lead in one hand but also knowing and sharing best practices and the knowledge that has been gained in other countries.  And I'd like to do it, but we can only do it in a network.  And these conversations like this one are influencing a lot what is being done in the world.  
    >> MODERATOR:  Exactly.  And I know that you'll be taking these nuggets to Parliament.  It's about good having you here as well to give us that epicyte from a parliamentary and lawmaking look.  
    That's been a valuable conversation.
    >> LISA DITTMER:  Thank you so much.  been beneficial to get the perspectives from various countries.  
    From a Civil Society perspective, we will do our very best to connect you to make sure that different voices are heard.  We are in a somewhat privileged position to bring the voices out and I think the whole workshop has been a great reputation of what more inclusive and transparent policymaking should look like.  And it needs to happen more often and your voices need to be heard and the different International perspectives play a great role in producing legislation.  Stay healthy.  Thank you so much.  
    >> MODERATOR:  I want to extend the thank you for everybody.  Thanking for taking part.  Thank you to our panelists.  All these conversations and their contributions that you have made, it's food for thought.  I think as we walk away from the conversation, we are each examining just how we can do it.  We have pen told that the next five years are so critical.  Let's keep our eyes on the places that we have been asked to keep our eyes on.  
    I want to give a final thank you to everybody.  Especially our panelists and friends on YouTube thank you for sticking this out on us.  
    The IGF, thank you for organizing this pathway.  
    Reporters without borders, thank you for bringing us together.  The team has worked hard to make sure that we can come together in this way.  I don't want to start giving shout outs, but the people you know who you are.  
    So to Helena, to Holmes, Gyte, if I start losing the names, what a fantastic start for the week.  Some of you are going to the evening now, but thank you for this.  And we hope to engage soon on this conversation because I think the message is that we all continue to work on this.  It's been great having you here.  Thank you for engaging us in the comments.  I've seen the messages.  I loved being here today.  You made my job easy.  
    So thank you.  Thank you.  Thank you.  Have a wonderful day.  Bye everybody.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-12-ws304-reaffirming-human-rights-in-company-responses-to-crisis-raw^^

 
   >> This session is being recorded and hosted under the IGF Code of Conduct and UN Rules and Regulations.  
     The chat is for social purposes only but you can, of course, type your suggestions and remarks in the chat as well.  My colleague put all of those information already in the chat.
     And if you wish, you can take a snapshot, a print screen of the session and attach it into the final report later on.
     So please feel free to do so.  And I am making again the recreation of people who are still joining.  So maybe let's wait maybe one or two for minutes but it is just a suggestion.
     >> GBENGA SESAN: And host, can they have all of their camera on so we can see them directly?
     >> Yes.  I will type a message now.
     >> GBENGA SESAN: Okay.
     >> JAN RYDZAK: I would like to ask if the screen shot is a reporting requirement or is it optional?
     >> It is optional.  You can do it, you don't need to.  It is just a possibility.
     >> JAN RYDZAK: Okay.
     >> That is why I kindly inform you about it.  I just put request to everyone to turn on their cameras so they should see this request.  Yes, I think they have just started to turning on.  Their cameras.
     >> GBENGA SESAN: That is good.
     >> JAN RYDZAK: Wonderful.  I think we are ready to go.
     >> That is the case, let's, please let's begin.  I will just --
     >> HAIAASM BO SAID: If we have more participants let's give it more time.
     >> MODERATOR: If we have more participants, let's give it one more minute.
     >> Hello, everyone, can you hear me?
     >> MODERATOR: We can hear you but I'm not sure who we are hearing?
     >> I just decided to use the opportunity to test my microphone but if it is fine then --
     >> MODERATOR: On my side I would say it as little quiet.  If it is possible to increase the volume a little bit, then that would be great.
     >> Okay, is this any better?
     >> MODERATOR: Not for now.  At least not on my part but I mean we can hear you.
     >> Because I'm not sure if I can improve anything apart from just speaking louder.  That is the one thing I can control, I guess.  But other than that, I'm afraid I exhausted the options.
     >> MODERATOR: That is type.  You are audible and if anyone has any doubts we can just ask.  And I would like to clarify for those joining there is a recommendation to turn on your camera if you wish.
     With you I would say it is not a requirement.  We would also like to respect differential bandwidth, so it is completely okay if you choose not to turn your camera on.
     I think we have a critical mass.  In informal terms 30 might be a critical mass so let's call it that and continue the conversation as people join.  First of all, thank you very much for joining, everybody.  Good morning, good afternoon, good evening depending on your time zone.  I hope you had a very illuminating IGF.  This is as you know the last day.  I'm Jan Rydzak, the company edge gagement lead and research analyst at ranking digital rights.  In case you are not familiar with RDR, we are a research project that creates global standards for companies to essentially make good on their responsibility to protect and respect human rights.  We place special emphasis on freedom of information as well as privacy and we evaluate and rank companies.  Some of the largest tech and telecommunications companies in the world and we rank them on their policies their practices and the commitments that underlie them or in many cases should underlie them.
     And we capture the differences between those policies and practices between companies through the RDR corporate accountability index which to many of you is known as the RDR index quite simply.  And the RDR index is a kind of tool kit.  I don't use that word lightly but it is a tool kit.  Just to give you snap not, 20920 edid user has 58 indicaters broken down into 335 individual questions on policies and practices that range from transparency reporting to Targeted advertising practices to how companies use and develop algorithms and how to transparent they are about that and all of the questions fit into three large pillars, governance, freedom of expression and information is and privacy.  And not coincidentally that maps perfectly to the breakouts in the session.  Certainly not an accident.  What are we focusing on today?  This workshop is essentially about looking at situations of crisis.  So political crisis, health emergencies like the one we are experiencing currently.
     Outright conflict.  Network shutdowns, overall situations where massive violations of human rights are either taking place or having enormous potential to take place.  The leading question for this workshop is what are the short comings of company accountability in times of crisis and what can be done, what can we do as a human rights community to make companies more accountable in the area and what are the main points of foussas we should pursue.
     And with that I would like to introduce our speakers.  So starting with Isabel Ebert who is an expert at the office of the UN high commissioner for human rights working with the B-Tech project on issues that largely revolve around governance and how companies governance should follow the UN guiding principles in particular.  So she is doing really exciting work on that front and I'm sure we will hear a lot about that.
     We also have with us Dorota Glowacka who is a lawyer with the Panoptykon foundation.  Any do work in privacy but more recently a mover on broader universe human rights and Mr. Haissa who is Executive Director of the paradigm initiative that works to deepen digital inclusion and promote digital rights in Africa and you are still a fellow at the Stanford digital Silvanei lab, is that correct?
     >> GBENGA SESAN: That's correct.
       No thanks to.
     >> MODERATOR: Exactly.  Flexible work models are hall mark of the COVID area.  As part of this already overly lengthy introI would like to remind everyone that is session is not just about COVID.  In fact, I would say it is not even just about global crises.  What we think of as localized emergencies can completely consume the lives of people who suffer its impact the most.  And obviously the pandemic has brought to the fore issues around unbridled data collection and its impact and implications and all of us agree it has launched us into a new reality.
     And as part of the reality the practices that have become common place during the pandemic risk become normalized. in this session we are looking to address a longer standing problem which is that it is hard or it is sometimes downright impossible to kind of forecast how a company will respond in a crisis situation if general.  So I would encourage everyone to sort of look past the pandemic, look beyond the pandemic and recognize that crises simply do not always impact us all the same way and recognize crises that do not directly impact us all.
     Okay.  So let me tell you about the structure of this session.  We will begin with interventions by the three speakers, that is about five to seven minutes.  With some flexibility there.  So of course, we have -- we are fairly flexible.  And then we will move on to a discussion that will end around I would say 55:00 past the hour and we will see a minute or two before or after if there is some flexibility.  And then after that, technology willing we will break out into breakout groups.  Obviously that may be a challenge, but we will keep our fingers crossed and hope for the best.  Those breakout groups will focus on governance, freedom of express, and privacy as I previously hinted and the presentation will provide grounding for the breakouts.  They will be randomly assigned and moderated by each -- each moderated by a member of the RDR team and I would like to take this opportunity to introduce my colleagues Veszna Wennenauer headline be moderating the other two sessions and then we will come back for the final discussion and wrap the session up.  On a logistical know the feel free to use the Q&A for substantive questions.
     I would like to start with Isabel.  So Isabel, the B-Tech project I think is really leading a lot of work in terms of providing guidance on how to apply the UNG Ps to digital economy.  Interesting about B-Tech and your approach you are focusing on some core areas core do companies if governance.  Business models.  Hue pan rights due diligence.  Remedy.  Can you tell us in general how good governance can come in play especially in times of the major calamities.  Over to you.
     >> ISABEL EBERT: Thanks for the opportunity to talk more about our work.  Of course, you said the panel is not only about the pandemic but, of course, we have seen a lot of company behavior responding to the pandemic that is?
     A way a crisis but also shows how companies are preparing for other crises.
     We have seen that in particular the pandemic obviously demonstrated the key challenges that we have in upholding human rights in particular in this narrow interlinkage of the State and businesses alike where actually the States were really dependent on the cooperation of companies in order to roll out certain technical solutions for managing the pandemic.
     And these challenges on the business nexus are actually already addressed in the UN guiding principles on business and human rights and there are by the very nature applying to all sectors so they are not tech specific yet but that is what we are actually taking only with B-Tech.  We are breaking down UN guiding principles on human rights through the technology sector and that means that all technology companies have the responsibility to respect human rights at all times and across all of their operations.
     Also for the crisis moment the State has a strong role in supporting companies and carrying out the responsibility to respect human rights.  And specific language on the necessity of the State to support companies in crisis situations, also conflict situations where there is a heightened risk of human rights abuses and that is certainly something that we see in the hitting of the pandemic.  And what we are going to do with B-Tech is that we are producing more dedicated guidance on how technology companies can protect human rights going forward and we have already put out a range of foundational papers that you can find on our website.  These are really a conversation starter and based on these papers we want to really follow up and coordinate with all stakeholders in the setting to make the guidance as concrete as possible.
     So your question on good governance, I think I really want to highlight three key points today.
     On the one hand, transparent governance and accountability structures.  On the other hand really the necessity even though companies might be confronted with very, very much public pressure and also time pressure there is the necessity to carry out human rights due diligence as best as possible.  And then thirdly, really emphasizing also the role of stakeholder earn gagement in that.  In the government accountability part when we see that States are contracting with technology companies or seeking support from the companies we need to ensure that the governance between those parties is clear and it is really based on responsible data governance, responsible data use that not only applies to the sort of big tech players but we have also seen that there are many mid-sized and smaller players that stepped in during the pandemic but also are stepping in other crisis moments and often the public attention focuses on the big tech players but the smaller ones can have a tremendous impact on human rights.  We have seen that in the past with the niche surveillance companies really playing a critical role here.
     So B-Tech is really set out in order to make sure that we have robust and trans parent ownership structures when it comes to digital infrastructure but also when it comes to digital sort of use of data, how we are making sure that rights holders can have a say and can contest decision-making in case of doubt and we have seen some interesting cases for for example in the Netherlands on that.  And when it comes to human rights due diligence, my second point we have seen that those businesses that had in place robust structures to respond to crisis moments have been able to a manage the crisis moments better.
     When you already have your human rights management structures in place and then the crisis hits it is easier to make sure that the communication across the company is sort of more or less clear and coordinated and that you can respond accordingly in multi-disciplinary teams and really make sure that you get the information from the grassroots level but you are also able to scale it up to the top of the company.  Avalanche that is something for example in the government in request for user data we see a lot where the companies have that been experiencing the crisis moment again and again have now adopted more robust managerial structures and can respond much quicker.  I'm happy to talk across the panel also more about ideas for stakeholder engagement.
     Our work really departs from a thorough necessity to identify, address and mitigate adverse human rights impacts stemming from technology companies and that is critical and a very powerful state of business nexus.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  I think there is a lot of questions stemming from that.  We can pursue them in the Q&A.  And I will think you know, especially it is especially interesting to me what you are saying about the importance of preexisting structures, right.
     This, you know, the preparedness and readiness is obviously an important part of resilience and I think a lot of the time we do see the companies across-the-board Cooperstown that we sort of focus on as an organization that a lot of Keys processes that they adopt are kind of ad hoc. and I wonder about the role also of targeted human rights due diligence focused on the crisis moment in that respect.
     There is been some initiatives in that direction but I think they are still kind of tentative and we are still at a very early stage of this conversation.
     So I would like to bring in Dorota, actually.  If you microphone works.  I am assuming it is okay.
     But, Dorota, the Panoptykon foundation has provided awealth to the area on privacy that is the area on which the Panoptykon foundation is known.  But also around the champion program length -- challenges of content moderation in the environment that is disrupted.  If you could zero in kind of on the role of algorithm decision making and the role of remedy or appeals which I think are two topics that you focus on in this disas a resulted environment if you could give us a sense of that I think that would be very important.
     >> DOROTA GLOWACKA: Sure, thank you very much for the invitation.  And yes, for I would like to briefly discuss the implications of the pandemic for freedom of expression.  By focusing on how the current crisis has affected the content moderation practices of big internet platforms.
     As I believe this is an area that to a great extent determines what we can and can't see and say online.
     As you may have heard the big tech companies once the pandemic started they introduced changes to the content moderation policies.
     And basically what happened is that they literally sent the human moderators home and shifted some part of the work to the algorithms.  Obviously the algorithms have been used before for content moderation purposes but during the pandemic crisis the platforms have admitted to use them even for for those purposes.  And that was not the only change in their policies as regards content moderation.
     What is important is also that they kind of limited the appeals procedure, procedures that were available on those platforms.  And just to make it clear, at least in my opinion, these procedures have never been or have been far from perfect, I will put it that way.  But right now, they have become even more limited.  For example, Facebook has temporarily suspended reinstating content after a user that would like to contest a decision to take down content and Facebook has temporarily suspended reinstating such a content.
     What was the effect of all this?  As you know, probably there are studies that suggest that basically algorithms that are used for content moderation are not 100% effective.  In fact, they often carry a risk of overremovals on the one hand and on the other hand they often fail to identify truly illegal material.
     So in general one may say that like algorithms are prone to errors in this respect.  And there are like certain mechanisms that can be introduced in order to mitigate the risks that are associated with using algorithms or in general with just using arbitrary powers of platforms to moderate content.
     And these are the appeals process, some transparency mechanisms that can be introduced but as I said before, those have never been perfect and during the pandemic I would say that they even have deteriorated.  So the combination of the factors have led to a quite disturbing effect that is demonstrated in the data provided themselves by the platforms in their transparency reports.
     If you look at the data concerning content removals provided by Facebook or YouTube, you can see that during the pandemic there has been a massive increase of removals.  After the new content moderation policies have been introduced.
     Basically the amount of potentially harmful content removed during the pandemics doubled comparing to a similar period from before the current crisis.
     What are the regulatory implication is or conclusions that can be drawn from that effect?  Those conclusions are not ground-breaking.  These are things that many human rights advocates have known already and have been advocating for quite a long time.
     So in order to mitigate the negative effects of using algorithms to moderate content three things are needed.  One, proper a transparency mechanism including transparency on role and functioning of the automate the systems used for content moderation.  One thing, more transparency.  The second thing are effective appeals processes in the platforms, so called due process.  And the third thing is external independent oversight of final platforms decisions.  These are the three elements I would say that are needed and I'm not going to go in into details what they should mean because those details can be found in many soft law documents already developed by many human rights bodies and also there is quite a lot of recommendations developed by academics slash NGOs in this respect.  Probably the most prominent example are the so-called Santa Clara principles that concern among others the details or representations concerning the proper appeals process that should be implemented on the platforms and we at Panoptykon try to contribute to the efforts maybe not in the most obvious way that you can think of because last year we started litigation trying to question an arbitrary removal done by Facebook basically what happened was that Facebook block thed without any explanation a page of another Polish NGO and we are trying to convince a Polish court so far or at this stage to basic amly consider this arbitrary nontransparent removal as unlawful.
     Again, I'm not going to go into details.  If you are interested in the lawsuit and how it goes, there is a -- we are run a web page dedicated to the case where you can follow its progress.
     What I would like to stress one last thing and probably a key takeaway.  The remedies for the situation that I presented they have been already kind of discovered.  There is like not much new you can say about it.  But what became transparent out of the experiment that happened during the pandemic is that, well, let me put is the other way.  You could get an impression over the last years that the due process in the platforms have progressed.  The platforms have introduced certain safeguards, additional safeguards such as, for example, recently established Facebook oversight board.  And other elements that probably have improved the situation.  What the current crisis have shown is that this progress is to a great extent illusionary.  Illusionary in the sense that the progress based on the self-regulation can be basically withdrawn any time.
     And the platforms can basically change their policies overnight.  And therefore, I believe that this is ever important evidence that well, basically should convince us that we are really at the stage where we really need a binding regulation instead.  Thanks.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  Sorry for the few seconds break.  I was looking for the chat -- for the unmute button.  Thank you so much.
     I think that is interesting and you touched on multiple very interesting points including the role of independent oversight.
     I'm very glad that you mentioned the oversight board as a sort of counter example to what independent oversight may be because there is a limit to its independence.  A lot lot of us in the session I think have worked on the topic and there is a sort of independent element but it is still sort of dictated by the platforms' rules.  It would be interesting to see how o it evolves and what kind of initiatives it informs.
     >> , a you said about appeals is also interesting specifically in the case of Facebook because if you do a deep are dive into their most recent transparency report, one thing that jumps out is that the appeals in normal circumstances the appeals that are restored after a user requests or appeals, dwarfs the number restored out 1 appeal.  You can see how important that is and the abcents of that mechanism in the course of pandemic is impactful and important.  This also underscores the importance of being prepared.  The pandemic in a way was an unexpected event but then it became an expected event and I think there was a lot of preparation that could have been made that perhaps was not.
     So, thank you very much for that again.  And moving to Gbenga Sesan one the problems that keeps human rights advocates up at night is that the pandemic will be an excuse for excessive user demand, to Block accounts sort of under the umbrella of emergency procedures and that I think ties into broader questions about how companies react to turmoil in ways that may contribute to the long-term corrosion of human rights.  And I know that the paradigm initiative has done work on topics -- (no audio).
     >> GBENGA SESAN: Is it is Janu not me.
     >> VESZNA WESSENAUER: Jan wanted to ask about the work you have done on topics like how companies react to excessive demand in your countries of focus and what lesson can those precedent?
     >> GBENGA SESAN: For a second I thought my internet was frozen and there could be many reasons for that.  But it is not mine.
     I think is is important to -- I mean we will try not to talk about this crisis during the crisis even though it is difficult but I think the fundament thing to note is that companies have a major, major role to play in what becomes the new formal.  With companies allow or even, you know, tick up during this pandemic and during any crisis becomes the new normal for a different set of actors.  Especially the actors who have an agenda.
     I will give you examples.  There are countries that shut down the internet during examinations.  That are countries that are automatically known that they will shut down the internet during any element of crisis.  There are countries that will shut down during elections.  Now, what happens is that when there is not an unexpected crisis like COVID-19, you know and businesses do not ask critical questions when demands are made of them those countries with an agenda will make what they are able to get and make it a new normal.  A simple example is data governance during this period.  It is a bit flexible for many companies because almost everyone, there is a climate affair, maybe now access 9% 5% percent or maybe things are some what coming down but the fear is still there.  Let's like survive 2020 and then we can have other conversations about privacy and things like that.
     But it is important to have the long-term view.  The long-term view is that if we allow data collection that is not guided by certain principles during this period trust me, there are countries that will refer to this period and say but in 2020 Germany collected data this way.  But in 2020, France collected data this way.  And these are the countries that we work in.  In the 2019 digital rights in Africa report which focuses on certain countries you will see countries that talk about shutting down the internet during examinations.  Everyone knows that Ethiopia from Nigeria.  Now Ethiopia learns that Le lesson and continued to practice it even when everyone had -- the laws guiding the change.  And that takes me to the second point.  Except the laws changed to become more friendly or we disallow new laws I can't tell you how many legal proposals we tried to fight back on across many countries in 2020 alone.
     Th are so many countries trying to get in emergency laws and they have provisions that you would look at.  They have nothing to do with COVID-19 and everything to do with opportunities by the government.  One of the bills, by the way was a two-page document.  A two-page document with nothing but COVID-19 but everything about national security, national Morality and the path of the government to shut down the internet.  That is based on a political agenda.  Where the companies come in and I keep saying this and I have been saying this for two or three years now.  Companies need to be more activists you know.  And I say that because I thought yes, companies are not like nonprofits that can be activists and things like that.  But there will be no bottom line for you if Yo allow things to move too far.  In many countries where global platforms operate including tech companies in Africa, what governments use is not even the law.  It is simple and I said this question.  There are countries we know that we have on record that a phone call from the presidents or the Prime Ministers office or from a ministry as going to a teleCoe and they shut down the internet without any data trail.
     Even when there is the law of the land saying that you have to do it and you know that it is not the right thing to do, the question still -- three things that we agree in terms of norms that should be considered where actions are taken.
     >>   Is it legal?  Unfortunately, in many African countries many laws actually allow shut downs and many laws actually allow bad practices.  Is it proportional?  In many cases proportionality and necessity are the two elements that can allow businesses to ask questions.  Ehad example not only just the tech sector.  Everile single example I gave of the -- bank of Nigeria was trying to you know basically clamp down on protesters by freezing their bank accounts and then the bank regulators said to banks we have these 20 people and we suspect they have ties with terrorism and Block their accounts.  There was no document from the Courts and some of the banks went on to block these accounts immediately.
     And then about 18 days later the banking regulator produces the document from the Courts to say by the way, for that illegal action you take it is now legal because we have the document.  So it is important to think legal et cetera and proportionality and necessity.
     Is it proportionate?  It has to be.  And it has to be necessary.  I mean if you know many of the actions that we Documented in our 209 digitalization in Africa report are good as user to use a grenade to kill a mosquito.  When you take a look at the action taken by government, someone asks a question and says why is the governor of my state spending more money on burying dead people than on education?  And this person was fired.  How on earth does someone ask that question and that is what you think is necessary to do.
     And speaking of companies pushing back, one of the things that we have had we have talked a lot about mere and we have in many of -- here and have in the conversations is transparency supports.  This is on to you, jan companies under pressure from RDR have broken con the companies that used to lump together.  But but there was not one African telecom or tech company that produced a transparency report until recently.  I can tell you why.  Reason is because many of them know or believe if they did that they could lose their licenses and this is why it is also in their own interest to make sure that they push back and do not got clogged up and clammed down in an atmosphere, in a climate of fear.  Good news NTN which received the biggest fine in the telecom on the continent because of what happened to them in Nigeria now released a transparency report and guess what?  Their licenses were not withdrawn.  We have been asking for transparency reports since 2000 and was it 11 or '12.  It wasn't even called a transparency report.  In 2010, a telecomcompany name withheld was contacted by the presidency in Nigeria and released text messages by an opposition politician.  And started requesting questions in 2011.  To date, now nine years, one company, which is good news.  We don't always press statements to commend a company for doing something, but we going to call out NTN for doing the right thing finally.
     Better late than never.  Of course, we will still ask them to break down some of the elements.  It is interesting that NTN is not taking credit for being the last company to shut down the internet in Sudan and being the first person to retore.  Why on earth does anybody have to take credit for such a thing?  They should not shut down in the first place so that is type.  It is important not only transparency reports but provide enough information for everybody to understand what is going on.  At the end of the day the one element that these companies thrive on is trust.  There is no digital gig data economy without trust.
     Many times the trust is breached.  What happens is the companies begin to die because people begin to understand that I can trust them with my data, I could get into trouble with my government for using this platform and by the way this is one of the things that we are very, very, very, very excited to look at the in the 2020 digitallal rights in Africa report which will we released in April next year.  For the 2019 report we put together a 19-minute short film to demonstrate what is going on.  Wean tend to do the same thing.  I will invite you for a movie premier for the 2020 report.  I think it is important that companies do understand that the biggest user in the evolution of trust is the bottom line.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Gbenga.  There is so much to unpack.  MTN is one of the companies that we rank at RDR.  You touched on a point that a lot of us have seen in the past which is that transparency reports don't get specific enough.  There is an arbitrary element to how companies disclose things in general and especially during the pandemic.  We see arbitrary collections of data being published.  And in some cases that I will not specifically, shutdowns are bunched together with other restrictions such as blocking individual numbers in ways that make real transparency kind of impossible or next to impossible.
     So I would since we don't have that much time, and I think we have a lot of questions here, I think we have a few questions in the chat.  But I believe we have a participant who has raised his hand.  That is his excellency Dr. Haissam Bou Said.
     >> HAISSAM BOU SAID: I will make it short.  The COVID-19 pandemic is one of this type of international crisis but also and I heard some of the colleagues spoke about a lot of topic and we agree on some.  Especially Mr. Sesan when he spoke on the Nigeria aspect it is to call attention that we monitored the pressial elections and also good a lot of violations even from the media and internet site.
     The issue is that on the Middle East where it is our -- to follow all of the violation of human rights we believe that we witnessed also a lot of fake news carried by a lot of social medias, televisions, newspapers and still being carried on until now.  And as much such, the matter of fact is that such fake news created a lot of chaos in the understanding and approach of the main crisis.
     And also it mislead a lot of States to take actions on some violations as it is not -- it was not, you know, well pointed even these fake news media.  The problem is not with the laws, the laws are there.  The problem is with the implementation of a the laws carried out by some of the companies and also States who are not on various purposes are not willing and they are not showing intentions to carry some legal actions against some social media.
     We are not with the shutting down that is being done by many social medias, but also we are not by letting them, you know, continuing with all of these fake media.  And as I said, that the is problem is also with the State legal departments that they are not also taking actions.
     Therefore, we believe that the federation of the communication which is one of the UN bodies should take full responsibility on that and jump in in all of these kind of crisis to put an end to all of these violations.
     Because we cannot continue like that with misleading the social and public opinions.  And also, we cannot continue like that because it is jeopardizing our work at the human rights council and other international bodies.
     Therefore, we believe that it is also needed to focus on how to trigger these laws and how to make States and companies together to stick to these laws?  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  That is informative and cuts across what a lot of the three of our speakers said.  Is also offers a different perspective than what we have heard so far.
     I would also like to get to a couple of the questions in the chat before we split up into the breakout groups.
     And the first one that I see here is from the Danish institute for human rights and the question to Dorota specifically.  Do your findings that suggest that the increase in content removals during COVID is because of more removals or is it because the health crisis has prompted companies to identify more content that can actually be harmful?  Do you a sense of where that stands?  What is -- let's go ahead and give you the floor.
     >> DOROTA GLOWACKA: Sure.  Well, the truth is I cannot really exclude a possibility that it is the number of -- that the number of harmful or illegal content has increased during the pandemic and that this is the factor that has led to the effect that I described.
     And the reason why I can't exclude this possibility is simply because platforms do not provide enough data to accurately assess at least from the perspective of an external researcher or an NGO monitoring practices of the platforms.  Having said that, though, I would stick to my hypothesis that it is actually the use of algorithms that have -- it is the use of algorithm that have contribute the vastly to the increase of removals for a couple of reasons.
     First of all, the increase of materials have been so massive that is the one thing.  And then if you link it to other data that you can see in the transparency report such as for example in the YouTube transparency report you can see that the number or the percent of content that was used sorry 90% of content that was remove was actually flagged and identified by algorithms.  So if you kind of link the like those numbers together, I believe that this supports hypothesis that the algorithms played a crucial role in removing content.  And then with the finding of the previous studies that I referred to that basically suggests that using algorithms increases the risks of removals.
     And over removals.  In the recent months the companies have started to withdraw from the new policies and either made it official or we know it from some informal conversations with the company moderators that the companies came to a conclusion some of the work should be shifted back to human moderators and they have been kind of more involved in the process of at least, well, conducting an oversight of the algorithm decision-making processes.
     So again, these are just, you know, like some -- these are the arguments that kind of support my hypothesis, I believe.
     But I guess the core problem here is that as long as we do not have like solid data that would prejudge it one way or another we can still just guess and make those assumptions.  While getting this data would be like actually really helpful to see what are the core reasons for such a massive increase of content removals.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Dorota.  And I think this obviously as any of the questions opens up a whole lot of other questions it is a whole sort of, you know, Russian doll situation in which we can expand to an in finite number of additional questions.  I think there is a lot to say here about the roll of algorithms in individual parts of content moderation in general.  One of the pairias focusing on is the moderation and in both appeals and takedown of content and there are problems due to the clustering of different kinds of p enforcement.  Takedowns or shutdowns of accounts.
     But I think in the long-term we also need to look at the solutions, right.  So what can we do about that?  What can we to about algorithmic systems that are simply not accountable?  Is it audits or publishing detailed policies on how companies use algorithms and forwhat?  There is multiple ways to break it down and I think all of them are worth pursuing in separate panels if not entire workshops.
     So given that we are running relatively short on time and we have a tight schedule I would propose that we will take the rest of the questions from chat after the breakouts to make this as inherently practical as possible and we will try to return to those once we are done with the breakouts.  So if my colleagues from IGF could kindly split us up into three rooms if that is possible I think we are ready.  (Breakout room 3).
     Maybe since we are a small group we can do a quick round of introductions and then we can start.  I'm P O.J. in Orr celet and in the Ned RI for the.  Thank you,.
     >> Someone else would like to go?
     >> KAMAYANI: I'm from India and involved in movements and my suggestion which be since we have less time just start and when people intervene they can introduce themselves.
     >> That is also good.  So the purpose of this breakout group it is to discuss two points.  The first point is to sort of identify and discuss trends in crisis telcos and technology companies and whether they align with human rights standards and the second point is to identify good practices that companies should adopt and follow in these -- in any -- in these types of crises.  And once more, just to remind that we are not only dealing with global cry session like the pandemic, the COVID-19 pandemic but we are also taking into account other types of cry session including conflicts and disasters and humanitarian crisis.
     So I'm not sure if anyone else would like to start.  Maybe to add anything that was raised but also to discuss other friends than were discussed illegal.
     >> PONCELET ILELEJI: I will start.  Looking at what they have done in terms the pandemics looking at the perspective from the Global South and look at it from my end in Gambia.  We had to be tell Coes what they did for the university students they were able to make them have data to be able to access classrooms so that was all given that access just offers data access in the classroom.  Another thing I notice about most companies, I did myself or my staff was being able to and I think that is a good global best practice in terms of pandemics being able to provide a path which required data and good connectivity at home.  So that everybody would be on the same level.  Even my drivers had connectivity.  My janitor had connectivity, you know.  Those are things while I look in the normal context of things that normally you don't get an allowance for that as part of the pay check.  I thought that was a good practice.  A lot of companies I know and in different parts of Africa, you know, even I was surprised a friend in Ethiopia explained for me they didn't have a lot of route projects that they work just above us.  So that is something I will think as a group improve our standards, you know, and our recommend apart from what telcos have done in terms of trying to minimize.  Thank you.
     >> AFEF: Reminder that here we are talking to good access and good connectivity is one of, of course, is falls under this breakout group discussion.
     And particularly also to avoid shutdowns during like a global pandemic where people need access to information.  It could be also a very bad practice in it kind of crisis.  Anyone else?
     >> ISABEL EBERT: Maybe to jump in what we can see is that obviously the discourse becomes captured by people that do not necessarily support a human rights based approach to these topics.
     And this is obviously a really growing development because by that we are diluting the discourse and we are -- we are threatened by the idea that obviously also the human rights language can be used against some of the people that we actually need to protect on the ground, right?
     So I think really what also was aiming at emphasizing in my contribution it is not only the technology companies that have to really work on the human rights based approach but it is also the States and that can, of course, sometimes lead to adverse situations where in the end technology companies see themselves confronted with demands from the government and might not be in line with the human rights based approach to governing technology, right?  Just a little bit what Gbenga has been touching upon but what we see in many jurisdictions and in particular in the transparency reports that is very obvious.
     If you look at for example, data from 2014 around the protests that were happening in Hong Kong and so forth, you see that there is immense pressure on technology companies to cooperate with States.  I would really recommend people to have a look at these transparency reports.  He this are useful in some ways with the caveat that they are not standardsized and the numbers of one company don't necessary any compare to the numbers of other companies.
     >> AFEF: That is a good point.  Maybe for a good practice here is have companies sort of be more involved in multi-stakeholder interrishtives not only in these times of crisis but also before and during these crises.  I'm not sure if you have any other recommendation about the point that you raise the specifically for companies?
     >> ISABEL EBERT: Yes, so from my experience what companies have been doing now to certain processes they have really coordinated let's say even though I said earlier we have a the lot of attention on the big players but they also have the Cassity Po coordinate order us and roll out big processes.  Basically there is a critical mass of big tech companies that have acressed how to address certain issues, network shutdown demands or government requests for user data and come up with a sort of joint idea how to approach this.  Some reflected in the principle of the global network initiative.
     But others a sort of more formal way of exchanging how to react to certain situations and you create the leverage that the business human rights ask for like work together sometimes even with the competitors on the specific area of holding human rights protection when when confronted with challenging situations in conflict setting or crisis moments.  Here we have seen some progress and also as Gbenga mentioned there are more and more companies joining this critical mass and entering into this really significantly important discussions.
     >> KAMAYANI: I would like to add from India we to look at the relationship between the State and companies as.
     India we are a large democracy but being governed by the corporates.  During the elections where does the money come from?  From the big tech companies and big giant corporations.
     So there is no transparency as we have talked about transaction logging transparency reports.  That has not been happening.
       And when the tech companies are giving money for elections and there is I would say an unholy nexus here where the human rights suffer.  I think we need to think how can we actually challenge this unholy nexus?
     >> AFEF: That is a very good point.  But you have here sort of a good practice for like suggestion for a good practice or representation for companies to try to adopt I MEAN THAT IS FINE BUT JUST RAISING THIS POINT BECAUSE IT IS AN IMPORTANT POINT.
     >> THOBEKILEMATIMBE: It is critical for balancing out the power dimensions that come between the state and telecom companies.  Basically what is critical is, you know, for companies to consider, you know, deliberately to engage a wide range of stakeholders has already been echoed because I think that is kind of like the best yard stick when looking at what is best practice because when there is engagement there is robust discussions around what a best practice and what is internationally acceptable in terms of respecting human rights issues.
     It is a nonnegotiatable issue.  And there a tendency to slacken from telecom companies when looking at the interactions with the State isself.  You find the continuous with stakeholders on a constant way sis.  Stakeholders who are not the state who are continuously indicating what the best practice are and what should be adhered to.  So that is very critical.  And also I think you know basically I think maybe engaging at a level of, you know, even getting capacity from stakeholders.  Where human rights issues are concerned because we musted a might they might not be the best experts on human rights issues but to bring in the interface where stakeholder consistently engage and you know capacity telecomcompanies.  This is pertinent and why we would call and say know, come onboard when we have forums that provide -- that discuss these issues so that you also get that capacity.
     >> AFEF ABROUGUI: Thank you.  Anyone else?  And what about the point in relation to the use of algorithms now that most of the at least a big part of the content moderation work since the pandemic for some of the big platforms has been shifted to algorithms?  Maybe you can also address that point if there have been any particular trends or cases that you noticed in our own countries and regions and what kind of practices should companies adopt to be respectful of human rights when using these algorithms?
     >> ISABEL EBERT: I'm happy to say something about that.  Many companies particularly the social media platforms think that they can manage content governance based on a large and scanning the posted contents by automated means.  So a certain extent sometimes there is not necessarily human oversight involved.
     And when it comes to hate speech this is obviously problematic because hate speech is inherently context specific so if you just use sort of natural language processing techniques, you will miss out on the contextuality of the statement.  If you use trigger words, you miss out on actually a way in phrasing statements that doesn't use the trigger but still says the same thing.  So we see that a lot when it comes to managing these contents.
     And I think turning in into a recommendation to the technology companies this would mean that they really need to invest in more staff actually having human oversight over these discussions and that also includes having sufficient resources for people that in non-English speaking environments.  There is an issue that we don't have sufficient Arab language moderators for example there.  And again there you see that some of the injustices from sort of a power perspective are replicated even in that very low-hanging managerrar area where you could make an effort from a management point of view in scaling up these efforts.
     >> AFEF ABROUGUI: It is a very important point to make about hiring content managers.  I had discussion with Ethiopia regarding the crisis with the political transition and hate speech and acts of violence.  And there is a problem of hate speech but there is a lack of content moderator in the local languages in Ethiopia.  It is several many languages in Ethiopia and that is a very big problem.  Anyone else would like to share?
     What about I mean the issue of so-called fake news or disinformation and misinformation?  We have seen recently several companies taking action to sort of downrank certain kind of content that there is a threat to -- that is a threat to public health or they consider as being a threat to public health and that could actually misinform people about what is happening with the pandemic but also how they can protect themselves.  Are there -- I mean are there any implication or could there be any implications for freedom of expression and information when companies that take that kind of action?  Do we want companies taking more action on this type of content?  Anyone else have any thoughts?
     >>
     >> GBENGA SESAN: I was hoping to get a response to the fake news as brought up by the ambassador in the open panel.  People talk about hate speech as if the real is the social media or the con platform that the don't tent is regulated through.  Eastbound agrees disinformation and hateful speech are things that need to be tackled but what we can't afford to do is to solve a problem by creating another problem.  In an attempt, we are now introduced practices that are themselves, illegal, unnecessary and disproportionate.  That isn't the way to go.
     So we had a lot of debates especially in cub Ethiopia and Cameroon and we have put out a statement and followed up with prose is.  Nigeria have made quite some progress with the what is called the in court social media antisocial media appeal which is basically to prohibit falsehood and misinformation on the internet.  And the bill has been able to could that -- hasn't been able to do that.  What it has done is give more power for a police force that is already known brutality and provides for internet shutdown td and provides and gives more power without the oversight of judiciary by the way.
     What we have now been able to do is have administratives and say in the first place we do not know one country where control or regulation doesn't mean control, it could mean creating stand tards but we don't know one place in the world where social media regulation has treed to end the disof course campaigns or dangerous speech on any platform.
     What we are seeing is that when certain communities and we have seen this in distribution networks and when I say that user -- I give an example of what are groups?  So what is a group for example where all of the things that are happening on the internet happen or the community then comes together and says listen this is a code of practice here and we will not share further any information that we consider to be false and that you cannot prove.  So I think that there are two things we can do.
     One is in terms of educating people a lot more so they can identify what is dangerous and what is false and not share it.  And secondly, to encourage the people to be able identify common codes of information in conversations.  And many times what government attribute to fake news for hate speech are actually citizens speaking up with the malpractices that it is saying.  Very for the protests that happened in Nigeria.  Now they are saying that many were propagating fake information.  And they said well, we were there but we were invited by the governor nan and then a few days later said okay, we were there and we shot, but they were blanks and we shot off so it is important for us to push back and not allow people to clamp down agenda.
     >> MODERATOR: 
     >> EFEF: I have to interrupt you because we have three more minutes.  It is a good tactic to adopt.  Do you have a recommendation for companies in this case?  A quick one.
     >> GBENGA SESAN: A quick recommendation for companies like Isabel said earlier the need to hire smarter.  Not necessarily hire more, hire smarter.  The people that understand the context and can be good in nuances and be able to help you make the right decisions.  Machines can't get us out of this unfortunately.  We can solve unemployment problems in many areas by hiring the right people.
     >> AFEF: That is a good recommendation.  Does anybody else have anything to add because we have probably one or two minutes.  Okay.  Then I think we can, yeah, we should be free to go back to the entire group and thank you very much for your contributions and I will summarize the points when we are back.  Thank you all.
     (Main room).
     >> MODERATOR: Hello again.  I think we are getting a trickle in of participants.  Welcome back.  I think we will try to run through some of the top level conclusions from our breakouts real quick.  Our breakout room discussed the governance focused solutions and there were a lot of commentary especially on the role of due diligence, human rights due diligence and in particular within that field we talked a lot about the role and potential of mandatory human rights due diligence frameworks.  I'm not sure if we had a quorum or if we had consensus but there was quite a lot of sentiment that there is a very clear role for mandatory human rights due diligence and not necessarily on a country level but on a regional level and as many of us know, the European Union is sort of spear heading a lot of those efforts.
     And I think the second sort of top level highlight for me is that I tried to emphasize this at the beginning of the session but it is important to realize that there are localized problems that also require a specific, you know, localized approach, right?
     What is a crisis in the forum of the U.S. elections which is a priority for large tech platforms being that is unfolded in a priority mark is not less important than elections happening elsewhere and the same sort of importance should be accorded to rather markets especially given that a lot of the big platforms have the resources to expand their focus there.  There is a lot more thoughts there but I would like to leave the floor to the other two breakouts and collect a couple of more questions before we wrap up.  So that is it for me.  Over to you Vesdna.
     >> VESZNA: thanks, Jan.
     We were talking about the privacy section of today's section and managed to get through three set of questions only.
     One of the things we were talking about is how transparent are the companies about data collect the for the track and trace co-programs.  No one in the groups familiar with the processing of these apps but what we could clearly say is that companies in general are not clear about these things so they are very non transparent about data collections and practices and it was brought up that the question also has a culture aspect probably like and how these applications are trusted across different cultures and who is the owner or like who is developing these applications.  The government or is it a private corporations and those have different perception in different countries.  And then we also talked very briefly about the sunset closes for crisis data collection and processing and what best practices can be defined if there is no end in sight of the crisis.
     Again, what we said is that in general companies they don't tell how much about how long they going to retain data of users but as the best practice we were talking about the opt-in and opt-out option or control in the hands of the users from data collection and data processing.
     And we had a few minutes to talk about tech communication companies transparency reports accounting for government reports for user information and we had an example from Brazil where government wanted to have excessive access to tech communication companies user information but if I understood well the Supreme Court held this and it was not implemented in the end.
     So and this was during the COVID crisis so if was for the purpose of handling and mitigating the risks of COVID and having access to user data.  But it has not successful.  Maybe we can elaborate on this if people are interested.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much Veszna.  And we will move over to Afef to give us the sense of the freedom of expression.
     >> AFEF: In the freedom of expression breakout group we discussed first the issue of access, internet access and that as a good practice it is important for telecommunication companies to ensure access, good connectivity and also to sort of try to at least push back against shut downs if they can.
     And the other trend is sort of state and company interactions either around requests for user data but also one example for example in India was that some companies and from the tell Coe sector are not supporting of human rights and these sort of interactions can be threatening to human rights.  In these cases it was recommended that it is critical for companies to engage with a wide range of standings on the human rights and it is critical for companies to coordinate around these issues and try to roll up processes.  Big tech companies have already been doing this around certain issues like the global network initiative for example but it is also important for smaller companies to do that.
     The other issue or the other trend was content moderation either when it comes to the use of algorithms and how that can be detrimental to freedom of expression and in this case it is the good practice it is important for companies to sort of have human oversight over content moderation that involves to algorithms particularly for certain types of content such as hate speech because here it is for hate speech to decide which content to take down or not context is very important and that can be algorithms are not -- they are not capable of understanding context.  The other recommendation or good practice is that it is very important to invest in more staff and human oversight.  Content moderators in different languages and content moderators that actually do understand the context.
     We discussed for example the example of content moderation in certain countries including Ethiopia where it is a very complicated political context out there and so many languages that are being spoken.  The big problem when it comes to hate speech but companies are not doing enough.  I think that is it unless I forgot something, maybe someone else from my group can highlight it.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Afef.  I'm impressed you are much more thorough and comprehensive than I can be.  Thank you for being so precise with your comments.  Is there anyone that wants to expand on what was mentioned, in Isabel, go ahead.
     >> ISABEL EBERT: I think one point that I highlight and that is important is also what what they need to sing the out is both the companies and companies have to have the human rights approach and comes to the context perhaps the situation about the opinion what happened on ground is not crystal clear but again here pointing to my earlier comments the governance in accountability has to be there.  Whether it is the government or the company it needs to be clear what happened on the ground and how both of the actors or set of actors responded in the fields and includes also the necessity of both actors to be transparent in the publications what exactly this very taken as steps to identify potential adverse impacts and how they reached out to rights holders.
     >> MODERATOR: That is a very important point.  And kind of reminds me, too, of one of the few instances that I know of personally of a sort of like mandatory approach to disclosing human rights practices that at least I know of some of you may be familiar with the mandatory disclosure that the U.S. required in companies operating in Myanmar.  That was process.  It was interesting because companies were required to provide progressively detailed information about precisely that, what both the situation on the ground and what they are a company are doing to respond to an increasingly volatile, you know, environment and set of circumstances.  I think it is important to look back at some of the potential successes as far as requiring greater accountability and transparency like that and learn from them.  And also learn why they were discontinued at the same time.
     Okay.  We have three minutes left in the session.  I would like to leave that for any burning questions.  I will try to prevent myself from going into a monologue.  So please go ahead if anybody has a burning question you would like to raise, now is the time.  Or a point you would like to address.  Okay.  I will give a five warning.  Okay.
     Unless there is -- I think silence is consent in this case so if nobody else has any commentary, I would like to wrap up and say you know, we didn't set out to change the world in a single IGF workshop, that is practically impossible but I think this is a good seed.  You know, our goal was to sort of take an interactive approach, excuse me, your excellency, you have a hand raised.
     >> HAISSAM BOU SAID: It depends on the memorandum of understanding that these companies have with States.  If the memorandum is restricted to some part such as crime infos or state high security infos, then we might accept the nontransparency in this case but is should be a specific item that should not be revealed to the public.  Otherwise, everything should be transparency.
     >> MODERATOR: An interesting point and connects with the idea that some intervention can be Targeted, as far as the algorithmic systems many times companies want to prioritize the most harmful content and that is where they should disclose on how the systems work and perhaps opening up to audits.  With a minute left I would like to thank everybody for participating especially our speakers but also my excellent colleagues from RDR.  All of you went above and beyond.  Thank you so much.  There will be a report coming from the workshop shortly but at the same time please don't hesitate to reach out to RDR or any speakers that participated in the session if any of this piques your interest.  I would like to add as a closing remark I think a crisis like this is something that happens rarely, you know, some would call a black swan event.  A rare crisis that has an impact on a lot of people.  But at the same time, it important to remember that many times systems come out of the crises stronger.  I would wish that and I think we can be more vigilant and more watchful now having almost gone over the hill in this crisis since now we more than what we did a year ago about how human rights abuses can often fly under the radar.  I wish us all resilience and strength since we have survived such a difficult time.  Stay safe and please enjoy the closing ceremonies.  Thank you very much, everyone.
     >> Thanks, bye.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-12-ws310-how-digital-payments-support-inclusive-economic-growth^^

 
      >> MODERATOR: I think we can start because I see everyone here.  And I hear everyone correct.  
     Warm welcome to you all.  My name is Nell Przybylska.  I work for Digital Poland Foundation.  
     I have the pleasure to moderate today's discussion.  I would like to remind you that the subject, How Digital Payments Support Inclusive Economic Growth.  
     Today I will ask Konrad Slusarczyk from Visa, Killion Munyama, a member of Polish Parliament, and Pawel Widawski, Cashless Poland Foundation, and Willem Pieter De Groen, European Credit Research Institute. Sorry for maybe no good pronunciation of your surname.
     >> KONRAD SLUSARCZYK: That is completely fine.  We are a global community right now so.
     >> MODERATOR: And our guests will try to answer my and the audience questions, of course, everyone can have some questions and send them.  
     Today's discussion during the Internet Governance Forum is powered by Visa, and that is why I would like Konrad to speak first and answer the question how digital payments support inclusive economic growth.  Konrad, the floor is yours.
     >> KONRAD SLUSARCZYK: Thank you so much, Nell. I'm really happy to be here.  We have great participants and hopefully we will also have really interesting insights to share.  I think this is great opportunity being at Internet Governance Forum, especially in extraordinary times we are living in right now.  So I think, I hope the discussion will be very fruitful for us and for our audience.  
     So to answer your question now.  Actually, the impact of digitalization on economic growth is the biggest for emerging marks, according to the research of conducted Modest Analytics, conducted on 70 countries globally that generate 95% of global GDP.
     It turned out that every 1% increase of the usage of digital payments can contribute to an average annual consumption increase by even $104 billion, which is a significant number.  
     This applies not only to emerging markets, but also to developed ones.  But of course the bigger GDP gain can be seen by the emerging markets obviously.  
     Importantly, the data demonstrated that once the financial infrastructure is in place, the developing countries can see a boost in GDP as the card penetration increases.
     Digital aid distribution also helps boost economic recovery which is, of course, extremely important in these times.  As the fallout of the COVID-19 pandemic continues, the need for government to address the problems which enable swift and efficient distribution of financial support for people in need have definitely rocketed.  
     The COVID crisis has clearly proved that the need for digital disbursement is of a great importance right now.  And we see what digital disbursements try to start replace older measures of distribution of money like cash, checks for vouchers which historically the governments tends to use when the State of emergency came.
     Digital payments facilitate also the adaptation of more advanced digital solutions.  And digital solutions enhance effectiveness of processes which have a direct impact on the easiness to start, for instance, opening a business or registering a property, all those activities very crucial for inclusive economy growth.  And above all, of course, they definitely support the resilience and reliability of the procedures.
     We definitely cannot forget about the financial inclusion, which is drastically helped by digital payments because it becomes widely accepted by governments and by multi-national bodies like the World Bank.  But electronic payments plays a significant role in increasing financial inclusion.  And it is not only addressing the payment systems but also the access to the basic payment account.
     Right now, nearly 40% of all adult population globally, which translates to two billion people does not have an access to a basic account.  And that in my view, enhancement or improvement of payment system and infrastructure can only play a significant role into financial inclusion for those societies overall.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  I want -- you said 40% worldwide or in Poland?
     >> KONRAD SLUSARCZYK:  Exactly, 40% adult population.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  And maybe Pawel would like to answer the question how digital payments support inclusive economics, or as a representative of Digital -- uh, not Digital Poland Foundation.  I'm sorry, Digital Foundation.  I always think about the Digital Poland, it is the name I have in my mind all the time.  
     Pawel?  You need to, your microphone switch.  There.
     >> PAWEL WIDAWSKI: Absolutely digital payments positively influence every economy, developed and still under development.  
     And there is no floor, we all know that.  The question is how to do it properly, how to do it efficiently, and how to speed up the development of payment infrastructure.
     >> MODERATOR: Let's say, how do it?
     >> PAWEL WIDAWSKI: Well, I think that the key element of payment infrastructure can consist from two element. 
     The first one are standards.  And standards are key element, crucial element in general in financial services.  Without standards, it is not possible in the modern financial markets and financial services operate in general.  So we need standards.  And standards usually are produced by the market, by the market participants.
     And we know a number of different examples how startups can influence positive development of certain services, certain areas of financial service including payments.  And very, very good example of such a standard is API or API standards that creates open banking solutions.  Here in Poland, here in Europe, but also across the world.  
     So the market players decide to meet together and create certain standard that allows intra-operability.  And based on the standard, banks and on the other hand -- on the other side, third parties can communicate with each other and hence with this achievement, the market can produce and create new products that are positive for not only for the market but also for the whole society, for the consumers, for entrepreneurs and the whole economy.
     Unfortunately, not in every case standards are enough.  We know a lot of examples where there is a very good technical standard, very good specification, very high level of security, even very good business rules which are part of the standard.  But it is not enough.  There is something wrong or there is a kind of barrier that should be removed.  
     So my -- the second element that I would like to mention is market initiatives that are aimed at removing such a barrier or speeding up the development of certain area.  For example, infrastructure.  
     And a very good example of such a market initiative aiming at faster development of payment infrastructure in Poland is Cashless Poland Foundation, Cashless Poland Program that I have the pleasure to represent.
     So maybe let me tell you a little bit about --
     >> MODERATOR: How Cashless Poland Foundation can support the digital payments?
     >> PAWEL WIDAWSKI: Of course, how we support.  But I think the more interesting element is why this creation was created.  
     So in 2016, and you should be aware of this fact, 77% of active points of sale in Poland did not accept payment cards, digital payments in general.  So we can say, we can assume that this group of merchants were financially excluded even though they had bank account probably, functionally they were financially excluded.  So it was a systemic problem.  
     In 2016, as well, we had only 500,000 POS terminals, which means that Poland were far below the EU average in terms of infrastructure density of saturation.  And it was a problem for all economy.
     And but the question was why merchants were so hesitant to use electronic payments.  And according to a number of researches that we have made at that time, there were one major barrier relatively -- or not relatively easy to address, it was perception of very high costs of having terminal and high cost of acquiring service at that time.
     So at the end of 2016, the group of market stakeholders and payment card organizations, issuers, banks, and acquirers decided to do something about it, to design a solution that would remove this barrier.
     And after several months of development of this solution, the final solution was the free terminal for one year for every merchant that has never accepted payment card before.
     And after three years of operation of the program, we can say that this solution was very successful as today we have more than one million terminals in Polish market.  So we have doubled the number of terminals.  And payment card acceptance network in Poland is relatively high.  We almost reach the EU average.
     So this is a success story how to implement the market-driven solution supported by the government because the government from the beginning decided to support this solution.  
     This is good example how standard and market initiatives can influence positively the market and limit financial exclusion.  Okay.  That's all.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks.  Right now I think it is good to -- it is time, good moment to talk about gross economic growth that we have during the pandemic.  
     And I have a question to Killion.  What are the determinants of inclusive economy growth?  On mute, please.
     >> KILLION MUNYAMA: Yes, I have unmuted.  Thank you.  
     First and foremost, I would like to thank you for inviting me to this conference, we could call it, or rather seminar.
     >> MODERATOR: Yes.
     >> KILLION MUNYAMA: It is a great pleasure being with you all and seeing you all with us here.  
     First and foremost, to answer your question, it is important actually to try and make a definition of what inclusive economic growth is all about, okay.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.
     >> KILLION MUNYAMA: It is actually a concept that advances equitable, we could say, opportunities for economic participants during economic growth with, of course, benefits incurred by every section of society.  Every section of society.  The ones who are disabled, the ones who have got we could say not equal opportunities.  
     The definition of inclusive growth actually implies direct we could say links between macroeconomic and microeconomic determinants of the economy; and, of course, economic growth in general.
     So in order for each and every one of us to be included, it is very important that there should be some measures to ensure fair and equal access to all the -- from the start of society in general including disadvantaged and, of course, marginalized to opportunities created.
     Therefore, of course, digital economies have a very big role to play in order to have everybody included in the whole system.  So in reality, inclusive growth depends actually on two factors, okay.  
     One is economic growth, and the other one is economic distribution because we should be in a position to distribute the wealth that we are accumulating at a particular moment in time.
     Similar to the consumer theory whether indifferences actually curves, we could say, we do represent the changes over time in aggregate demand, of course, we decompose the income and substitution effect into growth and distribution or we could say components.
     The findings that have been there so far in the economic development about inclusive growth emphasize the fact that access to finance by the poor is a prerequisite actually for poverty reduction and sustainable economic development as well.
     So if there is access to finance, then the poor are in a position to come in and participate and to reduce poverty as well.
     There are four pillars of inclusive growth, okay.  One is economic growth that has employment as well infrastructure in it.  When we talk about growth, we talk about GDP per capita growth rate.  When you talk about employment, we are talking about employment in industrial sector as well as employment in services sector, okay.  The difference which is very much familiar to all of us.
     When we talk about infrastructure, we are talking about NADUs and also the possibilities of developing roads and right-of-way and so forth, okay.
     And then the second pillar is inequality.  And when you talk about inequality, we're talking about the general index, poverty, talking about poverty head count ratio when looking about the purchasing power priority, okay, the PPP.  And then, of course, the general equity which is in the ratio of female to male level force participation rate.
     Then the third pillar is accessibility.  We're talking about education, we're talking about health.  When you talk about education, the primary school enrollment rate and so forth.  But that is not a big issue in countries like Poland where we have compulsory primary school participation.  
     Health, it is the issue of mortality, the rate which matters a lot here.  There are countries where mortality rate is very, very low in the sense that people actually die earlier.
     And, of course, in this very issue of accessibility, we are talking of access to water and, of course, sanitation.  This has nothing much to do with Poland because accessibility is actually at its highest peak as well as other EU countries.  But there are developing countries which have a problem with access to water and sanitation. That is, the improved water source, improved sanitation facilities. 
     And the last one is about governance, that is the fourth pillar. Governance, that is government effectiveness. 
     When you talk about government effectiveness, you're talking about institutions playing a very important role and actually performing their role.  Not just institutions that are implemented but not performing their role.
     And then, of course, as far as governance is concerned we're talking about the corruption perception, okay, which is also a big issue in developing countries.  Especially when we're talking about the issues being handled in a corrupt way, not in a way that is -- that we can easily accept.  
     So those are the four pillars which are of great importance in as far as inclusiveness is concerned.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Maybe we can start to talk about informal economy, and I would like back more to the subject, digital payment.  
     How digital payments may help eradicate the informal economy?  And maybe Willem.  Is that a good pronunciation?  
     Maybe Willem Could answer for this question.  Of course, sorry, I didn't say this in the beginning, but everyone can answer for every question.  I just want to help you and say who will talk first to not waste time for waiting for the voice.
     >> WILLEM PIETER DE GROEN:  Thank you very much, Nell, and also Visa and IGF for inviting me to this panel, which I think is a very important topic.  
     And then if I may directly go to your question, how can basically digital payments contribute to eradicate, reduce the informal economy.  
     I think what we see in many countries where there are or there is an increase in digitalization of payments, we see that almost automatically transactions if they were before informal become formal.  
     Myself, I have done a lot of work on, for instance, things like platform work.  And there we see that transactions in particular which part of the -- thinking in large part of the world, there are many informal transactions happening.
     If you look in the region where I'm most active, Europe, you see there are still quite a lot of informal transactions that are mainly around households.  So, for instance, someone that cleans the house and is paid in cash instead of through a transfer.  What we see there in countries like France and so before they did anything about it, there were 80 to 90% of these transactions were not recorded.
     So informal, there was no tax paid.  Also which have large implications for the people's life because if you are active in the informal economy, for instance, in Europe you cannot benefit from any kind of social protection and broader protection in your labor situation.
     So if you don't have the digitalization, it becomes more difficult for people not to declare the transactions to their tax authorities so then it's a drive towards formalization.  
     We see that in like countries like France and Belgium that really can contribute to reducing the informal transactions, for instance on the household transactions, by two-thirds or more.  So that's really enormous.  
     And can be either through government scheme, what they have mostly in Belgium and France, but already taking it off from cash to digital payments can really help there.  So that is in brief a response to your question.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  Thank you.  And Konrad --
     >> KONRAD SLUSARCZYK: Yes, thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: -- could you answer the question?
     >> KONRAD SLUSARCZYK:  Willem already expressed, I'll add some perhaps more insights.  
     >> MODERATOR: I hope so, I hope that Visa has some interesting insights.
     >> KONRAD SLUSARCZYK: Yeah, we have some reports and researches at hand that we can share with the results.  
     For interesting, very interesting report of IT Kearney proves that 20% of growth of the digital payments per one year in five consecutive years can result in the reduction of informal economic impact on GDP by even up to 22%, which is huge.
     So assuming 70% of informal activities transfer to formal economy, tax revenues for the government, for the State can increase substantially.
     And again from this report, two examples for large economies like China, it's up to 3% of increase.  And medium sized like in Kenya, it is even above 11.  
     We know that businesses engaged in the informal activities pay less as comparing to their fair share of taxes.  And this not only harms competition among the society as such but can also result in substantially lower tax revenues for governments, which in effect means that there are lesser financial resources to contribute to economy development infrastructure or social problems.  
     An example from the Polish ground, Polish Economic Institute Research has shown that informal economy impact on the taxation reduced the revenues in the years 2014 to 2018 of 550 billion Polish workers.  So again, a very large number.  
     While we still fully recognize the role that cash still plays in society, unfortunately, cash is the single most important enabler of formal economy as this allows transactions generally to sidestep the government oversight and proper taxation for the governments.  
     So it is not surprising that the higher the amount of digital processes and digital payments in the market, the less of informal economy is.
     And that to prove that and nowadays, 65% of all measures that the governments are taking to tackle the informal economy and focusing on digital payments, whereas as in comparison to one-fourth in 2007.  So the focus is definitely more determined by the governments on digital payments.
     And maybe just to finalize my response, digital payments as such can also reduce the risk of leakage, risk of over cost, or can also reduce the cost of acceptance.  So basically, when we accept digital payments, it is definitely more convenient for the consumers, for the citizens to pay their taxes, and ultimately for the governments to gain from more increased taxation.  
     So those are definitely positive news for developing positive informal economy.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  I'm not sure if Pawel would like to add something.  But maybe all we said about this already?
     >> PAWEL WIDAWSKI: I think it was very comprehensive.  
     It is hard to find anything else to add in this respect.  
     I think I can speak a little bit to COVID situation.  Because, on the one hand, we see very, very positive trends in terms of cashless payments.  We all know that the pandemic could be a game changer in this respect.
     And relation between cash and cashless transaction is changing in favor of cashless.  And we all know this from our perspective, from our experience as consumers, we pay more cashless.  
     But on the other hand, and it is in relation to shadow economy, we see that a number of entrepreneurs and a number of merchants, specifically those micro entrepreneurs are in troubles right now.  They are fighting for survival, specifically in those areas who are locked down where we buy less.  So they are on the edge.
     And there is a risk that they will come back to shadow economy in order to survive.  So probably we need to find a solution for them to not let them come back to shadow economy.
     >> MODERATOR: Do you have an idea how to ensure the participation of different parties, government and merchants in building circular digital payment infrastructure?
     >> PAWEL WIDAWSKI: I would say that different party, private sector and public sector players, they have different aims and different priorities in general.  
     But in terms of payment infrastructure, they have very similar interests, cooperation in the area of building secure payment infrastructure is win-win situation.  So we need, and this is a lesson from Polish experience, we need to build awareness among all of the parties that engagement in this process, in the process of building developing payment infrastructure is in favor of all.  
     Specifically for the government because it is very useful element of fighting this shadow economy.  So I think the most important element is building awareness among all and then cooperation.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  Thank you.  
     Killion, what can be done by governments to boost economic growth during and after the current crisis caused by global pandemic?
     >> KILLION MUNYAMA: Thank you very much for giving me the floor.  
     And also it is very interesting to hear about the comments and the answers that have been put forth by the other gentlemen, that is Willem and Konrad as well as Pawel.
     But, of course, there is no doubt that currently we are heading towards what we call slow-balization.  For those of us not aware of the new terminology, it refers to a new pattern of world trade that is characterized by snail-paced growth and market reduction in foreign investments as well as unresolved trade disputes, geopolitical tensions, shrinking bank loans that we are experiencing at the moment a retreat to what we call protectionist policies which we have been observing in the United States as well as in the united kingdom.
     Of course, the U.S. hoping that things might change now after the elections.  But the United Kingdom we are after Brexit so making it a bit complicated to cooperate with other European countries.  
     But, of course, the most important element that will contribute to slow-balization is the global pandemic which has added fuel to the fire.  If you were to observe how the world economy is performing today, there is some sort of a retreat from the trend that we had which was globalization in general.
     Governments have a very big task to encounter and their most important things is to have institutions that should function properly is that from ministries through the central banks, of course, surveillance institutions and we have banks which are commercial.  
     Governments really don't have the impact there.  But through the decisions, the multi-policy decisions as well as the power in the physical policy decisions, fiscal policy decisions can actually have an impact on how those institutions operate.  Government can also try to influence the rate of economic growth through the demand side and supply side policies.
     When we are looking at the demand side policies, we are looking at cutting taxes to increase disposable income and encourage spending.
     Although, this move will would increase the budget deficit and lead to higher borrowing.  Nevertheless, it is a direction in which the government can go.  
     The demand side we can talk about lowering interest rates.  Here the reduction in the borrowing costs which would increase consumer spending and investment as well.  But, of course, so far there hasn't been any trend of changing the interest rates which are -- we could say quite low today because we are talking about the fact that they are at 0.1%.  But it could go to 0%, for example, which would increase consumer spending.
     Thirdly, the government could think of, let's say, depreciating.  But, of course, here the government is not one that decide in the depreciation of value of the currency.  We don't have a fixed rate system in Poland.  We have 14 exchange rate system in Poland so deciding on devaluing is not possible.  But in developing countries where they have quite fixed exchange rates, that can be done.
     The other step that the government can do is increase real wages.  If wages grow above inflation then consumers have more disposable income to spend, okay.  That is another step that would be taking place.  But that is on the demand side, correct?  That is on the demand side.
     When we look at the supply side policies that the government could actually implement or rather boost would be development of new technology, the internet, computers was one of our main topics today which do contribute a lot to increased productivity in the 21st century.  
     We also have the idea of introducing new management techniques which to -- to better industrial relations that would help workers become more productive.
     The third supply side policy would be improved skills and qualification.  That would be about the education.  And then we also have the more we could say flexible working practices, working from home, self-employment.  
     Third one should be boosted, home offices and so forth should be boosted by the governments today, especially in this period which we are undergoing.
     And the other one would be increased net migration.  Especially encouraging workers with skills to be able to be accommodated in the countries without restrictions.  Let's say, for example, you have Ukrainian doctors who would like to work in Poland but there are restrictions on how to notify their degrees and so forth.  There should be a policy to allow those doctors to actually work easily since they have their degrees.
     The other would be regulate policy pertaining to investment migration.  Currently in the Council of Europe we are working on resolution calling upon investment migration to be one of those things that could be implemented as policies in countries so that those who would like to migrate and invest in a country can be facilitated the chances of working easily.
     The other one would be raise retirement age, therefore increasing the supply of labor.  Of course, it is quite controversial in Poland.  We had the retirement age actually decrease from 65 to -- from 67 to 60 for ladies and 65 for men.  
     But this is an issue of how to actually fit it in such a way that everybody is satisfied, all right.  Let's say if he has worked for 40 years, let's say he could retire.  So that would actually increase supply of labor.
     The last one would be public sector investment.  Improved infrastructure.  Of course, we are talking about roads, about railway, airports and so forth.  And, of course, increasing -- increased spending on education and health.
     Those are the steps that government actually can be able to do today, okay.
     >> MODERATOR: Do you think we -- we still have in Poland, and you are member of Polish Parliament, manage to spend for this project like big money for right-of-way and so on and so on so that you showed that long list of great options, yes, but I'm afraid --
     >> KILLION MUNYAMA: It is not the issue of having money to spend, it is the issue of how to govern the money that you have.
     >> MODERATOR: Do you think still we have?
     >> KILLION MUNYAMA: What I'm trying to point out is that if we are talking about Poland, right, we are in a position to have resources, especially when the EU budget is going to come out insofar as infrastructure is concerned.  
     Whatever is in the budget today because so far we are going to face a very difficult time and the budget deficit will be very big.  There are propositions which we cannot be able to command easily, all right.
     Because from what I pointed out in the demand side, for example, the idea of influencing let's say cutting taxes okay, of course that would increase the budget deficit but lower interest rates.  That would be in a position to boost the consumer and at the same time be in a position to get the currencies, I mean the income that is required to build.
     Of course, we are not in a position to build airports.  I mean I know what you have in mind, all right.  But it is not possible actually to build an airport whereby there are airports already existing.  Just a matter of improving their operations today.  And Poland doesn't need to have a big new airport, as we indicated here.
     But when I'm talking about infrastructure, I'm talking about the roads, you know, the roadway network which we have already but they need to be improved in order to facilitate development in the near future, okay.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  Thank you.  I thank you for all of this proposition.
     I think we need to get back to the topic.  And I think Kata would like to say something.  No, back to the topic of digital payments.  
     And I think maybe it is time for Willem, maybe you can answer the question how digital payments may support financial inclusion of the underbanked and the unbanked in the beginning of the discussion?  And maybe you can answer the question.
     >> WILLEM PIETER DE GROEN:  It is Katarzyna that wanted to interrupt, just to be sure.  
     Related to the question, how digitalization may support financial inclusion among the underbanked.  I think there is a clear model with digitalization in general, high fixed costs or relatively high fixed costs to set it up and relatively low value or marginal costs to operate it.  
     What is the advantage of having the lower marginal costs?  The marginal costs are the costs for adding one more customer to your network.
     So if you are a provider of these payment services if you want to offer your product to one more customer, with the digitalization in general that additional cost is very low which allows you to offer your products at a lower cost.  If the cost is lower, you will be able to offer it to more people.
     In particular to those people that are today unbanked because the financial services are too expensive or the manual checks that need to be performed can be basically -- are too much of a hurdle and cannot be digitalized, these are the ones that primarily can be connected through digital payments.
     Also, another area I missed a bit maybe in the infrastructure investment discussions, the investments in digital infrastructure I think also would digital payments, but also the rollout of new digital technologies and also increased access to digital infrastructures and also those areas of countries that before were not or under-served can be better served.  
     So thinking primarily about remote rural areas where people before didn't have access to a bank branch but now actually online your location matters less as long as you have access to digital infrastructure.  And even that can be very basic infrastructure such as mobile phone you can get access to banking services.  So I think these are maybe the most commonly mentioned and obvious examples.
     At the same time, maybe also go to a bit more deeper concern, I mean if we look at financial inclusion, it is, of course, not only having access to payments but also having access to savings accounts which often are linked to the basic bank account that Konrad mentioned before.
     So also relatively obvious.  And insurance that can be connected to mobile.  And that is quite easily connected through the basic banking services.  
     Maybe one less known is the access to credit.  What we see is that in many countries, there are a certain credit reference agencies that are used by banks to assess whether you can get access to consumer or mortgage credit.
     But in most countries, they are only covering part of the population.  That is different transactions or negative payments or have much more problems.  And people that go from one country to another or those that have never purchased a house or that basically have a relatively thin financial record in the country where they live.
     And also for that, having the digital payments can help the -- the trail of digital payments can help the bank to make a better decision of the creditworthiness of clients.  That is another aspect which is important to improve the access to finance of larger group of people.
     That being said, I must also say there are also some remarks where digital payments have a challenge in addressing underbanked and where I think that the new additional solutions are necessary and in some countries these are already also developed.  That is primarily where I see people with disability and distance to technology.
     Disability, people that have problems in reading because of visual or other reasons, people that have potentially other problems in understanding messages.  So there, there is really a need to make sure that the digital technologies are accessible for all.  
     And then, of course, we have those that are not that familiar with digital technologies so we speak in general also about elderly but there might be others as well.
     We also see the age of people that have more problem in using these digital applications is readily increasing.  It is becoming less of a problem really, but it is a problem that should be addressed.  
     And I think in the first instance, of course, you would like maybe the private party to also see what kind of solutions  can be invented for those groups that have more problems using digital applications like the digital payments.  Thanks a lot, Nell.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks.  Maybe right now we can take the floor to Katarzyna.
     >> KATARZYNA CYRBUS: We have a question from Ahmed Shamira who is asking all the panelists you have focused on the bright side of the digital solutions to boost financial inclusion.  Can you also speak on the dark side?  For example, microcredit crisis, et cetera.  
     Especially focusing on developing countries where there is a large informal economy, over 70%, and weaker financial infrastructure and other specific structural economic complexities that affect developing countries and are very different from an EU context.  
     The question is what are the dark side of the digital solutions?  And maybe to add more context to that question.  It was also said before that the more a country blocks free economy to its citizens such as monetary exchange controls, the more its citizens will turn to digital economy, for example, Venezuela.  
     So the main challenge is to regulate the unregulated.  Would anyone from the panelists answer that question or should we maybe precise it more for you?
     >> MODERATOR: I think Pawel knows the answer for the question, and he will say don't we -- we see only the bright side of the digital payments.
     >> PAWEL WIDAWSKI: I mostly see the bright side of the digital payments, but the problem --
     >> MODERATOR: You educate society.  That is why I think --
     >> PAWEL WIDAWSKI: And the problem here is if we don't have payment infrastructure -- and nowadays the payment infrastructure is as important as other infrastructures like energy infrastructure, road infrastructure, flight infrastructure.  
     So this is infrastructure of 21st century.  And if there is no reliable, secure and resilient infrastructure, the economy cannot transform properly into the modern one.
     So our efforts should be put on -- all efforts should be put on reasonable systemic infrastructure development.  And this is key question.  Because once there is no infrastructure you cannot transact electronically in digital way and there are problems that have been mentioned in this question.
     And would like to share my Polish experience because I don't have any other perspective.  We are not wealthy country, especially in comparison to other Europe countries, but we are success in building the payment infrastructure.  
     And this success was possible not because of the State intervention or because of the specific regulation, it was possible because of the cooperation.  Cooperation on two levels.  Cooperation between market participants within banking sector.  Cooperation between banks, payment card organizations, acquirers, but also cooperation between public and private sector.
     And if I could recommend something in order to maybe help in building strong payment infrastructure in other country, the first and most important recommendation for policy maker is to build a good form of cooperation between private sector players but also between private sector and public sector.  
     Cooperation is key element -- a key element of the foundation of payment -- strong payment infrastructure.  That is the foundation of modern economy.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Pawel.  I think because our time it is -- we still have like five minutes or less.  
     Please, Konrad, and if you also could in two sentence said about recommendation for policy makers in our topic digital payments.
     >> KONRAD SLUSARCZYK:  Absolutely.  Thank you, Nell.  This is extremely interesting discussion, and it is too bad that we don't have more time to spend.
     >> MODERATOR: I think we need one hour more.
     >> KONRAD SLUSARCZYK: I know, for example, recovery of the sector which is extremely important for economic growth in general.  But of course conscious of time.  
     A couple of recommendations stemming from what we already discussed and from our observations.  So we agreed that the digital payments can reduce the informal economy or, definitely reducing the informal economy; and, on the other hand, financial exclusion of the society.  
     So from our perspective, governments should definitely support the acceptance of cashless digital payments by entrepreneurs and the business as such because it definitely helps growth of positive trends.
     As and Pawel mentioned, the perfect example here is the development of a Cashless Poland program which proved to be very, very successful.  
     And the other I can observe is that digitalization as such fosters innovation at the market level, both from the business and administrative processes.  Hence, from my perspective, the government should strive to make all possible administrative procedures as digital as possible which can only benefit the citizens and the whole digital for public administration.  
     And the last one what the governments should do, to identify optimal set of policies that should implement, of course, a just and specific characteristics of the market.  But that would target more benefits for merchants or the entrepreneurs and the consumers to encourage them to use digital solution and digital payments on the larger scale, which could be -- and I'm just finalizing the last sentence -- which could be either through tax rebates incentives at the merchant level, for example, for those who buy or rent the POS terminal, or on the other hand for the consumer to reduce the impacts by some rebates policies.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Konrad.  Willem, if you could in one sentence, or maybe two maximum, give us some recommendation in digital payments.
     >> WILLEM PIETER DE GROEN:  Let's stay on topic.  So my main recommendation is, indeed, like I see that digital payments is really contributing to formalizing the more larger part of the economy as well as reducing the number of unbanked, but not all.  
     So I think there is a challenge remaining there.  And a particular work both on the public and private side to stimulate also solutions that are there for people that are less financially literate and have a disability.  
     Also on the micro-company side, there is really a need for a stimulation in order to ensure that they have access to the payment infrastructure.
     >> MODERATOR: Sorry, we haven't time for the question.  And we had a lot of about micro economies.
     And Killion, the last minute for you, if you would like to summarize the discussion.  I didn't want to --
     >> KILLION MUNYAMA: Thank you for giving me the chance to give some sort of recommendations.
     But the most important thing is to understand what are the advantages of a digital economy, all right.  The advantages are mainly great information and choice which everybody will have.  
     Also it saves time, we know that.  Reduced costs for businesses, that is important.  Greater personalization, that is also very important.  Lower barriers to entry, that is also extremely important.  
     Greater flexibility in work.  Enabling people to work from home, that as well is one of those advantages of digital economy.  And benefits, of course, for all developing countries as well.
     But just briefly to answer the question that was asked by the gentleman which understand that there are also some disadvantages.  You say that monopoly power of tech giants, right, that is a disadvantage we could say.  Less community, all right, which means that we are limited.  We don't spend most of the time in the community, we are dedicated to the internet and to the digital economy.  Addictive nature of technology.  
     Privacy issues as well, bypassing of level laws as well as disruption to traditional economy and jobs.  And, of course, finally, and also important, potentially environmental costs that you may be in a position to encounter.  
     So those are some of the disadvantages I can also put forward here.  But governments should emphasize on building the infrastructure, especially the internet infrastructure in all countries.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Our time is running out.  Thank you for the discussion and interesting observations.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-3-dc-community-networks-at-times-of-crises-and-pandemics^^

>> MR. LUCA BELLI:  So let's start this online meeting of the IGF Coalition, dedicated to Community Networks At Times Of Crisis And Pandemics.
    The theme of this year's session has been forcefully imposed on us by fate, but you know, when life gives lemon, try to do lemonade, as they say.  We have tried to use this as a good opportunity, actually, to be better heard by those stakeholders that maybe have not been considering Internet access meaningful connectivity, community networks as something not only useful but essential.
    And COVID-19 has harshly reminded to everyone that without the Internet connection, we cannot do anything almost in this moment.  And if we do not have an open Internet, if we do not have meaningful connectivity, if you do not think creatively about connectivity and if we do not explore alternative options, we are simply kept out of working opportunities, education, any kind of service, any kind of entertainment, any kind of communications, right?
    And actually, the great problem we have and that it is, still half of the world population almost that experiences this on a daily basis, not only during pandemics, the fact that if we do not have access, they are disconnected from the world.  But during their entire life because of lack of infrastructure, because of lack of appropriate policies, because of lack of these services in specific areas.
    The idea that we had with some co-conspirators at the beginning of this year was to collect a series of opinions, of ideas, description of concrete projects that can explain to the world why Internet openness is essential and particularly in times of crisis, of pandemics, this is something vital for everyone.  It is an option that must be considered by all policymakers.  
    I am very happy to see that over the last five years since the inception of the coalition, we started as a group of friends that had common interests and we managed to attract the attention of extremely high level policymakers that now are discussing community networks, now discussing frameworks from connectivity in rural areas and in other disadvantaged areas.  And now are considering Community Connectivity as a sustainable and true real option.
    Now, one of the key partners in the development of this project about the value of Internet openness in time of crisis, this year my friend Osama Manzar that has been one of the co-editors of this book we are launching together.  We are now also going to share the URL to freely download the book.  Of course, it is has creative licenses.
    Before I give you the floor, Osama, let me make a quick round of introductions.  We have the pleasure of having here also Sonia Jorge, who is associate Director of the Alliance for Affordable Internet.  We have the pleasure of having Jane Coffin, the President of the Internet Society; pleasure of having Rolf Weber, the University of Zurich; pleasure of having Senka Hadzic at CyberBRICS; and pleasure of having Cynthia El Khoury, policy advisor for APC.
    Nicolas Echaniz, one of the co-conspiracy editors of any good community network fun in the world.  And last but not least we have Judy Hellerstein, who will be our excellent rapporteur for today's session.
    Without further ado I would like to ask Osama to provide introductory remarks and then the keynote remarks by Sonia Jorge.
    >> MR. OSAMA MANZAR:  I am very excited to be here in the cohort of known faces, known co-conspirators, so on and so forth, in a different time zone, different events.
    One thing is common that we have all been going through some kind of crisis in our lives, wherever we are.  And in this kind of crisis as a matter of introduction, I would like to say that never, ever in the last 20 to 30 years we realised how important it is to have an Internet, how important it is to have connectivity and how important it is to have democratically available to all.
    It is sad to say that after two decades we started talking digital divide world once again, we had forgotten talking about digital divide as an issue.  But it came up in this time of crisis where we did not only realise that half the world is not connected but even those who are connected are actually not connected, you know?  They are losing the meaning of connectivity.  They are losing the meaningful way of exercising their rights on the basis of connectivity and so on and so forth.
    And so all the activism and all the work that we have been doing that Internet should be open, this was the most highlighted time in our history that we better have realised.  Also because this time of COVID crisis also brought us the new way of looking at authoritarianism, control, Internet shutdown, nonavailability of connectivity, and so on and so forth.
    And I am delighted that I have been part of this compilation of this book that has brought various voices from various parts of the world, many of you are here and it is a delight to bring it together and it is a delight to bring it to be available with all of you.  And as a matter of something that we can relish, we can propagate, we can reuse, we can disseminate and but it is incomplete without having each and every voice from every part of the world, even though we have compiled it, it is not complete in a way.  But we hope to have more free of it and more openness of it.
    I am thankful that I am part of it, copublishing, coediting and putting it together, Luca, thank you very much for reaching out and bringing all of us together to make it happen.  You know, old habits die hard even though we think of releasing it virtually and but we never hesitated to say that the compilation should be in the form of a book, you know?  Which should look like in terms of a design of the look, the look and feel of a book.  We release as a PDF or eBook or read it on Kindle or on your screen, but yes, it is something like we all are human, but we also get converted into data, you know?  But so it is a humanisation of data.
    Thank you very much.  It is post midnight here.  Glad to be here.  And glad to be here also with two screens, which is watching what is going to happen in America and at the same time what are we going to do with connectivity to the world?  Thank you very much.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Osama, for your kind words and inspirational words, as usual.
    Now there is no better person to introduce this section and to also give a perspective of the journey we have been accomplishing over the past years than Sonia Jorge, a good friend, Director for the Alliance for Affordable Internet which is an incredible organisation doing a lot of very meaningful things besides working very hard for meaningful connectivity.
    Sonia, please, the floor is yours.
    >> MS. SONIA JORGE:  Thank you, Luca.  Thank you, all.  It is really a pleasure to be here with all of you.  It was really an honour to also be part of this collective for this book, as we still like to call it, Osama.
    So it is really wonderful.  I want to first start by acknowledging also my two colleagues that worked with me on our contribution, Danarash Takur and Teddy Woodhouse, who many of you know.
    We at the Alliance for Affordable Internet as you know have been working, I like to say not just hard but wisely on trying to make sure that all of the issues that both of you just raised are centre stage in policymakers' minds, in private sector decision makers.
    And most importantly also all of our colleagues in civil society that we care about issues, that we focus on them in a way that it is productive and that will help us really all together to move the needle in how we can move forward.
    Let me start by sharing with you a couple of things based on our contribution to the joint effort.  But also share with you some of the thinking that we have been doing recently around these issues.
    Obviously, there is no surprise.  You all know and you are all following the fact that this pandemic is not only severe but has affected our lives in ways unprecedented.
    For us what is most obvious and most concerning is that in a very short period of time this global phenomenon also showed us that every one is impacted differently.  So the pandemic not only does not affect everyone the same way, but in fact it impacts us in ways that can be quite detrimental and different depending on who you are, where you are, how you express yourself, how you identify yourself, if you are poor, if you are a rural person, if you are a woman or girl, et cetera.  It is very, very important for government, civil society, public sector, private sector all of us together to change the way we are approaching the issues and accelerate our efforts to achieve meaningful Internet access which we like to call it which I will tell you in a moment.
    We in the Alliance at the beginning of the COVID crisis shared a policy brief on COVID looking at issues of access and affordability but especially looking at what could government, again private sector, civil society, any partnership different of the players, what could we all do to change the picture that the pandemic clearly amplified.
    But one of the things that was really important for us from the outset was that for us we needed to start our thinking or shape our thinking and share our thinking from a position where internet access is not only an essential good but is a basic right.  That was critical from the very beginning, right?  
    So it made us push and advocate for the kinds of decisions and thinking that included things like free or subsidized access to public institutions to low income households, underserved groups of pop layings, especially women remote or rural populations, et cetera, but also thinking about new ways of providing services.  Especially focusing on smaller and medium sized companies as alternatives to enter the market and also alternative models like community networks.  I'm sure others will speak about that later on in the session.
    But all of these recommendations and ideas bundled together really were about making sure that people had increased access, but had better access.  After all, as you all know, we should put all that coverage that we constantly are hearing about to good use, right?
    We hear that populations are covered by these incredible mobile networks but in reality we know that people cannot afford, can't use and even when they use, they can not make good use, meaningful use of the Internet.
    So these existing inequalities that we faced and also the challenges in taking action was something that really concerned us.  And we actually started working on this project of coming up with a new definition of Internet access.
    More than a year ago, when COVID hit, it was kind of:  Aha, this is it.  This new definition of access that we call meaningful connectivity was not only important, but it really was something that we needed to focus to raise the bar on how we think about Internet access, right?
    When we talk about having Internet access meaning having a connection that allows people to use the Internet in ways that benefit them, in the ways that they define for themselves are creative, useful, productive, entertaining, however people want to use it.  Having the agency of making that decision with the connection that people have was very important.
    As well as with the kind of device that they can access and take full advantage of that connectivity.  That the device is portable, multifunctional, et cetera.
    For the most part, most of us on this call use Zoom with fast connections not only take for granted but are so used to it that we forget that most people around the world don't have.  As Osama and Luca pointed out not only don't they have but supposedly when they have some kind of connection, that connection is actually so poor it serves very little.
    So we at the Alliance, at A4AI, we propose these meaningful connectivity targets, these concepts in a way that is also based on four minimum technical thresholds that look at the combination of the quality of access but also the kind of device that people are using.  What is important is that meaningful connectivity means that people have at least 4G equivalent broad bad connection.  They have a minimum a smart device, smartphone, ideally more if it is possible.  A fixed wire to wireless connection at work, home, place of study.
    But also and most importantly that they can use the Internet every day, whenever they want.  Not just sporadically once a month, once a week or however little they can afford, but any time that they need.
    And so really pushing for this was an opportunity for us to then start conversations in a new way with policymakers, with decision-makers in private sector as well as our own colleagues in civil society and rethink the way that we can work with all of these groups to have targeted policies, targeted responses that can help not only reduce these inequalities an these divides that became even more exacerbated with the pandemic, but also so that we could address what became an emerging new digital divide, which was this divide between those who are poorly connected and those who are hyper connected, right?  Those of us who are here who are hyper connected and many that are counted as connected to the Internet but in fact are quite poorly connected, right?
    These binary way of thinking about the Internet access is really not sufficient for the kind of needs that we have as individuals, as digital citizens around the world.
    So the pandemic highlighted these new divides but also made sure that it was a way to challenge us to think about new ways to address this.
    One of the ways that we are thinking about meaningful connectivity and working through these concepts with policymakers is that we need to make sure that citizens can become better prepared for the future.  One important requirement to prepare digital citizens, right, to be better prepared for a future where pandemics, natural disasters an other emergencies are sadly not just once in a lifetime occurrences but are becoming far too frequent is that we need to think about digital development and meaningful connectivity in a way that guarantees access to the open Internet.
    I wanted to make that point because as Luca pointed out the motivation behind this project that you and Osama and others worked on so hard was really to challenge us about, to think about Internet access within the concept of the crisis, but also what does that mean to the open Internet?  What does that mean to access to the open Internet?
    And so for us it really is important to centre that understanding that meaningful connectivity having the data, the speed, the devices and the frequency of use also means that people are not restricted in their use, that they have access to the open Internet, that they are not only not restricted so that there is no artificial restrictions and that includes things like shutdowns, includes things like blocking different applications, et cetera, et cetera.
    Having that foundation in the thinking is very important because we want also to make sure that policymakers understand that foundational element of Internet access as a basic right and as a public good.  Right?
    So for us, these questions became very important.  We have been working on them, bringing them together.  We actually are going to share with all of you in the next couple of weeks not only a policy guide on how to activate and operationalise the concept of meaningful activity but also how do we go about measuring?  How do we go about making sure that the methodological approach to measuring meaningful activity around the world, regardless of where you are in the world, which country, which region, is one that is comparable, is consistent and really will add value to the wider effort of increasing not only better measurements, better data on Internet connectivity, but also data that is, for example, gender desegregated.  
    We want to make sure that as we are putting in practice these concepts and measure the progress towards them, that we do not contribute to furthering inequality also and further exclusion by not measuring correctly all of the different divides that already exist, including the increasing gender digital divide, the divides amongst rural and urban populations, and other kinds of divides that really have continued to increase not only inequality but frankly really created new forms of exclusion to many different marginalized populations.
    So we hope that by embracing these concepts, we invite you all to work with us on that, that you cannot only engage with it, use it, put it in practice, but then also demand from ourselves and our partners and policymakers and decision-makers that you work with in your countries, in your regions, in your organisations, these concepts and put it into practice.
    It should be clear, however, that our policy recommendations also start from this commitment that I mentioned earlier to the open Internet, right?  Having open access to the Internet is absolutely important.  It has to be the starting point without a doubt.  Otherwise we will simply be contributing to the existing divide and we don't want to be there.  We want to make sure that we close the divides, that we challenge ourselves and the sector to be better, do better so we can have affordable and meaningful connectivity and so that the different experiences between those that are currently poorly connected and the hyper-connected become minimized, become, are eliminated and we can in fact achieve a meaningful connectivity for all outcome that we are working towards.
    I'll stop there.  And again, thank you.  And I hope that you can all engage with us on this journey.  I will share some links for you as well in the chat.  Thank you, Luca.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Sonia, for this very interesting introductory remarks.  Really, it is interesting to see the work that you are dock and how also you are trying to provide a framework for assessment of meaningful connectivity.  So not only pushing for this very powerful notion, meaningful connectivity but also providing the tools to assess whether policies, infrastructure, technology is really compatible with this notion, which is this ideal that we have to strive for.  Or it is on the other hand creating digital divides.
    Actually, I would like to -- I always like to speak about digital divides in plural because there are many different forms of it.  Even the way in which we calculate how many people are connected in the world are not really considering the nuances of how people are de facto connected to the Internet, which kind of speed do they have, which kind of allowance do they have, do they really enjoy an open Internet which is taught logical.  We shouldn't be speaking about open Internet.  The Internet should be open by design and default, period.
    But as this is not the re-alley, we really need to have the tools to understand whether this is the practice or not.  This session today is really about that and also I would also like to invite all the Panelists to also join this session, the other partner with which this booklet has been designed.  These are also key elements, Internet openness is also a key element of the work of this coalition.  It is also moving towards an extended phase considering Internet openness not only as traffic management but also other elements of Internet openness that should be realised and tackled.
    I would like to ask now to Jane Coffin, who is our next speaker.  She is as mentioned before, senior Vice-President of the Internet Society.  If Nicolas is the co-conspirator of all community networks, Jane probably is the second partner in crime of all network initiatives globally.  Jane, thank you very much for being with us again this year.  The Internet Society is always very welcome to participate in our debates because you are connecting the dots in a wonderful way between all community networks, respecting them and trying to, helping them work to their potential.  Please, Jane, go ahead.  The floor is yours.  I'm sure we will have very interesting insights on news from ISOC.
    >> MS. JANE COFFIN:  Thank you, Luca, and it is a pleasure to be a partner in crime with you and Niko -- whoops, sorry.
    (Phone ringing.)
    >> MS. JANE COFFIN:  That was a fail.  I am in a common room in my apartment building, thus the mask.  I suppose it is apropos for this session but I am wearing the mask.
    So as Luca mentioned we are connecting the dots with partners.  The critical thing about the partnerships that we work to cultivate is that we never want to be a single point of failure in the partner in those partnerships.  We are always working to build a very strong base of the pyramid of partnerships.  It's very people, open and collaboratively in a common sense.  Coming together to try and move forward and build those human networks that build the technical networks that help sustain what we do and help deploy those networks, help advocate with governments, and policymakers as Sonia mentioned earlier.
    And really build change.
    COVID -- Sonia and I have, all of us have been at this awhile, but Sonia and I do remember way back when universal service, maybe not exactly when universal service funds were created but the implementation of what that looked like in the teleco space and all the rules that went along with it and the way things were funded and the way policies and regs were put together.
    I'm on a bit of a tear but one of my big missions this year annex is that we need to break this down.  The old rules do not follow that old open network way.  We are small medium and large size the area, we need funding mechanisms and need interconnection between those small and medium sized and large networks.
    The last panel that you so ably put together on the commons approach, it is very important we look at interoperability in that open sense an that community networks which we champion with many partners are seen as a way not a for.  People are doing things for us.  We are doing things for each other.  We are setting up the networks and enabling people.  Anyone can come to the table with the great information you are releasing today in this book or the books that have been released in the past that IGF, by APC and others and you and Luca have been brilliant and making sure there is something, experience, relationship building.  Most importantly sharing experience.  I go back to 2016 and Mexico where we had this amazing synergy, I called it the human chemical reaction in action.
    You could see people coming together and getting excited:  Yes, you are doing that there?  Yes, we can do this here.  We didn't think about that.  We can definitely do this to help you with this, spectrum sharing, changing funding mechanisms.  Expect.
    Changing the game together where we all have been coming together and working in different spaces, whether it is the G20 which for the first time this year recognised community networks.  The Ethiopian government recognised community networks thanks to Africa partners to take place in an open proceeding.  Look, you're putting in new rules for open governance in your country?  We want to be part of that.
    Partners are coming together and working with the same language to say that community networks are not strange.  We are not weird.  They are legitimate, not rogue networks, not illegitimate.  We heard this four years ago.  Now the tone has changed.
    And the thing I do want to leave with everyone is that COVID has, is keeping us responsible for the things we did not get done in the last 20 years.  We have a gap, as Sonia noted.  We weren't seeing digital divide in the last couple years.  We said let's figure out the positives of digital opportunity.  This pandemic showed us where the gaps are.  The Internet is a lifeline.  It is not acceptable that people don't have connectivity at all anymore.  We can't live like this anymore.
    COVID is giving us an opportunity, however, to take this momentum, work with partners, work with governments, work with each other to say we know how to do this.  We have options.  This is not just complementary in some ways.  Now it is alternative.  We often say complementary at the Internet Society but I'm beginning to believe there's more here where there's alternative models with communities networks in some places.
    But the community networks become part of the common language that we speak with respect to connectivity.  It is not an anomaly.  They aren't something that should be uniquely done only if, in a situation.  They need to be part of our menu of options now moving forward.
    I will say this.  And I'm not trying to speak for other community networks we know.  It is a community for the community by the community, I was told that they were able to use common online post boards, community bulletin boards, sorry, to put up data about COVID to keep people fresh on information, on track, not with fake news.  That network just kept people connected as a lifeline.  We know that New York City mesh in New York safely social distancing, traveling across the roof tops of New York City, connecting people and families for the first time.  Study, to learn, to communicate with each other and stay in contact.  We need to be in contact with each other because this is a difficult time.  But we also need to work, live, learn.
    So there are all of these things taking place right now in urban community networks, in rural community networks, from South Africa to New York City, to Greece, to Georgia where we are funding networks.
    People asked us, is it safe?  We said we are going to trust our partners to do the right thing on the ground.  From Niko in Argentina to folks in Colombia, and with others, this turned out to be a huge deal where community networks are agile and governments are looking at freeing up more spectrum, changing the old rules.  They are accountable.
    Their elections in the future are going to depend on connectivity.  Cities are going to be populated based on the fact that they have better connectivity or not, and towns.
    I am going to leach you all with that.  There is an exciting opportunity in front of us to take advantage together and to speak that common language to make this the next three to four years even a bigger deal for community networks.
    Thank you so much for the opportunity.  We are dedicated to our partnership with everyone.  If you need more, I can put you in touch with the two people who lead our team, Max and Juan.  Thank you.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much for this, Jane, very thought provoking remarks.
    Actually, with your last point, I think it is a key element that we also should consider in our future strategies, the fact that finally Internet access has become something that could make people win elections.  If you propose to have good Internet access, people now really care about it.  So it has become something that really has the value it deserves and it is something we should really consider also as a strategic point.
    Another point that I wanted to mention that you were very well mentoring the G20 and the government of Ethiopia.  I think it was one of the greatest successes.  I am going to share now on the chat the link to the website of the Brazilian telecom regulators that has used our book on the communication manual to provide the official website of the Brazilian regulator, linking to the book of this coalition to provide guidance on how to build Community Connectivities.
    I wasn't even dreaming about having this kind of impact in three years.  And this really shows how important, how relevant the work of those who are developing community networks is and also still how much work we have to do, how many dimensions have to be properly explored, tackled.  
    In this period I would like to ask our third speaker, Cynthia El Khoury, to take the floor.  Cynthia is the Coordinator of the Gender and Woman Engagement side of the Community Networks Project at APC.  It is an extremely important part of this debate.  The role that women have, still the gender divide that exists within not only community networks but within technology, access to technology in general.  It is not a coincidence that the first three speakers of this session are three powerful, strong women that deliver strong messages that inspire people.  It is a design choice.
    We need to make this happen more often and I would like to let Cynthia following up with her presentation because I'm sure that we will have a lot to learn from you, Cynthia.  Do you have any slides to share?
    >> MS. CYNTHIA EL KHOURY:  Yes, hi, Luca.  Give me a moment to share my presentation with you all.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  You should have presenter access.  We are seeing your sheer.
    >> MS. CYNTHIA EL KHOURY:  Is that clear to you, Luca?
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Yes, thanks very much.
    >> MS. CYNTHIA EL KHOURY:  Think, everyone.  I would like to thank Luca and the other organisers of the session, the analysts and all of the participants here today.
    I would also like to acknowledge all of the work that is being done by communities around the world and who are not present in this space at the moment.
    So as Luca mentioned my name is Cynthia.  I work with the Association for Progressive Communication as Gender and Women's Engagement Coordinator for Community Networks, a project that is also referred to as LockNet.
    We support the development of community networks from the Swedish international development cooperation agency.
    I will be sharing with you all today a glimpse of the article that we cowrote as the LockNet team which is the contribution to the collective work today.
    Lock knelt or connecting the unconnected, supporting community networks.  And other community-based connectivity initiatives, is a project being implemented by APC in partnership with Rhizomatica, which works as a bridge between the engineers and developers of these efforts to ensure that technology is deployed for appropriate use and APC is supporting people working for peace, human rights and the environment through telecommunication technologies.
    We are committed bold of activists who want to use the Internet to make the world a better place.
    I would like to note that the community networks mentioned in this article and in today's presentation work were contact the directly to solicit feedback on their rammed local response to COVID-19.  This happened in the early times of the pandemic.
    And I would also like to acknowledge the hard work of our community network partners who are mentioned in this article and many others on the ground who are working to connect our communities during these difficult times.
    First just to share a little bit about our own personal response as a lock theta team for COVID-19 has been in many folds.  And the earliest day of the lockdown we facilitated a series of conversations with population specialists who provided specific information to the group that we have been working with.
    And that came at a time where there was a lot of contradictory information and we also held space for people who are working in community networks to come together and share early responses an strategies based on their lived experiences in their localities.
    Because so much of what was found out there did not really speak to the communities and the realities and global health agencies were not providing contextual public health responses to the virus.
    And we have also been co-curating spaces of exchange between technologists and developers in the Global South and the North, especially those working on educational and communication platforms.
    And as stated earlier, I will highlight in the upcoming minutes a few stories that illustrate how being rooted in community and community networks have played a vital role in one connecting the communities information about the holistic health and how they've created opportunities for education, especially in the rural areas of the world; and how intersection for communication also have also served as antidote to the traumatic uncertainty of this particular point in time through creating these spaces of connection and creating opportunity for healing.
    And that is especially to counter and transform the aggravating effects of the pandemic on women and rural folks who may have been found to be mostly isolated or subjected to certain forms of violence.
    As mentioned earlier by Sonia, the pandemic that has been around with us for months now and for those in lockdown, it is becoming one of the most challenging times of our years, I'm afraid.
    COVID-19 is primarily a health crisis.  Community networks have responded to that in kind.  So I will share three stories from communities that relate to contextual public health issues.  One is that SAPIN, the union of cooperatives, based in the municipality of Puebla, Mexico, they launched an initiative, based on, as for a strong heart which was and still is a response to the pandemic but also addresses socioeconomic concerns of the communities.  Part of this campaign uses broadcast audio productions created by radio volunteers and a website to convey accurate and appropriate community related content.
    The second story comes from a rural area in India where milk formula companies have turned the pandemic into a marketing opportunity by spreading false news to advertise for their products.  Now, those of us who follow hot issues closely like myself know that breast feeding has been a major space for activism for women's rights to health in the public health discourse.
    And one of our colleagues in LockNet who has herself articulated community networks with -- that aim to support women's livelihood in rural areas of India responded rapidly and countered this information by using local networks to educate the women on what COVID-19 truly is and how to adapt healthy behavior during and post pregnancy.
    The third story comes from Kenya where Tunapand, a nonprofit, and the informal settlement of Kibera supported women's livelihoods in the early days of the lockdown by providing timely health promotion initiatives where the women of the community were coming together to imagine and sell protective face masks for their communities.
    Now, that does not only health promotion activity but one that also supported the economic livelihoods of the women at the time.  The group also worked to demystify what COVID-19 was by making information available in local languages and also by addressing the emotional and mental health impact of the pandemic on communities and they did that through the support of local volunteers.
    As these stories show, community networks have proven to be much-needed communication infrastructures.  And the space for self and collective care.
    These times of uncertainties as some people have been calling it and where the world economy is greatly and heavily affected by COVID-19, it has shed light on the vulnerability of all systems.  The agility of community networks as stated by Jane, to provide adequate and rapid response.  And also a response that cares.
    So during a moment when connectivity is more vital than ever for communities while extending livelihood and care for each other, now is the time for governments to quickly step in and put in place enabling environments and policy practices that grant communities the rights to set up and run their own communication infrastructure.
    That is all for me today.  Back to you, Luca.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Thanks very much, Cynthia.  Excellent points and very interesting stories about how women directly contributed to these initiatives.  Of course, there is still a quite relevant gender gap, but there are very important stories that actually show how things can be done differently and they are already done differently.
    So very useful to have these examples.
    I would like now to open the floor for some initial remarks an debates and also provocative remarks, meaning it is very good -- we are not here, I wouldn't characterize our session, we are not only here to self-glorify our work, although we are, we are here to identify what are the challenges on which we have to work.
    We know perfectly well what are the things we are doing well.  But we are not always good at identifying what we are not doing well.  It is very good, I think, also to have this kind of debate today to see, to identify what are the challenges in which we can work, we should work, we may have good chances at producing something meaningful if we work.
    With this spirit in mind I would like to open the floor for a quick round of comments and questions or other remarks from the Panelists if any before we enter into the second segment.
    I see there is a raised from Niko.  Niko is already our Panelist.  He doesn't have to give you Panelist privileges.  You can go on the floor is yours.
    >> MR. NICHOLAS ECHANIZ:  I just want to mention, Luca, regarding the concept of meaningful connectivity.  While we have like now a bunch of these approaches, your networks of determination, our Internet co-creation concept, and now this meaningful connectivity.  One thing that we believe needs to be considered and we always try not to talk about access.  We try to talk about the co-creation of the Internet.  It is because usually we are accustomed to considering that what we need to do is provide access to everyone.  And this access is mostly what usually happens is that if you just provide access, it is access to some concentrated information silos.
    And we believe that we also need to deconcentrate the Internet and the community networks are an opportunity for that.  And I think that it is important to push this in policies also.  That local networks need to be meaningful, not just meaningful access.  The network needs to be meaningful.  The people in that network needs to be able to publish content, to create services, to exchange information in their local network.  And that network needs to be interconnected to the rest of the Internet, thus creating one little portion of the Internet.
    I see these concepts as usually forgotten.  This is the basic design of the Internet.  Although now we are forced to place CDNs because we have faster access to Netflix and YouTube and all the concentrated information.
    I think I just wanted to raise this point because I think that many of us are working policy.  And it makes sense to, well, to try to push for the best.
    I think that considering this point is important to set aside what we are saying from what, for example, a big teleco is saying, yes?  Because a big teleco may tell my government please subdies the demand so I can bring connectivity to these poor people.  They are not considering anything else.  Just bring some access to these people without losing money.
    And it is very important to distinguish that it is not just access.  We want to push for an open and diverse Internet that is not concentrated in a few powerful hands.
    Just that remark.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Excellent point, Niko, very good point.  And actually, I think perhaps Sonia will have some reaction on this.  My personal vision is that the two things are complementary.  All those who have been in policies and telecom policies for decades or for some time know that there is no one silver bullet that solves the problems.  You have a set of policies and a set of approaches.
    Our greatest merit is to, has been to spread the word in the standard community network is one approach.  It is not only big telecos.  It is also about initiatives that are bottom-up organised by people for the people, hosted by community networks.  But one needs not forget about the existence of these telecos an operators.  In that sense, the work of Sonia and the A4AI is meaningful.  It is important to understand the logic that drives community networks and apply it to our models in order to make them meaningful and useful for the people.
    And then I wanted to steal the words to Sonia or to give my personal interpretation of the work of A4AI.  So I will let her reply.
    Then we have two more people to speak.
    >> MS. SONIA JORGE:  Thank you, Luca.  I'll jump in quickly, but I will be quick so that others can also intervene.
    First of all, thank you, Niko, for that comment.  We couldn't agree more with what Luca and you also mentioned.  I think that the important thing here -- there are two points I wanted to raise in response to what you just said.  One is that in fact this idea of meaningful connectivity was cocreated precisely in that way.  It came about by doing the very in depth research with -- and various consultations with people around the world, but in depth researching for different countries.  But we asked people what is it for what you need to do?  What is it that you need to have?  So the concept was actually constructed.  And cocreated in that way as a response to what people want.  And how they want to be able to interact, to engage with technology and connectivity for any kind of purpose that they have.
    What I think is interesting to the point around community networks and any other kinds of really complementary providers and alternative business models, is that in really advocating for this concept and putting it into practice and activating it, we need those who are making the decisions about networks as you were mentioning to understand why we need the kind of network that we need.
    So we are not just saying we need a network because of XYZ, but we need a network bus we want to do meaningful things.  We want to be able to have access to the open Internet any time we want.  Women want to have access to health information or want to, you know, support their activism.  People want to have specific actions and engage in multiple ways in their own environments.
    But it is that kind of meaningful activity that will allow for that to take place.
    One of the things that you will see -- and I wish I could share with all of you now, but it is still in the process of actually being co-created and getting feedback from many of our partners at A4AI, is this these guides, this policy guide about how we can interact and engage with policymakers to transform and to go from the discussion on meaningful connectivity and create a path to get there.
    What are the right policy measures?  What are the writing centres, what are the right investments?  What are the kinds of investments that need to take place?  One of the things that you probably would have guessed and web actually working quite closely with many of our partners including Jane at the Internet Society and Luca and many others, is how to better create policy solutions that support and welcome community networks and other kinds of alternative providers to become not just alternatives but actually the default.  There is a lot of space in the market.  There's a lot of unmet demand that needs to be met by alternative providers.  And so by creating that space from a policy and regulatory perspective, we can go really much farther, but I'll stop there, Luca.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much for this reaction, Sonia.  We have two participants in line.  I think the first was Raquel and Amali.  I'm allowing you to talk, Raquel.
    >> RAQUEL RENNO NUNES:  Can you hear me?  I think because the meaningful connectivity concept, there is a reference that you mentioned briefly in terms of equipment that the smartphone will be like the ideal kind of equipment.
    Also because I think that in the research you had some information from women who felt safer using this kind of device because it was a device that allowed them to use it more privately.  In comparison to a computer or desktop that in a family or work environment you have to share with other people.  No?
    So how do you balance this information that is very relevant with this new demand that came with the COVID, kids and adults have to home schooling, remote work from home.  Of course, the smartphone is not ideal.
    So how do you add this kind of new information to the corpus of your research, of your analysis?  Thank you.
    >> MS. SONIA JORGE:  Luca, should I go for it or you want to take other questions?
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  You can please reply and then we have Amali and we can go with the second segment.
    >> MS. SONIA JORGE:  Thank you for that question, Raquel, very important.  All of the thresholds are minimum thresholds.  Think about it this way.  The way we see these, we need everyone in the world, no matter who they are, where they are, any time they need to have the same kind of connectivity.  There is no differentiation, no discrimination.  We need to raise everybody to the same bar, right?  It is a level playing field.  There is no accepting that a friend of mine in the Dominican Republic who lives in a rural area should have less connectivity than I in Boston, Massachusetts, or anyone in Delhi or in Rwanda, Angola, what have you.
    Everyone needs to have that basic access exactly.  And it is not, Maureen, it is not Utopia, it is so doable.  The exciting thing, it is so doable and there is no reason we can't be there in the next decade.  We published work about what it will take to do that.  I urge you to share but I will not go into that here not to digress.
    But first, Raquel, it is a minimum threshold.  That does not mean that that is all people need.  It means that at a minimum having a smart device, a device that has functionality that allows the possibility of people not only to learn but activate those ways of using technology and engaging with access in privacy, securely, et cetera, are created.
    Now, if every country, every group of the population will have different needs, different contexts, that we need to be aware of and also develop support systems that will allow them to be able to engage with technology without being restricted.
    If a woman like you are saying cannot use a device because the only device that is available is a computer, but by using the computer her privacy will be compromised, that is not acceptable.  This is why for us that individual access of a device like a smartphone is very important.
    Now, each country will be different.  Our colleagues in Latin America, for example, have been arguing very strongly -- actually, a report just came out this week from some folks in Latin America that I can try to share here with you.  What they argued was that while a smartphone is a good device as a starting point, in Latin America for the most part the markets and people and their demands for connectivity have changed to an extent that a smartphone is not enough.  It is not good enough.  You need to increase the threshold.
    So that threshold can change depending on the context of the country, the development state of the particular country or the sector, et cetera.
    I it really is contextual.  We want to have something, we want to have a concept that we could use to challenge, really push and change the way we are thinking about connectivity in the world and especially a way that minimizes the exclusion and inequality.
    But the specifics of each country, the specifics of each region will be dependent on that context in which they live.  Those who make decisions, all of us in civil society that are involved in these processes need to make sure that we bring those contexts to light so that the responses of policymakers and private sector and others are appropriate to those contexts.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much for this.  I ask Amali to give, try to give a quick comment or question.  And of course Amali is one of the coauthors of the booklet.  So it is a great pleasure to have you also here.  Amali, please, the floor is yours.
    >> AMALI De SILVA-MITCHELL:  Thank you.  This is Amali.  I'm the Coordinator for the Coalition on Data Driven Technology.  We are interested in connecting everybody to access to healthcare.
    What I wanted to say is really what was important in the old days when we started off with someone, you know, we used to call it eGovernment and the importance of the access of everyone to eGovernment services and that is an area we are especially interested in health.  It is not just only for information but the ability to send maybe test results, we know to have telemedicine and communication with doctors.  
    So in terms much these minimum requirements, we would also like if you would please consider adding kind of the size of the data files and the complexity to a certain extent that needs to be there at a minimum level to have very basic healthcare needs being taken care of through these eHealth government processes.
    So thank you, Luca, that's all I wanted to mention.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Amali, for this.  Now we enter the second session which has a presentation by Rolf Weber that has -- I mean, without -- Cynthia if you have a new word for saying -- besides the week before the IGF, the European Parliament would have announced that they were discussing a fundamental rights to Internet access, I don't know if you have these kind of powers or if it was a great coincidence, but your piece on Internet access as a human right was precisely discussed in what has now been sponsored by European institution at a really high level.
    Rolf, please, the floor is yours.
    >> MR. ROLF H. WEBER:  Thank you very much, Luca.  Indeed, I am not a prophet and I do not have a crystal ball, but I'm interested in this topic for quite some time and I also would like to raise it a little bit broader, not only limits to legal perspective which impression here to Internet access, but to access understood in a very general way as a human right but obviously the efforts of the European Union are helping me to take further into the respective issues, respective legal issues.
    Basically, my thoughts are, of course, of a more theoretical nature.  I can also liaise with the introductory keynote of Sonia and some other foundation of my thoughts is that openness is related to human rights and human rights constitutes the legal framework for society.  In particular, the right of access to information as stated in many international legal instruments and knowledge orientated.  This aspect is of particular importance in situations of pandemic environments such as COVID-19.
    What I'm saying is, by the way, not completely new or already in the context of the WSIS 2005 it was said that digital developments are empowering spaces for participation in public affairs and Internet access via meaningful devices should enable people to express themselves more directly in public arenas without having to go through the traditional media gatekeepers as well to apply new tools in the sense of human rights.
    In other words, if we take into the legal instruments, international instruments, we have to see for the possibilities how the traditional human rights can be made fruitful for the purposes of general access rights.  We have certain ways to interpret the respective legal instruments in a positive way.  On the one hand it would, of course, be important to more deeply elaborate on the freedom of information which is beyond the value in comparison with the freedom of expression, but is basically the back side of the medal, as we can see in many legal instruments.
    The restrictions imposed on the freedom of information would have to be questions in the special circumstances of pandemic situations and on the other hand, that is, of course, also relatively lengthy, this caution which we had among lawyers.  Traditional human rights are directed against states.  However, legal doctrine is of the opinion that human rights can have so-called horizontal or indirect effect.  This would mean that non-state actors would also be obliged to comply with human rights.
    If we look in particular at the very important international legal instrument, namely the international convention on economic, social and cultural rights, having been adopted in 1966 -- it is more than 50 years ago.  We can see that even in a nonbinding way but nevertheless at least as a moral commitment states are obliged to create an environment which enables civil society to make participative decisions and states should provide basic public services including infrastructure to support individuals in the realisation of their human rights.
    In other words, in addition to the principle of nondiscrimination being applicable in practically all international instruments, we have to see how we can more intensively refer to the respective provisions of this covenant, which is in addition supported by the rights to development as already contained in the respective UN Declaration of 1986, some 35 years ago, and the direction has been taken up by the UN sustainable development goals.
    In the UN report published half a year ago at the outbreak of the COVID-19 crisis, we do have shared responsibility and global solidarity.  And these objectives should be invested into the discussion related to the access rights to infrastructure.
    However, this is my second and shorter part of my short intervention.  We should not limit the efforts to the interconnectivity but also address access to data.  This is particularly important in a health crisis.  People rendering data to hospitals, to medical doctors, to other entities and organisations should have the right to have access to respective data even after this data has been processed by the data analytics and other methods.
    We do have such rights in most laws on data protection, but these laws usually contain restrictions.  And in addition we don't have such kind of access to data in the nonpersonal environment, the nonpersonal environment can be equally important if we are looking for general health data, et cetera.
    In other words, and in a nutshell, I am pleading for an extension of the freedom of information as a human right to a broader right of access, also having a constitutional value and I am pleading in addition to consider an extension of the general access discussions to specific access to data being of importance in times of crisis.  Thank you.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Thanks very much for this, Rolf.  It is indeed a very timely proposal to have, the rights of Internet access as a constitutional provision, hotly debated especially in some regions.
    Now, to move to the more pragmatic discussion I would like to ask Senka who is here, she is also a research Fellow at Research Africa, APC, and from CyberBRICS, to share her presentation about spectrum management.
    We have been speaking a lot about spectrum matters and how it is managed not so efficiently usually.  Senka Hadzic is one of the contributions to the book with Allison and Pablo from Research ICT Africa.  So please, the floor is yours.
    >> MS. SENKA HADZIC:  Thank you, Luca.  Can everybody see my slides?  All right.
    So in this presentation I will unpack our contribution to the dynamic coalition annual outcome report, which my colleagues from research Africa.  So background, South Africa's failure to release high grade spectrum has been cited by experts as one of the -- operators had to reform their 3G spectrum and use it to deploy 4G.  That long overdue spectrum option was meant to happen in 2020, but yeah, then the COVID-19 crisis started and stopped the entire process that was happening at the regulators.
    But also as I think Paul participants today mentioned the crisis has really highlight the inequalities and the digital divide in South Africa, only half the population is online.
    Most people cannot afford even, you know, data for basic communications an not to mention home schooling or remote work and video conferencing, all these applications that require much more data capacity.
    But then with the pandemic outbreak, the state suddenly showed how agile it can actually be when there is the right, correct political will and that it can manage the crisis caused by the pandemic.  Soon after the South African government declared a natural disaster at the end of March this year, there was a ministerial Director to the South African regulator to release additional spectrum to deal with the increased demand for bandwidth caused by the lockdown period.
    And the call was issued within a week.  And both the Ministry and DECA, have emphasized how these arrangements are only temporary and the pre-COVID status will be reverted to after the disaster or November 30 at the latest.
    That has been pushed to next year and we expect the spectrum will be completed by then.
    And CASA received 40 applications for that temporary spectrum but only 17 of them actually complied with the provision of their investigation for temporary spectrum.  And experts agree that with the way how it is this application was structured in a very, very short time to respond, it really had the feel like it was designed to give the spectrum to incumbents.  Yeah, indeed it was the dominant players in the market who got these temporary spectrum assignments.
    And by doing so, CASA sort of missed the opportunity to widen the pool of operators and eventually bring some newcomers on board.  For example, community networks operator.  Because while it was the incumbents did get instant relief, for example via com stated that this temporary spectrum has really allowed them to reduce network congestion an increase quality while handling all the extra traffic.
    But for the end users there was no real benefit with this interests discussion.  There was no price reductions or also no benefits in terms of bringing more people online.
    Also ironically, 5G was launched within a few weeks after the award of the temporary spectrum.  And, well, I say ironically because, you know, this was meant to bring more people online and not for operators to test their 5G deployment because it is certainly not 5G that will solve the digital divide and connect the unconnected.
    But there are also some positive things to highlight here.  First it was great to see that if CASA can act swiftly when there is political will to do so.  It was great to see the TV white space going forward.
    That was the only nonincumbent spectrum that was covered in this call.  And the regulations for the TV white spaces have been published by the South African regulators years ago and now granting that to three new TV white space operators demonstrate nor progressive thinking about getting cheaper technologies and new services into the market.
    But the issue with TV white spaces, it is an old technology and it is indeed a real backward technology with lots of potential for African back regulars but does not reach the users' devices because then the white space deployment usually rely on using wifi for the last mile.  But then again wifi has its limitations.  Also in rural areas of South Africa many users do not even have wifi enabled phones.
    Essentially we cannot reach the large masses without the INT spectrum and in order to really serve the unserved we need to do things differently.  And doing things differently could mean, for example, adopting alternative business models to facilitate the entry of smaller operators and community networks.  Test the potential of some alternative licensing arrangements.  We also kneeled to do way more spectrum innovation and regulatory experimentation to move away from exclusive nationwide licenses because, you know, spectrum is usually given to regulators on a national level also and instead of being used in dense urban areas where there is a business contains and the rest of the country it remains unused.
    Spectrum sharing must be taken more seriously as well as building potentially incentives for operators to share their spectrum.  One example to look at would be OFCAM in the U.K. where low small local licenses are permitted whenever the spectrum is not being fully utilized.  Well, of course, there is the condition that the entry of a new local licensee does not interfere with an existing licensee.
    For example, such local licenses could be given to community networks, to meet local demands and complement existing services especially because I think that community networks go way beyond connectivity.  Apart from just providing access to the Internet, they also often design services which specifically serve local populations.
    For example, now in terms of the pandemic, there is -- in South Africa provided very localized content like COVID-19 related information which was translated into local languages.
    And some other communities across the country provided eLearning platforms or used their community networks for direct communications, communication between teachers and students and so on.  There are quite a few examples.
    But obviously maybe this crisis can even be used as an opportunity for course correction.  Because now that the political will is there, we should actually use it while it is there because it can -- very quickly.  Like Osama said in his opening remark, the digital divide is kind of back on the table.  And we should make use of that momentum now that everybody is realising the importance of ubiquitous access and maybe even the regulators would be more keen to doing things differently.
    So yeah, that's it for the summary of our contribution.  I'm happy to answer that question during Q&A.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Excellent.  Thank you very much, Senka, for providing some perspective from the South African situation.
    Before we open for a brief debate I would like to give the floor to Nicolas who has been so kind to wait until now and although Nicolas, unfortunately, does not have the time to contribute to the book we are releasing, he developed an incredibly interesting initiative, the communities network toolkit for COVID-19, which is an incredibly useful project, especially in these times of COVID-19.
    Nicolas, you are free to explain to us how this work or any other project that has happened together with your new beard style that I am very pleased to see.
    (Laughter.)
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Go ahead, Niko.
    >> MR. NICHOLAS ECHANIZ:  There is always some new style.
    Yeah.  Sorry we didn't have the time to collaborate there.  We have been very, very busy, but yes, we had been working for some years already with what we called the (Non-English phrase.)
    >> MR. NICHOLAS ECHANIZ:  I don't know how we translate but it is the bootstrapping of community networks, community networks boot strapping.  Those workshops were usually workshops where some of us, AlterMundi or partners would actually go to the communities and work with them through a process of two to three days of boot strapping the network in that area.  Which meant not just a community but usually a cluster of communities.  We try to invite people from different communes in the same region.  So they can learn together and even though the practical stuff is done in that spot where we are working, they all leave with the practice knowledge to their own communities.
    What we did with this protocol that Luca mentioned, it is published in our website and also in the APC website.  We designed this protocol that is designed for the communities to go through the workshop without the need to have people from our teams on the ground.  This has been working, I would say, really well.  We are now in the process of actually finishing the deployment of 15 community networks, new community networks here in Argentina.  This has been done during the past three or four months.  They are from ISOC, APC, and 48 percent.
    Actually, it was funded an average of $1,000 per community.  So I think it was quite cheap and very interesting.  Many of these communities it is baffling like how when they share their experience and they have deployed between three and five router nodes in each community and they are so happy that most of the community already has some wifi coverage.  We are very excited with this.  But for us this was not just the -- the important thing about this was not just designing this for the COVID time and pandemic time which we hope will end soon, but also to in some way demonstrate to our government that community networks are a viable alternative that we can actually deploy lots of community networks at the time we can have a just qualitative, quantitative impact on connectivity.
    The next thing that happened is that our government, the local regulator has passed some I would say quite novel policies where they started three different funds that are derived from the universal service centre and are basically for deploying network in -- one of them is in rural areas.  Another one is in slums and under privileged settlements.  And the other one is related to mostly the education, public education system in the communities around the public education system.
    And with these programmes there has been lots of new movement here until this year I was the only operator with a license, a community work license in Argentina, which actually created because we pushed for that to exist.
    But we were the only.  Now there are five new ones.  And there are like ten applying for this license.  So this is growing quite fast.  There is one operation that has applied.
    (Audio garbled.)
    That is only one project is a programme for using money of the universal service fund.  And we are the biggest.  Most of our projects are choosing to deploy the technology.  We've worked so hard to develop.  We are also working with local government agencies to try to bring the production of the local router to Argentina but not just to produce the router here but to create a model for local production of Liber router nodes, which is not just the router, the electronics, the plastics, the antenna, the cables, all that comprises a node for each home.
    And this is going quite well.  We hope during next year we will be able to start producing the routers because one of the things that we have identified and I have been talking a little bit about this with Jane and other people, is that the scale has changed like dramatically.  So we were producing hundreds of routers and now we will need to produce thousands of routers.  And all of this in a nonprofit model.  So we are also actually right now like looking for partners that wants to help out with the --
    (Audio garbled.)
    >> MR. NICHOLAS ECHANIZ:  The universal service funds will be able to pay for the routers, we need to pay for the production first.  So that this, I think it is just a financial problem that we will need to address.  And for me it is exciting times.  It is a change of scale that we have been actually striving for for many years.  I hope that what is happening here in Argentina now will also be an interesting case study for countries around the world, from the universal design that leads to the communities fund, community network deployment also and technology.
    If there are questions, I am happy to share.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Thank you, Niko.  It is interesting to see that the Libra match and the router are utilized and very successful.  It is also very good for me to hear that also Argentina is using universal access fund because from the study we did on commercial networks three years ago one of the main problems we highlighted is that the universal access fund are rarely used or even more rarely well used.
    So the fact that these kind of programmes that facilitate the disaggregation of the network, utilization of the networks and positive externalities, the creation of these new networks entails in terms of jobs, in terms of new services, in terms of new content, in terms of access beyond the limits that is excellent news.
    I think we should really try to document these also to use it not only as a case study but as a concrete evidence of the very good progress these can have from terrestrial thinking to implementation to scale to something very meaningful.
    Do we have a couple -- we can take a couple of very --
    >> MS. JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Luca, we have questions in the Q&A pod from Glenn McKnight.  Do you want me to ask them?
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Yes, please.
    >> MS. JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Glenn McKnight, he has a question on transparency international as an example of another group that has been using performance of the work, value, and proof of concept.  He mentions about that.
    And he gives an example of a water pump in South Africa that is using children to play on a merry go round.  That was an example of some kind of a impact that they were having.  I guess his question is:  Are there other examples that we can use and copy other institutions so that we can make this effort.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  If I understand, it is thinking out of the box to have very creative ways of doing things that could be useful for community networks.
    I don't know, I wouldn't know how to answer to this.  I don't know if there is anyone familiar with this from the participants?  Does anyone want to reply to this question?
    >> MR. OSAMA MANZAR:  Hi, Luca.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  You're still here!  Excellent!  I thought you were sleeping!
    (Laughter.)
    >> MR. OSAMA MANZAR:  No.  So I wanted to say that I don't think we have an independent organisation or agency having done that.  But one thing that I would say that in community networks, the entire approach of multi-stakeholders in most of the cases basic infrastructure being taken care of by most, in most of the cases -- I'm not saying all of the cases -- by grants and showing the sustainability may show that the cost per person may not be as the private sector would calculate what the call is to, return per user, something like that.
    But in this case the social return and the infrastructural input by participative, multi-stakeholder participation actually make the cost much lower.
    And the entire profit and loss can be, cannot be calculated the way it is calculated in the case of private sector or in the case of what you call ISPs or the telecos would calculate.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Yes, indeed.  I totally share your point.  Again, Argentina is a very good example of how they shared resources in this kind of multi-stakeholder principle.  Niko has been proving this for years also with their agreement with the University of, I think it was Rosario, for sharing the connectivity access, making good use of a resource that is already paid for, but that moment of the day is not utilized by everyone.  University students don't go to school in the evening.  People need connectivity at night.  The fact that you have already good access in one point and you can share it in two different communities, students during the day and households during evening and night makes excellent use of resources already there and were simply under utilized in evening and night while it is there for other people's use.
    There are a lot of examples of these kind of multi-stakeholder principles sharing resources to bring down the cost of what could be the deployment of infrastructure.
    I am very mindful that we are --
    >> MR. NICHOLAS ECHANIZ:  Luca, sorry, if I might add a little thing?  I think it has to do with what Glenn was asking and what you were commenting.
    Another thing that is happening here that I think at least to my knowledge is quite unique is that we are in the process of signing an agreement with the government of our province, our state, so that about 3 kilometers fiber that is ... not the national state but the province.
    But this has very little capillarity.
    The government has to, in many occasions when they need to provide connectivity to a school, to a public library, to a local government, et cetera, there is no possible to do it through their own infrastructure, though they have infrastructure, backbone infrastructure.
    So we now are in the process of signing an agreement with the state.
    (Apologies, the audio is garbled.)
    >> MR. NICHOLAS ECHANIZ:  -- to the area because the company has, but the government will buy the bandwidth in quantities and the community will do the rest, the last for them.
    For the infrastructure they have not been able to use in this agreement with the carrier so we can -- draft from one community network to the next one through the state fiber network.  And the State can provide a connectivity to the schools.
    All of this, I think, is it -- it is like nobody is losing anything.  We are just better utilising what is already there.
    I think this is also an interesting case to reply, to try to copy in other regions.
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  I notice there are a lot of other things that everyone would like to discuss and comment on.  Unfortunately we do not have any more time and I don't want to exploit the very kind technical support that has been provided for us.  I know that everyone has respect.  
    Thank you very much to everyone for your participation, for your very interesting presentations.  We have a mailing list that is open to anyone for sharing any further document, link, report, presentation, requests for partnership or anything else that you may have in your mind.  If you want to have a final group picture that we are able to share then with the IGF Secretariat, if you could switch on your cameras for just two seconds and smile, then we can take a good screen shot of everyone.
    Actually, Osama may be already sleeping.  Okay.  Have a good night, Osama.
    He's here again!
    (Laughter.)
    >> MR. LUCA BELLI:  Okay, excellent.  Everyone smiling.
    Excellent.  Thank you very much to everyone.  And have an excellent evening, afternoon or whatever the time of the day is in your time zone.  Thank you very much for separating to this session of the coalition and please let's keep in touch through the mailing list and let's organise more interesting events, projects, initiatives, anything you may have in your mind.  Goodbye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-3-dc-lessons-learned-from-the-pandemic-child-rights-and-safety-raw^^

     >> MODERATOR: Good morning.  Good afternoon, good evening.  Wherever you are.  My name is Marie-Laure Lemineur.  I will be the moderator of the session.  I work for an organization call based in Bangkok Thailand are I am right now.  Welcome to the session and thank you for joining.  When I checked roughly an hour ago, we had 83 registered participants.  So I was pleased to see that we had so many participants.  Thank you once again for joining us today.  We start with a little bit of housekeeping.  Mentioning that we have four speakers today.  That is all of them will be making a presentation and then once we are done with the presentations, we would open the floor for questions, comments, and the duration of the session is 90 minutes so I'm hoping that we will have more than 30 perhaps 40 minutes for the questions.  And then we will discuss forwards the end of the session the key takeaways from the discussion.  And we will be ready to wrap up.
     So before I give the floor to the first speaker, I will like to tell you more about the background of each one of our speakers.  We start with the speaking order and the baron necessary Beeban Kidron.  A British film maker and advocate for children's rights.  In the house of lords Kidron sits as a cross bench peer and sat on the house of lords digital technologies committee and the communications select committee.
     Eris also the founder and chair of the foundation called the five rights foundation.  Which is a charity that works to create policy and practical solutions to fill the digital world children and young people deserve.
     Bare -- and the artificial entell against and child rights policy guidance group.  That is the wide, wide experience and have view her views and insights will be valued.  And then Dr. Amanda Third, a research fellow in the institute for culture and society at western Sydney university and the codirector of the young research center.  Dr. third is the research stream colleague in the center for resilience and inclusive societies and a faculty associate in the Bergman Klein center for internet and sew tiety at Harvard University in the U.S.A.  And professor third is an international expert in child centered and participatory research and her work investigates children's technology practices focusing on marginalized groups and right based approaches.  Professor third has led child centered projects to understand children experience of the digital age in over 70 countries working with partners across corporate government and not for profit sectors and, of course, children themselves.  She has authored plenty of publications.  The last one young people in the digital society 2019.
     And coauthoring the UN committee on the right of the child general comment on children's rights in the digital environment.  And we have our third speaker, on the program description the session you can see the name of Nina.  Unfortunately, Nina yesterday inform the us that she is sick and we were sorry to hear that.  And Uta Jutta Croll afreed to join us.  She was the managing director of the foundation from 2002 and to 2014.  And from 2014 until 2016 she was the managing director of the German center for child protection on the internet.  A member of the IQM mag and a foe funder of the die ma'am nick coalition online safety also a co-organizer of the session.  And finally is member of the several steering boards and committees.  And last but not least, working as a head of a team at the European cyber crime center also known as EC3 which was I believe set up in 2013.  The center is the body of the yew union that is head quartered in the Haig in the Netherlands and the center coordinates cross boarder law enforcement activities against all forms of cyber crime including online and, of course, the center acts as a center of technicalling per tease on the matter in the region.  So without further ado, I will give the floor to Beeban for the first introductory remarks.  Thank you very much.  Over to you.
     >> BEEBAN KIDRON: Thank you so much.  And hello to everyone listening.  I will start in a curious way which is what happened to me in API when I got a phone call from a teacher at a school where the children were remote learning and she had an extent where a young child had posted and shared some child sexual abuse.  And she was beside herself and even though it was lock down we agreed and met in the school play ground outside.  And over a cup of tea and a lot of tears she explained that in addition to the particular incident she was beside herself because she was supposed to be teaching children remotely but couldn't trust the technology that she was using and said on the one hand, these children need to learn, they need to be in touch with each other and they need to be in touch with us.  But we are putting them in an environment where almost always we feel that we are pulling them into a world in which they are not ready and it is not fit for them.
     >> I was moved and asked her to keep in touch and since then and over the last few months my in box is full of messages from teachers.  Some is very extreme and some in minor.  But the sense of anxiety built up in the teachers of a responsibility of two thing pulling them between a child's right to education and their duty and wish to keep the children safe is tearing them apart.  Now I want to say that very specifically because these teachers were all in state schools.  And around the same time I was approached by one of the biggest private school networks globally in many countries across the world, nearly 100 schools and the CEO of that met work rang rang me up and said we are proud of ourselves within three weeks we are now teaching 95% of our lessons online and our kids are in school every day in all corners of the world.  And I said this is an absolute triumph, what did you do about safeguarding?  And he went pale.  Nothing.  He said what should I do?  1.7 million children cannot have access to a laptop of their own for education.  Seeing also a divide there.  Sharing laptops with material that is and settings that are simply not fit for purpose.
     And teachers who have lost contact with before we went -- before we came out of the first lockdown and information weeing go are in again tomorrow but this time keeping children in school and sharing that teachers lost contact with nearly 40% of children.  The government have brought in an emergency law making remote learning come pulsery in UK school so any child not in school in the next wave of lockdown must have access to remote learning by the school but they have done nothing, nothing to make that access safe.  That is the picture nor a child in the UK.  At the same time I looked at the statistics around a particular product here which many of you will know.  It is called only fans and I was looking the at it because I think as many of you know we are bringing in legislation in the UK online harms legislation and I was looking at it because the government keep on telling me that small companies must be exempt from this legislate, and only France has less friends has less than 50 employees but 50 million subscribers and 700,000 content creators and for all of those people who don't really know what it is, it sells access to naked photographs and sexual content and in about April found on a single day a third of Twitter profiles globally advertising nudes for sale or similar tags appeared to belong to underage users.
     And many of those were using the British firm only fans that would I believe be out of scope of the proposed legislation.
     And I find myself thinking that what we are creating and what the pandemic has brought into that the policy makers and family have not understood is that we are asking children and putting children in the center of a very toxic environment.  That actually we can no longer look at this issue of child sexual abuse and grooming and the most extreme forms of sexual violence against children as being a thing that bad actors do to individual children.  But we have to start looking at what normal we create and look for the levers to make it a less toxic environment and in a world in which it is normal for a child to make pocket money selling a nude picture of themselves that creates an environment in which it is also normal for a child to share on the remote learning school pa tern and also then normal to pick up admiration and friends through that process.
     >> In my words I wanted to raise our eyes and say the levers of change that we must look for have to be systemic.  And they have to deal with some of the normals that children are finding themselves living in and the pressure of actually joining in with those new normals.  As well as some of the more extreme cases that we are hearing.  I was glad to see to extend what kind of harms that children are suffering and there are two or three things I have been witnessing in this time from a UK context which I imagine are relevant elsewhere.  And I have found very particularly sort of concerning.  Is the first is about misinformation and I think we are all aware specifically of the huge effect of health misinformation.  And what it actually means and I still have in my head a headline from the newspaper of a young man who said I guess it wasn't a hoax as his dying words in America.  And I think that the depth of the misinformation around health has been very profound for us all.  But what I -- what caught my eye was a report earlier in the summer that said from the center of disease control that said those people with most access to conspirecy theories are the least likely to watch their hands and social distance.
     That makes a lot of sense.  But also that children, that came out of the same week as the report on children's media access and it was, of course, that children get most of their information online.  And I put these two things together and felt a wave of upset that the diet we were giving children was so poor that access to information which is something that is theirs by right to have information and I felt that their story in the misinformation had not been properly told.  And I think that you have to then extrapolate from that information and the close information of antivaxx misinformation which resulted in many millions of children getting measles unnecessarily.  They are the victims of this misinformation.  And also what we are seeing here as an increase in radicalization and through the summer again a huge increase in hate speech and specifically racially based hate speech in the UK.  And so I felt that actually in amongst the harms that children are experiencing now where they don't have the check point of a broader society and could have a great deal of time inside and online that this world that is being created of misinformation is actually should be central to our concerns and we must not see it as something that is happening solely to the adult population.
     And then finally, I just wanted to mention the question of domestic violence.  And this has been a huge problem throughout the pandemic in the UK.
     Not only the strategies that people traditionally use to get away from their oppressor but also that in the tension of the person straighter being indoors or losing their job or being anxious, those rates go up.  It is a sort of a double whammy of abuse and inability to get out.  And we have seen huge numbers of children calling help lines for the first time about violence to themselves or, indeed, in the family context.
     And I think that this is something where there are good remote services and help lines that have been absolutely fundamental to their well being and to either getting them out or supporting them through those situations.
     And I think that that is possibly where I would like to end to say in all of my criticism of the environment created by the technology that children are using is we could so easily flip it to create a technology that would bring children their rights and help them flourish and keep them safe and that in the end the battle is about responsibility and the business model and about legislation and mandating a lowest bar of behavior that would actually protect children through these sorts of issues.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Very interesting.  You touched upon a wide range of aspects we will go back to when we open the floor.  The remarks I think sort of lean well with what Amanda is planning to say.  Over to you.  You can expand on the remarks we just heard.  Thank you so much.
     >> AMANDA: Thank you very much.  It was clear that in comparison to other populations such as the elderly, children were not particularly vulnerable to contracting COVID-19.  Even though the crisis has profoundly impacted children around the world.  In just one sign that the impacts on children are significant, children's help lines in high income countries have reported increased -- (microphone muted).
     >> MODERATOR: Amanda, you were muted.  Suddenly.  I don't know why.
     >> AMANDA: I just got a message that the host muted me.
     >> MODERATOR: Can you go back like a couple of seconds.
     >>
     >> 25% -- HELP LINES ARE EXPERIENCING A 25% INCREASE IN VOLUME IN CHILDREN ACCOUNT SEG IS THE SERVICE.  I WANT TO BEGIN WITH TWO NOTES HOW WE MIGHT THINK ABOUT CRISIS IN in relation to children and right theres.
     The word crisis comes from the Greek but in the original meaning the emphasis is not on the cataclysmic event but take the necessary decisions to deal County cataclysmic event.  We envision the change we want to see and go after it.  The time is now to center childrens rights as we take decisions about the important role that technology has to play in navigating crises.  Secondly, COVID-19 will be a formative experience for this generation of children.  But it is unlikely to be the only major crisis that shapes their sense of the world and sense of safety.  For Australian children the Pam was immediately preceded by the national emergency of devastating bush fires.  And in the Pacific vie syllabus cyclones and in Cambodia and Viet Nam, catastrophic floods.  We must be careful not to con train the thinking to individual crises though they might grab our attention.
     We must use this moment to think ex-pan Sibley about how to address the intersecting crises that shape children's lives both now and in the future be it those that confront us Starkly, or those that are burning more slowly such as the climate cry Civil Society.  Bus if childrens rights are challenged now this is not a temporary situation.  Throughout the pandemic there mass been a strong emphasis.  For children as for adults the pandemic has been more than a health crisis.  It has been and continues to be a crisis in children's social worlds.  Emerging research shows that for many children, the pandemic constituted an unprecedented disruption to the every day routines, their relationships, their sense of security, September, and fundamental safety.  The confidence that comes from predictable routines or the reliable comfort of strong and stable parents and relatives was suddenly thrown into disarray.
     So my team's research to develop child centered indicators for prevention prepresenter online and offline in the Philippines She's that the children's concept of safety depends stretch on the stability of their immediate relationships or we might say that safety is social and relational so children's safety might already have said to have been compromised by mere fact of the scale of disruption in the social networks compounding this and among other factors children have been exposed to streams of information of varying via social media and video sharing platforms as Beeban was indicating but also the fragments of news owner obvious conversations between parents careers that overheard.
     It is no wonder that children are reporting heightened distress.  Reese sent research shows that the possibility that children or their family members might contract the virus is very low down on children's list of immediate concerns.
     Rather, the report heightened sense of a worry, stress, feeling trapped, frustration, anger, sadness, loss and grief.  And of not knowing how to deal with the often new and powerful emotions.  They feel districted from peer networks which for many is a vital source for the well beg and resilience.  And they struggle to adapt to online education and much of the Tran section to online --ing took place on the fly and as such wasn't always underpinned by good pedagogy as Beeban has just talked about.
     And family tensions caused by being in the closed quarters with the same people day in and day out exacerbate the by the financial pressures in families that faced job lossesnd unstable work and business closures and so on.  Through the period, technology has played a more and more prominent role in the lives of many children and, of course, we have to qualify this statement with the very careful acknowledgement that not all children have regular and reliable access to technology.
     And this raises a very important set of issues about how such children can enact rights in the context of a pandemic unfolding in the digital age.  There is a very real possibility that crises such as the present one will further marginalize those that experience digital exclusion.  For those with access while there are concerns that rapid increases in the screen time during the pandemic have exposed to increased risks of parm and I will say more about this a moment, technology has provided also a crucial point of continuity and connection for children.  It has enabled them to maintain connection with peers, toe stay engaged at some level with schooling and provides a very important means of relaxation and entertainment.
     But many of the technology based strategies that we have put in place to sustain life under the pandemic have been assembled quickly without attention to the risks of harm or how to maximize the potential of technology to support a sense of safety and well being in the disruption.  Now more than ever, deceit the issues that we confront it is important that we pause and step carefully.
     How should we think about children's rights in the context of this pandemic and other crises?  While the right right to mental health is most affected negatively and positively by technology during a pandemic, we must remember that there is much more at take than their right to health.
     The pandemic unfolding in a digital age has significant implications for children's rights to information, education, privacy, identity, rest, leisure, play, and adequate standard of living, protection from forms of physical and mental abuse and exploitation and much more.
     It also differentially impacts the rights of children with disability, adoptees, refugees and those in institutional care or situations of vulnerability.  As the global community responds, we have to remember the endivisiblity of children MS rights.  As the convention stipulates and as the teamhood by the five rights foundation has insisted on while drafting the UNCRC general comment on childrens rights in the digital environment a document that we hope will guide our thinking in relation to child rights technology and the pandemic, there is no hierarchy of children's rights.  They -- they must be progressively realized in combination.  So we must resist the temptation to only think about children's right to health.
     With this in mind, I want to briefly reflect on some of the ways that children's rights are impacted by technology in this time of crisis and what this means for their safety.  We know that children don't distinguish the online and offline in the ways that adults often do but rather move flexibly across online and offline spaces and interact, learn and participate in offline and online platforms simultaneously.
     Children have emphasized that during the pandemic, while technologically mediated relationships have been important to them they can't replace their face to face interaxes and I think it is useful to arer that under the conditions of the pandemic our communication has had to be very intentional rather than incidental.  There is no bumping into people and having a casual chat.  You to reach out and communicate.
     Children are saying when the engagement moves solely on line, it is not the case that the technological subty substitutes for face to face interaction when physical contact becomes impossibly.  Being unable to interact with peers challenges children's well being.  Indeed, to the extent that the pandemic impacts children's right to health it is the mental health a form of safety whose response is often underestimated that is perhaps most of concern.
     Major challenge for us is how do we augment existing platforms and technology-based services to support children's mental health well being and their rights to safety.  We know the risks of harm to children online have likely increased during the pandemic.  Increased time online does, indeed, augment the likelihood that children will encounter risks of hall.  And while we know that more time online enables children to develop their digital literacies and capacities to manage the risks, arguably they have not had the opportunities to do so with the right structures of support and guidance around them.
     Given that they have been largely reliant on family members who themselves are in crisis.  Purely by the fact of spending more time online the possibility children are exposed to forms of digitally mediated harm have increased.
     We know that for those children who were already vulnerable to forms of violences the risks are accentuated.  For the vast majority the consequence is that they spend increased amounts of time at home and not all children MS homes are safe spaces that support and sustain them.
     The domestic vience community for example is deeply concerned about rising rates of internet partner violence and the effect this is having on children.  Further more, the usual structures of visibility and face to face accountability that regulate the behaviors of perpetrators of violence are currently compromised.  We need to think creatively in earnest and across sectors about how we use technology to identify and counter the violence that is taking place behind closed doors.  We need to think how to support child victims of violence whether it is offline, online or both.  If there is a glimmer of hope it is that the issues are finally more visible in public and policy debate.  This cause I think for -- there is cause I think for cautious optimism that the pandemic provides an opportunity to ad Vance children's right to protection from serious forms of violence.
     One effect I think of the pandemic has been to challenge most people's sense of privacy living in close quarters is very challenging.  But, of course, again, by visit too of intensified time on line, children are evermore exposed to the not always expolicity or well explained data collection practices of technology companies with potentially significant implications for their right to privacy.  These incursions on privacy only compounded by contact tracing absent other surveillance technologies implemented to protect populations.  But, if surveillance of the general population has increased the privacy rights of those children who live in abusive families are severely compromise the.
     As Beeban alluded to, technology in that context potentially amplifies the mechanisms of control that are available to perpetrators of child abuse and other forms of exploitation and violence.  While the way forward is in IGF processes boucler we can't shy away from the difficult questions.
     Crises and this is especially true of acy such such as the COVID-19 pandemic tend to throw us in the immediacy of the present and obscure the past and the future.
     Across cultures, children are seen to represent the future.  To center the needs of children as we address crises would be to shift us beyond the sole focus on the present moment of disruption and to bring the future into play.
     It is -- so thinking about children, centering children is a vital tool in counter acting the tendency for short-termism.
     If children are seen to represent the future they also represent our collective hopes for a better world.
     Indeed, alongsighted, children are also articulating a range of positive experiences as a consequence of the pandemic.  So far the conciliations have shop that amidst the challenges children appreciated the opportunity to spend more time with family.  Outside the usual routines.  They found strength in their connection with those family members and they have learned to appreciate the small things.
     And many also have enjoyed even relished being online.
     If technology can undermine, it is clear that it has the ability to sustain childrens rights in a time of crisis.  And yet we are yet to still imagine the ways that technology can be necessaried to do so.  As we proceed, it is important that we don't lose sight of the ways that this moment might enable us to invent new purposes for technology which enable children and communities to navigate crisis but also technologies that can support towards it world in which children and the adults in their lives can lead more equitable and fulfilling lives.  There is no time like now for thinking about how to leverage.  The pandemic has shown us that the task is urgent and necessary.  Thank you.
     >> Professor: Thank you so much.  It is interesting and a good complement to the remarks made at the beginning and I took notes of some key comments that you made and I would like to go back to it when we open the floor.
     Before I pass on the baton to Jutta, I would like to remind all of the participants that there is a Q&A section where they can write down their questions for the speakers when we are done with the presentation.  So as far as, we have four questions.
     >> Professor: So Jutta over to you and then we will finish with Cathal.  Thank you very much.  Unnewt myself.
     >> JUTTA: Thank you very much.  I have shared my screen now.  Can you see my slides?  I see someone nodding so that is fine.
     >> MODERATOR: Sorry, can you make it -- the huge screen because we can see the detail.  There you are.  Thank you.
     >> JUTTA: July.  I'm Jutta control.  Hit erheading the project children's rights and child protection in the digital world for four years now and happy to take over for my colleague Nina Pirk from the German help line.
     We have been working with help lines from Germany in regard of that compliance with the GDPR and also rye spect county the rights of the child around the German health line.  There are several the children can reach out to counseling by young people and they can reach out to counseling given by adults.  Paragraph paragraph paragraph paragraph you can see in all three parts of the work they are doing they had a huge increase during the Pam and these are statistics until April is for the time that children and families have been in lockdown and especially an increase in their in the online counseling for children but also in the parents' telephone hotline where it increased by 54% from March to April.  Having a deeper look into the details, the helpline remained open for all of the time and they increased even the times when children can reach out extended them during April and for the parents helpline to address all of the calls and messages they received.
     The -- the details of the reports they had to address saw a bit different data like we heard from Beeban before.  So they had expected to have more context about domestic violence and grooming and potentially harmful content but that was -- that increase was not as much of -- as was expected.
     But they had an increase in reports about violence which was physical, emotional left hand also sexual violence when children had a lot of reports or just questions about love and relationship online and also about cyber bullying.  So it was not only harm, it was also like positive experience where they had questions regarding that.
     And then the question that came from parents like about gaming, data protection and excessive use were less relevant for the children but they came in from the parents.
     We have -- I have here some examples from Nina.  Questions that parents put to the help line.  This was related to where can I find suitable content for children.  What might be the possible risks if my children are more and more hours online.  And how can I talk to my children about these risks?
     Many parents felt overwhelm the with the situation and they were frustrated and got feelings like am I a bad parent?  What shall I do?  But also very, very expressive issues like some sent some nude pictures to someone he met online and now he is bullied.  How can I help him to be protected.
     And issues that are not only related to the pandemic but that also came up during this time of crisis and the 13-year-old daughter having a relationship online to an adult and how can I cope with that situation.
     Things that children reported were different.  They felt they were behind with the task for school and parents weren't able to help them.  They are afraid of the future.  But also parents took away the phone so they could not stay in contact with peers and felt angry but also disappointed about the situation.
     And then children that parents were still working, were not in lockdown, so the children felt alone at home, were scared and sad and couldn't even do something about that.
     Then also children who lived in the families the parents had problems with each other where there was fight so they were afraid of the situation.  A huge picture of different issues the help line had to deal with.  It was not always the thing they had expected which happened during lockdown and the pandemic.  And we even got reports from another help line who said that they got more reports about physical, sexual abuse that happened before the pandemic.  So these children somehow during the pandemic when they came -- were not in physical contact with their -- with the offender, they felt more confident to report to a helpline to search for counseling.
     So they somehow opened up in that situation when they were not in direct contact for example in the sports club or even at school or kindergartner with the offender that they felt cared about.  We have different developments in that situation and I do think we are still in the situation that we have not enough means, not sufficient means to deal with the situation.  Help lines are overwhelmed.  They have a lot of reports of parents overwhelmed.  We still need to develop strategies to ensure that people -- that children can benefit from the rights that are dedicated to them, that they can exercise their rights and at the same time being safe.
     Thank you so much for listening.  And I'm ready to take your questions.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Jutta.  Interesting remarks.  We started with Beeban who painted the broad picture around the wide range of children's rights and now the perspective of a front line service provider, help line attending the calls of the children and you shared some interesting data that we can comment in a few minutes.
     And now we also will have the perspective of a service provider front line provider which is a law enforcement agency.  And then we can have a very interesting discussions around some of your comments and data you are sharing.  Over to you, Cahal.  Thank you very much.
     >> CATHAL DELANEY: Thank you very much.  Let me share my screen.  Okay.  So, my name is Ked of Cathal, Delaney.  So I wanted to pick up on from the other peekers and from the presentations that have been made so far is that law enforcement is not always viewed in terms of what we could in relation to children's rights.  But in this area in particular, we are very much focused on the child and their rights and their status as a victim when crimes are wielded against them and particularly in relation to sexual exploitation and abuse.  We take the role as being inherently protective of those rights and rying to enforce those rights and their right to protection and their right to privacy and this is central to what we are trying do in law enforcement when we are exploring those who will exploit and abuse sexually children online and offline and to make the children to try to protect them from the abuse and to protect them from it continuing into the future as well.
     An effective way that we look at this, in Europol is intended to support law enforcement throughout Europe in their work in different crime areas where two or more member states are affected by the crime and by different (?) that need to be investigated.  We look at this 30s four different steps or area.  We call them steps because they don't necessarily follow one another.
     You have a most importantly a collaboration.  So the collaboration that we have with our law enforcement partners and collaboration that we have with the public and the private sector and nongovernmental organizations and the different stakeholders involved in the different crime areas in particular in relation to children and sexual exploitation.
     And following from that we have an operational response which is a huge part of the law enforcement responses to actually do something about what we are being told is happening and take action in relation to that and our role rather at Europol is to support the member states' law enforcement agencies in taking actions and trying to ensure with them that the best possible result comes from those actions.  And then we have the strategic response which is looking at the picture of what is going on and how we can use that picture to better protect children and also to contribute to the decisions that are being made by policy makers and by the decision makers in both in the member states and to inform them about how things can improve and what are the steps that need to be taken to do that.
     And then prevention and education which is one of the very few areas that Europol reaches out directly to the public for and that is providing different materials, advice and ways for the public to protect themselves, protect their children and become more educated about what is happening in the area.  And they can do that.
     In terms of operational response, and we are very focused on the children and focus first on the identification of the victim.  In any investigation the first question we ask is where is the victim and how can we help them?
     And we sometimes as certain that through different conventional methods of investigation with our -- with the partners and with the agencies that have is asked for our support and we have victim identification function at Europol that we built over the last number of years and it is a part of the team that drives the victim identification task force that takes place every year and is taking place at the moment.
     And we use the information we gather from the victim eye departmentfication process and the -- identification process.  And when I say we, I mean all of the investigators involved in this and we use that information to try to determine where a child is so that we can enable them to be reached by the national law enforcement agency responsible in the jurisdiction.
     And doing that also involves intelligence analysis and technical support and intelligence analysis for information that we store in the databases about the offenders and their activities.  Technical support on the ground, on the spot or at Europol head it is quarters with the technical expertise and knowledge that they have in the particular area.
     >> And result of that during the lockdown period was that we were able to support remotely several operations.  One example here was a case Italy where oraclings in Australia discovered material online that they believed was recent abuse of a child and through the examination of the material and the cooperation of several different jurisdictions that we coordinated, several different law enforcement agencies in Europe it was possible to discover the particular region in Italy where we believe that the abuse was taking place.
     And then the colleagues in Italy were able to inform the local investigators there about the circumstances of the case and the information that they had related to the suspect.  And ultimately that led to the eye departmentfication of the suspect -- identification of the suspect and the victim, a young girl, a child who had been abused by him within 10 days of the videos being posted online which is quite a significant achievement in that particular difficult circumstances.
     And another example in Spain, similarly the national agency were able to conduct a search remotely based on information that they had previously received and information that we had added to, again, to rescue a male child in that case, a boy, and to discover the identity of his abuser as well and taken before the Courts for justice.
     And then also we had a case in France where we actually supported on the ground with the technical and intelligence support leading to the arrest of a suspect there.  And the -- and the safety of two of the children, two children that he had been abusing himself.  To each of those are just illustrations of the extent of the efforts that we would go to in order to ensure that children who are being abused online and whose abuse had been posted online that we will do everything that we possibly can to support the law enforcement agencies in Europe and beyond in ensuring that that information gets to where this needs to be acted upon and that children are made safe as a result.  And this is just additional information in relation to the Italian case that I spoke about already.
     The information comes from those cases is added to the information that we already have at Europol and we have the video analysis system which is for identification and in the system at the moment we have more than 50 million images and videos that are unique and these are not multiple copies.  These are unique images and videos of child sexual exploitation abuse.  And because of the efforts that we have made over the last number of years and with our partners through like the victim identification task force that we hold once a year and sometimes twice we managed to examine just 20% of that material.  And that is to give you an idea of the scale of the problem that we face in relation to the amount of material that is out there.
     And I know that network they have given statistics previously in relation to possibly that many and more images and videos appearing online every year as well.
     And the difficulty, of course, for any child who is abuse has been recorded and whose abuse has been distributed is that there is every possibility that they will at some stage at least be fearful that they will be recognized on the street because -- by somebody who has viewed material in relation to them and seen material in which they were exploited and abused and that they -- that person could recognize them on the street.
     And this through survivor surveys carried out by the C 3 N in Canada and other collaborators have established that this is a very real fear for victims and you can see how damaging and difficult that would be for them as they go through their lives.
     And what we do at Europol is we have a very strict privacy and data protection regime and within our own team, that is privacy and data protection regime is very strong and we because we recognize the importance of the information that we receive not only in terms of criminal intelligence but that it is material in which children have been abused and in which we want to do our very best to ensure that those children and the abuse material that is there is not any further exposed than this absolutely needs to be and is only seen by those who need to see it and that there is not a possibility for those children to be revictimmized in the context of the investigations that we support and in the ways that we support them as well.
     So in looking then at the strategic response in relation to what we saw during the pandemic, we produced three public reports during that time.  First one is catching the virus and the second one was at the beginning of April just within four weeks of the lockdown beginning and then beyond the pandemic which is at the end of Apr irreconcilable differences l and then a dedicated report exploiting isoLas Vegas and published on the 19th of June.  Even of the reports what we wanted to do as a team was to emphasize what the impact and what the crisis seemed to be having in relation to children and how it could be the case that both in public and decision makers could be properly educated and steps could be identified for them to try to mitigate the damage being done.
     So we looked at in the first report we looked at what the situation appeared to be with information that we got from law enforcement partners and from the various other sources and we saw that there did seem to be a problem.
     I won't reiterate again what Dr. Beeban and Dr. third have said because it point the out that the time is likely to become obvious during the pandemic in relation to the children themselves and now which Dr. THird have said have become impossible to identify.
     In the second report we looked at what the future situation was likely to be.  And not dedicated report and then we looked at the whole range of data sources to try to establish what the full picture was and how that picture could be mitigated through the actions of law enforcement policy and decision makers and the actions of the public themselves.
     And what we did from the information was that we produced pretense and education advice for the -- prevention and education advice for the pub live and obviously for the different levels of the public, the careers and parents and children themselves and working in collaboration with the safety commissioners and office in Australia and producing the global online safety device for parents and careers in the European context and adopting what they already produced.  Producing videos and information and, yeah, information for the different levels of parents and children to inform them of what could be done to help them to not be vulnerable in this situation.
     And I think going back to what has been said already and the difficulty of potentially damaging children's privacy during this time and the right to privacy for those children who have access to the internet is very much dependent on having access to this type of information where parents can be educated about what it is that they need to do in engaging with their children and conversing with them and discussing with them what it is that a parent is trying to do in protecting them.  They are not trying to take away their rights but rather trying to supplement and strengthen them by telling the child what it is that they are trying to do and including them in the information.  And by doing that to hopefully motivate the child as something that they also have a part in and this he have a role in and they need to understand and to take seriously in order to protect their own rights in the future and be able to do that as well.
     In the end of the day, it is very much the case that whatever way we look at this, there is no way that law enforcement can solve this problem on their own.  And we don't want to solve it on our own.  We want to solve it in collaboration with partners whether those partners in the public sector, in the private sector, with Nongovernmental Organizations.  We want to be working with you in order to solve this problem because it is only by doing that, by having all of us working on it together that we can be effective and that we can produce a result which at the end of the day will protect the rights of children they are to health or protection or privacy and that is something that we as a law enforcement agency at Europol are very focused on and that we as a community of investigators who are very much focus the on protecting children and protecting their rights and also want to achieve as well.
     Thank you very much for the invitation and for your attention as well.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, cathal.
     Thank you for ther is spective of the victims.  And also as one who may not be familiar with the work starting your presentation by mention is that the work that you do as an agency is victim focused and centered is something that shouldn't be taken for granted for all law enforcement agencies, especially 15-20 years ago this had been a very positive progress made by major law enforcements agency, the national and regional and international level that we have witness and we thank you for that.  So, and also thank you for ending oen a positive know the mentioning the fact that this issue is really about collaboration.  Thinking of responses and solutions.  We need to think collectively and this panel is a good example of that.  We are bringing in expertise across sectors from academia and NGO and law enforcements so that we can all together put our brains together to look at the problem and the solutions.
     So I would like to go back to some questions that were spelled out in the Q&A section that are linked to the points.  They are -- I mean they are all very interesting.  I will start perhaps with one on photo DNA because it is sort of linked to the topic of the volume of what Kathal was referring to right now.
     And John Carr is asking if you wear that, what is happen -- if you are aware what is happening at the European parliament in relation to the use of the photo DNA and potentially its ban and the ban of other to detect grooming and other illegal content?
     And John is saying that the pandemic is reminding us or has reminded us that those two are very important and can we have your thoughts on that?  I don't know, Cathal, or some of the other speakers.  I don't want to put you on the spot.  If not Cathal, other speakers.  Yes, Jutta?
     >> JUTTA CROLL: Thank you for giving me the floor.  I think this is also related to the other question that we got in the question and answer shin as wing, I hope I pronounced that directly who is asking whether the practices like using photo DNA to a detect child sexual abuse material might be a censoring of the people especially feminists he or she writes on the internet.  And I think it is important to explain from the start we are not talking about censorship in any way.  We are talking about fighting child sexual abuse material with the means of those tools like photo DNA.
     So that is not about suppressing freedom of expression.  It is -- in the other way, it is ensuring that children's rights not only to safety but they also have the right to freedom of expression and we need to ensure that the children can exercise the right in a safe environment.  So I don't think we are -- we can achieve something if we are talking about whether it is censorship or not Cathal can go into details how helpful the tools are.  Photo DNA has nothing to do with mass surveillance.  It is not Sur veiling the interaction of people.  It is discovering files and images.  But you can explain better, I think.
     >> CATHAL DELANEY: I will take that as well.
     I have to be a little careful because at the end of the day Europol is not going to comment on any political developments or anything like that and John knows that as well.
     And so let me talk a little bit about the technical issue that Jutta brought up.
     And the purpose of these types of tools is that they will detect material relating to child sexual exploitation and abuse in platforms where it is being distributed.  As Jutta said, they are not used in order to suppress freedom of speech but rather for a particular defined purpose in order to detect this material and to inform law enforcement about it, which reaches the law enforcement member states, 18 of them through Europol in relation to referrals made through the mandatory reporting in the U.S. and through the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children there and those have been increasing the last couple of years to a significant extent.
     And in relation to what is the legislation that was proposed by the commission earlier this year, and Europol obviously applauds that this legislation was produced and then respects the role of the other parliamentary and council institutions in deciding how that legislation is to be implemented.  So, yeah, I -- I mean what I understand I'm not defending the legislation.  What I understand is that what it seeks to do is to maintain the status quo and not to go beyond what is already the situation and to close a gap between legislation which comes in to force the 20th of December this year and other legislation that they hope to introduce next year in order to close this gap basically in the law that otherwise exists.  That is what our position on it is.
     And the technical aspect that I think needs to be understood about it.  And about the other technologies that are being used to do the same thing at the home.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Beeban, you raised your hand.  You wanted to add something about this topic?
     >> BEEBAN KIDRON: I think, first of all, before I speak, I want to thank Cathal and all of the colleagues at Europol for what they do on the front line and we really recognize that that is different from those of us who talk about policy and thank you very much.
     But, I think I can make a political point -- I can't make a political point just like you can't and I pink I could like to make a slide slightly broader political point.  I'm disappointed that policy makers have sort of been backed into a corner about talking about freedom of speech versus child sexual material protection and the other protections that we see.
     I just want to make this analogy.  It is like if in the milk system we put a little poison and every 10,000 over breakfast somebody got sick, we wouldn't say, on the one hand, prefire Dom and on the other hand protection.  We simply don't have the right framing in this virtual world.
     And the framing that I would like to see policy makers take because I set some of the arguments about the tool itself.  Let's do it this way and say if you cannot do your very profitable business without carrying, you know, industrial level of child sexual abuse, then you are not fit to -- you are not fit to trade.
     So I see it as a business practice issue.  And that the solutions then will have more attention and will have to be much more effective unless you can do that, it is -- it is a not fit purpose.
     And I haven't -- you know, again, I think I said it at the end of my opening remarks, you know, this technology is marvelous, look at what we are doing, we are in different parts of the world all speaking together.  The truth of the matter is we have to have a much more zero kind of attitude for this and say it is not fit for purpose.  So what are you going to do with it?
     And maybe new tools and three tools and some restrictions to their own services and sprint but it is not about freedom of speech.  That is not an unqualified freedom against other freedoms and these are private companies.  They may be the public highway, that is something we allowed but they are private companies and not fit for trade if this is the trade that they enable.
     >> MODERATOR: I would like to jump in and link what you just said Beeban to a question that Sonya wellington is can asking about solutions and saying that the panel has raised a troubling set of problems facing -- sorry, I missed -- oh, God, I lost the question.  Where is it.
     My apologies.  A set of problems facing children during the pandemic.  So your point, Beeban, what immediate actions can you call for, from the government or the industry?  Can you think of something very specific?  You were talking about being (?) perhaps.
     >> BEEBAN KIDRON: We have to be careful because the short-term things we call for are not the whole solution and it is a difficult place to be.  I think, you know, I would like to see rigorous application of their own age restrictions, yeah.
     Right now, you know, so it doesn't solve the whole problem but it does mean that 8-year-olds aren't using services that they don't have the maturity to deal with.  And I think that there is certain parts of their design they should disable immediately.  And I have talked to some of them about this.
     But and I -- and I -- maybe I could just stop on this exact point which is, you know, why is it that it is routine and normalized that strange adults are introduced to children as friend requests?  I mean in what world does that make sense when at the front line, you know, colleagues are trying to deal with grooming and child sexual abuse.
     And actually I had a recent conversation with a senior safeguarding police officer in one of the nations and we talked about -- and he went back and looked at past cases and he actually started seeing how kids were being introduced, you know, through these benign apparently thicks.  This is just a commercial thing for their own network effect.
     So we have got to, you know, it should not be that a child is offered friends with of adult strangers period.  They don't need it to make the system work.
     I think my long-term thing is that we have to start doing impact assessment on services.  We to see where the risks are.  Take out the risk because the risk is a harm that hasn't happened yet.  And that would mean our colleagues who are dealing at harm at the other end, yeah, would have a whole lot less to do if we made it a little bit more difficult and less sticky in the first place.  I think we need ooh wholesale regulation and algorithmic oversight and the big thing we have to make a difference on is the difference between individual pieces of content and enabling them to spread.
     These are two different processes.  One is a bad actor and one is a business model.  Allowing, enabling that spread is also criminal in my view.  So I think there are things and I don't want to take all of the time, but there are literally a whole host of things and in terms of 5Rights we have a very good publication on the website saying priorities for the online homes bill which doesn't cover all of this but covers a piece of it.
     >> MODERATOR: Talking here about algorithmic amplification.
     >> BEEBAN KIDRON: If you think of me sitting in the room alone, whatever I put up,ia, only those who try and come to find and see it.  If you deliver it and predicter it around the world therein throughs the problem.  If it is isolated in one place, yeah, and this is something that I don't think policy makers are quite yet attuned to.  But a lot of the problem we have here, whether it is misinformation, or child sexual exploit is about spread and network effect and aah automating the bad instead of automating the good.
     >> MODERATOR: Very well, automating the bad.  To move on because we have another two questions which I think are relevant.  One is about the dark web.  And perhaps that should go to Cathal.  And another one (?) about regulations.  To the one from (?) is asking what is the proportion of these crimes in the dark web to normal internet abtivity in the internet space?  How do those in the dark web interact with children.  I think we can apply this question to the COVID-19 pandemic.  We gave an example of one of the forms within the dark net and that form was Pirkly -- those couple of forms actually and they were particularly concerned with what they called capping which is capturing video teams that are proaccused by children for various different reasons.  And so it can be that they are produced because the child is being sexually extorted or co-othersed or they are exchanging material with a peer.  It can be that they believe they are exchanging with a peer but it is actually an adult or it can be that they are broadcasting unfortunately, and their own abuse online in order to get likes and to gain popularity and at that time status and so on, which is to me rather tragic but it is the reality.
     And what we saw was that there was an increase in material being formed in relation to capping and there was an additional form in relation to this in order to enable and both had a significant following in terms of numbers and both were on the dark net.  And so to us it was an indication of where their interests lay at that particular time.  And that they saw this as a fruitful and useful way to gather and exchange and distribute data between them 70s and making available to one another in toward be able to have access to it and to read -- to reabuse essentially the children.  The material comes from the different sources in various ways that I described but most come from the net because the interaction between offenders and victims on the dark net is very low because that is not the way the dark net is built.  It is built to ensure that people are anonymized and the identity is not available and making connection takes more effort as it does on the care net.  They will source the material from the care net and then post it on the dark net or begin the relationships that they want to in an open forum and then they will move it to a private forum which is something that we are all very well aware of as a modus on ran die and then in the private form abuse the children themselves.  Occasionally it has been the case that we have seen where groups have formed in the dark net to do this type of abuse particularly the capping and so on.  The proportion of offending directly against children which is taking place in the dark net is very low.  But what the dark net dose is a amplifies and at an order of magnitude the actual abuse and revictimmization of those children through the exchange of that material among those who are frequenting that space and also enables them to aidentify that this type of abuse is okay and an acceptable thing for them within their society to do and that this is the right place to do it because it heptose protect them from being protected.
     >> MODERATOR: It is very clear.  We have six minutes left so we will take one last question before we wrap up.  It is from (?) and asking about how we regulate self-generating materials and attention between the laws protected protecting children from predatory adults.  But now there are rising images by the young children and then if we apply those laws then we will criminalize the children's behavior basement need to defer the behaviors.  Abih ilash is wondering how do we find a balance.  It is a tough question.  Jutta, you want to answer that.
     >> JUTTA CROLL: We need to differentiate between children who are forced or blackmailed to take the images and children who do it deliberately.  I would say it is somehow at a certain age exploring your own sexual orientation and your personal development and it might also be part of that process to take images but then we come to the question that we have been raised earl -- that Beeban raised earlier.  The difference between taking an image and spreading the image and that we need to address that children have the right to have their own identity.  And what about planting the images all over the internet and then they are probably also misused by other people and we need also to talk about how we can stop the spreading of these self generated images.  I would not talk about criminalizing children by law for doing -- for taking images but it might be a criminal act to spread that around the internet.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I think it is a very clear answer.  Do you want to add to that on the particular point, anyone?  Yes, Beeban, please go ahead.
     >> BEEBAN KIDRON: Just to say to underline the fact that actually where the law has been developed without this concept in mind that children might self-generate these images, think we have to decriminalize children and take action.  I would agree 100% with Jutta on this point that there may be some times -- some places where we actually need to make an intervention in existing law because it didn't imagine this scenario.
     And very, very few children should be criminalized for this sort of activity.  I mean only in very, very extreme cases where, you know, not the social sharing.  And there is a problem and I flow there is a problem even in our primary schools which means kids under the age of 11 are being put on the El sex register.  It shouldn't happen.
     >> MODERATOR: I think it is a topic that deserves a session on its own and I will -- I will take the opportunity to refer the participants to a very nice campaign, a video on Europol website that says from the top of my head says no, if I'm not wrong.  It is in all of the European languages.  For those not from Europe, you will find either English-speaking, Spanish-speaking or French-speaking.  And other languages that you might need.  But but it is very well done and speaks for itself and I do use it personally to trigger discussions around the risky behavior of self-generating and solutions.  And, of course, there are other material out there, you can find it in the E-safety commissioner.  The aah stalian E safety commissioner website and other organizations.
     Yes, Jutta?  Sorry, I thought you were raising your hand.  We are wrapping up the session and we have one minute to go.  And I would like to thank the speakers for the valuable presentations., ideas, insights and this are certainly key takeaways that we can, you know, take with us.
     And I'm tasked with doing a report so I have plenty of notes and we recorded the session.  So you have set so many interesting things and very applicable to our respective field of work that I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart and also acknowledging that some of you had to wake up very early this morning to connect and but it is all for the cause as Cathal said at the very ebeginning.  I would like to before I end I would like to make a call to the participants because the IGF this year is initiating a call for voluntary commitments.  Is asking all of the participants and speakers to this year to the virtual IGF to make a pledge to move forward the goals of the Internet Governance Forum and the recommendations from the digital corporation road map.  I invite you from withever vector you belong to go to the website and look for the web form where you can make a commitment so that within the neck year until IGF 2021 you commit to take forward one of the actions and the goal goals of the Internet Governance Forum.  With that, we can end the session today because I suppose we will be cut off if I don't stop now.  I thank all of you and I web you a very good day, if you are starting the day and a good evening if you are anding the day.  Thank you very much to all of the participant.   I hope you enjoyed the session.  Bye bye.  Thank you.  Bye bye.
     >> JUTTA CROLL: Bye bye.  Thank you for excellent moderation.  Bye.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-3-governance-of-blockchain-based-business-dao-model-law^^

>> Good afternoon, this is Selbi IGF.  Please, if you are one of the panelists, kindly raise your hand so I can promote you to the panelist section.  Thank you.  We will be starting very soon.  We are just waiting for our panelists, and then we can start the webinar.  Thank you. 
>> Hello.  We are waiting for the panelists to join the meeting, but we are still trying to locate them.  We are waiting for about 20 minutes and if we don't get them, then we will end the session and move onto another session.  So sorry for the inconvenience.  We are still committed.  The session will be continued.  Thank you very much.  Very sorry about that.
>> Hello, this is Luis Bobo.  Apparently there is no moderator in this session.  The panelists did not arrive.  I'm sorry again for the inconvenience.  We haven't gotten any feedback from the panelists.  We are going to close the meeting.  Thank you.
>> Thank you, yes.  This meeting was expected to be at, I guess 12:10UTC.  I think we should close it.  So please let's end this meeting.
>> Okay.  Thank you very much, and sorry for the inconvenience.  We are sorry for that.  At this point, we will end the meeting and thank you very much for joining.  Have a nice day.  Bye.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-3-lessons-learned-from-the-pandemic-child-rights-and-safety^^

>> MODERATOR: Good morning, good afternoon, good evening, wherever you are.  
     My name is Marie-Laure Lemineur.  I will be the moderator of the session.  I work for an organization call ECPAT International based in Bangkok, Thailand where I am right now.  
     Welcome to our session and thank you for joining.  When I checked roughly an hour ago, we had 83 registered participants.  So I was very pleased to see that we had so many participants.  Thank you once again for joining us today.  
     We'll start with a little bit of housekeeping.  Mentioning that we have four speakers today.  That all of them will be making a presentation.  And then once we are done with the presentations, we would open the floor for questions, comments.  And the overall duration of the session is 90 minutes so I'm hoping that we will have more than 30, perhaps 40 minutes for the questions.  
     And then we will discuss a little bit towards the end of the session the key takeaways from the discussion.  And we will be ready to wrap up.
     So before I give the floor to the first speaker, I would like to tell you a little bit more about the background of each one of our speakers.  We'll start with the speaking order.  
     I will start with the Baroness Beeban Kidron.  You can see all the speakers on the screen, I believe that their videos are on.  
     So Baroness Beeban Kidron is a British filmmaker and an advocate for children's rights in the digital world.  In the House of Lords, Baroness Kidron sits as a crossbench peer.  She sat on the House of Lords Democrat and Digital Technologies Committee Inquiry and the Lords Communications Select Committee.
     Is also the founder and chair of the foundation called the 5Rights Foundation, which is a charity that works to create policy and practical solutions to fill the digital world children and young people deserve.
     Baroness Kidron is also a member of the Youth Foundation for Sustainable Development of the Global Council for Extended Intelligence and Child Rights Policy Guidance Group.  So you can see that Baroness Kidron has a wide, wide experience and her views and insights on the topic will be very valued.  
     Then we have Dr. Amanda Third, who is a research fellow in the Institute for Culture and Society at Western Sydney University.  Dr. Third is also the co-director of the Young Research Center.  Dr. Third is also the research stream colleague in the Center for Resilience and Inclusive Societies and a faculty associate in the Bergman Klein Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University in the U.S.A.  
     And Professor Third is an international expert in child-centered and participatory research.  And her work investigates children's technology practices, focusing on marginalized groups and wide-based approaches.  
     Professor Third has led child-centered projects to understand children experiences of the digital age in over 70 countries working with partners across corporate, government, and not-for-profit sectors.  And, of course, children themselves.  She has authored plenty of publications.  The last one being "Young People in the Digital Society" in 2019.
     And she's also currently co-authoring the UN Committee on the Right of the Child general comment on children's rights in the digital environment.  
     And we have our third speaker.  On the program description, the session description, you can see the name of Nina Pirk.  Unfortunately, Nina yesterday informed us that she is sick, and we were sorry to hear that.  
     And Ms. Jutta Croll agreed to join us.  She was the Activity Managing Director of the Foundation from 2002 and to 2014.  And from 2014 until 2016 Jutta was the Managing Director of the German Center for Child Protection on the Internet.  
     Jutta has been a long-time child rights advocate, focusing on the child rights -- on the digital rights of children, sorry. Jutta is a member of the IGF Mag and a co-founder of the Dynamic Coalition online safety.  Also, a co-organizer of the session.  And finally, Jutta is a member of the several steering boards and committees at European and national level.  And she works very closely with the Council of Europe.
     Last, but not least, Cathal Delaney is currently working as the head of a team at the European Cybercrime Center, also known as EC3, which was set up, I believe, in 2013.  
     The center is the body of the European Union that is headquartered in the Hague in the Netherlands.  And the Center Coordinates cross-border law enforcement activities against all forms of cybercrime including online child sexual exploitation.  And, of course, the center acts as a center of technical expertise in the matter in this region.  
     So without further ado, I will give the floor to Beeban for the first introductory remarks.  Thank you very much.  Over to you, Beeban.
     >> BEEBAN KIDRON: Thank you so much.  Thank you, colleagues, and hello to everyone who is listening.  
     I will start in a curious way which is what happened to me sometime in April when I got a phone call from a teacher at a school where the children were remote learning.  And she had had an incident where a very, very young child had posted and shared some child sexual abuse.  
     And she was beside herself.  And even though it was lockdown, we agreed, and we met in the school playground outside.  And over a cup of tea and a lot of tears, she explained that in addition to the particular incident she was beside herself because she was supposed to be teaching children remotely but she couldn't trust the technology that she was using.  
     And she said, on the one hand, these children need to learn, they need to be in touch with each other, they need to be in touch with us.  But we are putting them in an environment where almost always we feel that we are pulling them into a world in which they are not ready, and it is not fit for them.  
     I was very moved by this teacher and asked her to keep in touch.  And since then and over the last few months, my in box is absolutely full of messages from teachers and parents who have found out that I have been collating this information.  And some of it is very extreme, some of it is very minor.  
     But the sense of anxiety built up in the teachers of a responsibility of two things pulling them between a child's right to education and their duty and wish to keep those children safe is tearing them apart.  
     Now I want to say that very specifically because these teachers were all in state schools.  And around the same time, I was approached by one of the biggest private school networks globally in many, many countries across the world, nearly 100 schools.  And the CEO of that network rang me up and said we are very proud of ourselves.  Within three weeks, we are now teaching 95% of our lessons online and our kids are in school every day in all corners of the world.  
     And I said this is an absolute triumph, I said what did you do about safeguarding?  And he went pale.  Nothing.  He said what should I do?  
     So those are the two things that have been with me through this pandemic.  And I know that during this session we're going to talk about lots of very different -- lots of very different views on this subject.
     But for me, I think that the pandemic brought into clear focus this terrible normal where we are asking children to be in places that are simply not fit for them.  And we are asking for people who care for children to make decisions that there is no good outcome.  
     Now 1.7 million children cannot have access to a laptop of their own for education.  So we're seeing also a divide there.  Sharing laptops with material that is and settings that are simply not fit for purpose.
     And teachers who have lost contact with -- before we went -- before we came out of the first lockdown and of course we're going into lockdown again tomorrow, but this time we're keeping children in school.  And sharing that teachers lost contact with nearly 40% of children.  
     The government have brought in an emergency law making remote learning compulsory in UK schools so any child not in school during the next wave of lockdown must have access to remote learning by the school.  But they have done nothing, nothing to make that access safe.  That is the picture for a child in the UK.  
     At the same time, I looked at the statistics around a particular product here which many of you will know.  It is called Only Friends.  And I was looking at it because I think as many of you know we are bringing in legislation in the UK, online harms legislation.  And I was looking at it because the government keeps on telling me that small companies must be exempt from this legislation.  
     And Only Friends has less friends has less than 50 employees, but it has 50 million subscribers.  And it has about 700,000 content creators.  And for all of those people who don't really know what it is, it sells access to naked photographs and sexual content.  
     And in about April, in April 2020, earlier this year, it was found that on a single day a third of Twitter profiles globally advertising nudes for sale or similar tags appeared to belong to underage users.
     And many of those were using the British firm Only Friends that would, I believe, be out of scope of the proposed legislation.
     And I find myself thinking that what we are creating and what the pandemic has really brought into sharp relief perhaps the things that we who do this every day already know, but that the general public, family, and even policymakers have not understood is that we are asking children, we are putting children in the center of a very toxic environment.  
     That actually we can no longer look at this issue of child sexual abuse and grooming and the most extreme forms of sexual violence against children as being a thing that bad actors do to individual children.  But we have to start looking at what normal we create and look for the levers to make it a less toxic environment.  
     And that in a world in which it is normal for a child to make some pocket money by selling a nude picture of themselves, that actually creates an environment in which it is also normal for a child to share it on the school remote learning school platform, and it's also then normal to pick up admiration and friends through that process.  
     So really in my work here, I wanted to sort of raise our eyes for a moment and say the levers of change that we must look for have to be systemic.  And they have to deal with some of the normals that children are finding themselves living in and the pressure of actually joining in with those new normals as well as some of the more extreme cases that we are hearing.  
     Now I wanted to also touch on a couple of other issues.  Because it was -- in the questions for the session, I was glad to see it said, you know, what kind of harm, you know, to extend even the kind of harms that children are suffering.  
     And I think that there are two or three things that I have been witnessing in this time from a UK context, which I imagine are relevant elsewhere and I have found very particularly sort of concerning.  
     The first one is about misinformation.  And I think we are all aware specifically of the huge effect of health misinformation and what it actually means.  And I still have in my head a headline from the newspaper of a young man who said I guess it wasn't a hoax as his dying words in America.  
     And I think that the depth of the misinformation around health has been very profound for us all.  
     But what I -- what caught my eye was a report earlier in the summer that said from the Center of Disease Control that said those people with most access to conspiracy theories are the least likely to wash their hands and social distance.  Well, that makes a lot of sense.  
     But also that children, that came out of the same week as the report on children's media access and it was, of course, that children get most of their information online.  
     And I put these two things together and felt a wave of sort of upset that the diet that we were giving children was so poor that access to information, which is something that is theirs by right to have information.  And I felt that their story in the misinformation had not been properly told.  
     And I think that you have to then extrapolate from that of misinformation and the very close relation of anti-vax misinformation which has resulted in many, many millions of children getting measles unnecessarily.  You know, they are the victims of this misinformation.  
     And also what we are seeing here as an increase in radicalization.  And through the summer, again, a huge increase in hate speech and specifically racially-based hate speech in the UK.  
     And so I felt that actually in amongst the harms that children are experiencing now in this world where they don't have the checkpoint of a broader society, that they do have a great deal of time inside and online, that this world that is being created of misinformation is actually -- should be central to our concerns and we must not see it as something that is happening solely to the adult population.
     And then finally, I just wanted to mention the question of domestic violence.  And this has been a huge problem throughout the pandemic here in the UK.
     Not only the strategies that people traditionally use to get away from their oppressor, but also that in the tension of the perpetrator being indoors or losing their job or being anxious, those rates go up.  So it's a sort of a double whammy of abuse and inability to get out.  
     And we have seen huge numbers of children calling help lines for the first time about violence to themselves or, indeed, in the family context.
     And I think that this is something where there are some very good remote services, there are help lines that have been absolutely fundamental to their well-being and to either getting them out or supporting them through those situations.
     And I think that that is possibly where I would like to end to say that in all of my criticism of the environment created by the technology that children are using is we could so easily flip it to create a technology that would bring children their rights and help them flourish, keep them safe.  And that in the end the battle is really about responsibility, about the business model, and about legislation and about mandating a lowest bar of behavior that would actually protect children through these sorts of issues.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Beeban.  Very interesting.  
     You touched upon a wide range of aspects that I think we will go back to when we open the floor.  But your remarks I think sort of lean very well with what, I believe Amanda is planning to say.  
     So over to you, Amanda.  You can field and expand on the remarks we just heard.  Thank you very much.
     >> AMANDA THIRD: Thank you so much.  And thank you very much for organizing this panel. And thanks for the wonderful opening comments.  
     Very early in the pandemic, it was clear that in comparison to other populations such as the elderly, children were not particularly vulnerable to contracting COVID-19.  
     Even so, this crisis has profoundly impacted children around the world.  In just one sign that the impacts on children are significant, our children's help lines in high income countries have reported increased -- (microphone muted).
     >> MODERATOR: Amanda, you were muted suddenly.  I don't know why.
     >> AMANDA THIRD: I just got a message that the host muted me.
     >> MODERATOR: Can you go backwards like a couple of seconds.
     >> AMANDA THIRD:  So I was just saying that the crisis has profoundly impacted children.  
     And one sign of this is that 25% -- that help lines are experiencing a 25% increase in volume in children accessing their services.  So internationally the pandemic has registered as a crisis.
     So I just want to begin with two notes how we might think about crisis in relation to children, their rights, and technology.
     Firstly, the word crisis comes from the Greek.  But in the original meaning the emphasis is not so much on the cataclysmic event but on the process of taking the necessary decisions to deal with the cataclysmic event.  
     Crisis demands that we envision the change that we want to see and go after it aggressively.  I'm shortly going to suggest that the time is now to center children’s rights as we take decisions about the important role that technology has to play in navigating the crises.  
     Secondly, COVID-19 will be a formative experience for this generation of children.  But it is unlikely to be the only major crisis that shapes their sense of the world and their sense of safety.  For Australian children, the pandemic was immediately preceded by the national emergency of the devastating bush fires.  
     For children in the Pacific, the pandemic followed by vicious cyclones.  And in Cambodia and Viet Nam, catastrophic floods are currently compounding the effects of the pandemic.  
     In short, as we make decisions, we must be very careful not to constrain our thinking to individual crises, though they might grab our attention.
     We must use this moment to think expansively about how to address the intersecting crises that shape children's lives both now and in the future, be it those that confront us starkly, or those that are burning more slowly such as the climate crisis.  Because if children’s rights are challenged now, this is not a temporary situation.  
     Throughout the pandemic there has been a strong emphasis on managing the medical dimensions of the pandemic and its response.  However, for children, as for adults, the pandemic has been more than a health crisis.  It has been and continues to be a crisis in children's social worlds.  
     Emerging research shows that for many children, the pandemic constituted an unprecedented disruption to their everyday routines, their relationships, their sense of security, certainty, and fundamental safety.  
     The confidence that comes from predictable routines or the reliable comfort of strong and stable parents and relatives was suddenly thrown into disarray.
     So my team's research to develop child-centered indicators for violence prevention online and offline in the Philippines shows that children's concept of safety depends very much on the stability of their immediate relationships.  Or we might say that safety is social and relational so children's safety might already have said to have been compromised by mere fact of the scale of disruption in their social networks.  
     Compounding this, and among other factors, children have also been exposed to streams of information of varying quality via social media and video sharing platforms, as Beeban was just indicating, but also via the fragments of news or nervous conversations between parents and carers that they overheard.
     It is no wonder then that children are reporting heightened distress.  But recent research such as that on the screen at the moment, shows that the possibility that children or their family members might contract the virus is very low down on children's list of immediate concerns.
     Rather, they report a heightened sense of worry, stress, feeling trapped, frustration, anger, sadness, loss and grief.  And of not knowing how to deal with these often new and powerful emotions.  They feel disconnected from their peer networks, which for many is a vital source for their well-being and their resilience.  
     They struggled to adapt to online education.  And much of the transition to online learning took place on the fly and as such wasn't always underpinned by good pedagogy, again as Beeban has just talked about.
     And family tensions caused by being in closed quarters with the same people day in and day out, often exacerbated by the financial pressures in families that faced job losses, unstable work, or business closures and so on.  
     Through this period of momentous disruption, technology has played a more and more prominent role in the lives of many children.  And, of course, we have to qualify this statement with the very careful acknowledgement that not all children have regular and reliable access to technology.
     And this raises a very important set of issues about how such children can enact their rights in the context of a pandemic that's unfolding in the digital age.  
     There is a very real possibility that crises such as the present one will further marginalize those that experience digital exclusion.  But for those children with access, while there are concerns that rapid increases in children's screen time during the pandemic have exposed them to increased risks of harm -- and I will say more about this a moment -- technology has also provided a crucial point of continuity and connection for children.  
     It has enabled them to maintain connection with peers, to stay engaged at some level with their schooling and it provides a very important means of relaxation and entertainment.
     But many of the technology-based strategies that we have put in place to sustain life under the pandemic have been assembled quickly without attention to the risks of harm or how to maximize the full potential of technology to support a sense of safety and well-being in this time of disruption.  
     Now, more than ever, despite the urgent issues that we confront, it is important that we pause and step carefully.  What then of children's rights? How should we think about children's rights in the context of this pandemic and other crises?  
     While children's right to physical and mental health is obviously most affected negatively and positively by technology during a pandemic, we must remember that there is much more at stake than their right to health.
     The pandemic unfolding in a digital age has significant implications for children's rights to information, education, privacy, identity, rest, leisure, play, and adequate standard of living, protection from forms of physical and mental abuse and exploitation and much more.
     It also differentially impacts the rights of children living with disability, adoptees, refugees, and those in institutional care or situations of vulnerability.  
     So As the global community responds, we have to remember the indivisibility of children's rights.  As the Convention stipulates and as the team led by the 5Rights Foundation has insisted on while drafting the UNCRC general comment on children’s rights in the digital environment, a document that we hope will guide our thinking in relation to child rights, technology, and the pandemic, there is no hierarchy of children's rights.  
     They -- they must be progressively realized in combination.  So we must resist the temptation to only think about children's right to health.
     With this in mind, I want to briefly reflect on some of the ways that children's rights are impacted by technology in this time of crisis and what this means for their safety.  
     So we know that children don't distinguish the online and offline in the ways that adults often do, but rather they move flexibly across online and offline spaces and they often interact, learn, and participate both in offline and online platforms simultaneously.
     Nonetheless, the majority of children primarily use the internet and digital technology to support and sustain face-to-face interactions. 
     Children have emphasized that during the pandemic, while technologically mediated relationships have been important to them, they can't replace their face-to-face interactions.  And I think it's useful here to remember that under the conditions of the pandemic our communication has had to be very intentional rather than incidental.  There is no bumping into people and having a casual chat.  You have to reach out and communicate.
     So children are saying that when their engagement with other people in their world moves solely online, it is not the case that the technological simply substitutes for face-to-face interaction when physical contact becomes impossible.  
     Being unable to interact with their peer’s challenges children's well-being.  Indeed, to the extent that the pandemic impacts children's right to health, it is their mental health, a form of safety whose importance is often underestimated that is perhaps most of concern.
     A major challenge for us is how do we augment existing platforms and technology-based services to support children's mental health, well-being, and their right to safety.  
     We know that the risks of harm to children online are likely to have increased during the pandemic.  Research shows that increased time online does, indeed, augment the likelihood that children will encounter risks of harm.  And while we also know that more time online enables children to develop their digital literacies and their capacities to manage these risks, arguably they have not had the opportunities to do so with the right structures of support and guidance around them given that they have been largely reliant on family members who themselves are in crisis.  
     Purely by the fact of spending more time online the possibility children are exposed to forms of digitally mediated harm have increased.  We know that for those children who were already vulnerable to forms of violence the risks are accentuated.  For the vast majority of children, the consequence is that they spend increased amounts of time at home and not all children's homes are safe spaces that support and sustain them.
     The domestic violence community, for example, is deeply concerned about rising rates of internet partner violence and the effects that this is having on children.  Furthermore, the usual structures of visibility and face-to-face accountability that regulate the behaviors of perpetrators of violence are currently compromised.  We need to think creatively in earnest and across sectors about how we use technology to identify and counter the violence that is taking place behind closed doors.  
     And we need to think in even more creative ways about how to leverage technology to support child victims of violence, whether it is offline, online or both.  If there is a glimmer of hope, it is that these issues which the child protection community has known about, are finally more visible in public and policy debate.  
     There is cause, I think, for cautious optimism that this pandemic provides an opportunity to advance children's right to protection from very serious forms of violence.
     One effect I think of this pandemic has been to challenge most people's sense of privacy.  Living in close quarters is very challenging.  But, of course, again, by virtue of intensified time online, children are evermore exposed to the not always explicit or well explained data collection practices of technology companies with potentially significant implications for their right to privacy.  
     These incursions on privacy have only been compounded by contact tracing absent other surveillance technologies that are implemented to protect populations.  But if surveillance of the general population has increased, the privacy rights of those children who live in abusive families are severely compromised.
     Again, as Beeban alluded to, technology in that context potentially amplifies the mechanisms of control that are available to perpetrators of child abuse and other forms of exploitation and violence.  While the way forward is anything but clear, we can't shy away from these difficult questions.
     Crises, and this is especially true of a crisis such as the COVID-19 pandemic, tend to throw us into the immediacy of the present, obscure the past and the future.
     Across cultures, children are seen to represent the future.  To center the needs of children as we address crises then would be to shift us beyond the sole focus on the present moment of disruption and to bring the future into play.
     So thinking about children, centering children is a vital tool in counteracting the tendency for short-termism.
     If children are seen to represent the future, they also represent our collective hopes for a better world.  Indeed, alongside their fears, children are also articulating a range of positive experiences as a consequence of the pandemic.  
     So far the consultations have shown that amidst the challenges children have appreciated the opportunity to spend more time with family outside the usual routine. They found strength in their connection with those family members, and they have learned to appreciate the small things.  And many also have enjoyed, even relished being online.
     In short, if technology can undermine children's rights, it's also clear that it has the ability to sustain children's rights in a time of crisis.  And yet we are yet to still imagine all the ways that technology can be harnessed to do so.  
     As we proceed, it is important that we don't lose sight of the ways that this moment might enable us to invent new purposes for technology which enable children and their communities to navigate crises more effectively, but also technologies that can support us to work towards a world in which children and the adults in their lives can lead more equitable and fulfilling lives.  
     There is no time like now for thinking about how to leverage technology for children's rights.  The pandemic has shown us unequivocally that the task is both urgent and necessary.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Amanda. 
     It is interesting and I think it's a good complement to the remarks that Beeban made at the very beginning.  And I took notes of some key comments that you made, and I would like to go back to it when we open the floor.
     Before I pass on the baton to Jutta, I would like to remind all of the participants that there is a Q&A section where they can write down their questions for the speakers when we are done with the presentation.  So far we have four questions.  
     So please feel free to write down the questions and we will go back to them. 
     So, Jutta, over to you and then we will finish with Cathal.  Thank you very much.  Unmute myself.
     >> JUTTA CROLL: Thank you very much.  I have shared my screen now.  Can you see my slides?  I see someone nodding so that is fine.
     >> MODERATOR: Sorry, can you make it the huge screen?  Because we can see the detail.  There you are.  Thank you.
     >> JUTTA CROLL: Wonderful.  So my name is Jutta Croll.  I'm heading the project Children's Rights and Child Protection in the Digital World for four years now.  And I'm happy to take over for my colleague Nina Pirk from the German help line.
     We have been working within the project with help lines from Germany in regard of their compliance with the GDPR and also at the same time respecting the rights of the child.  
     And the German help line (speaking in non-English).  
     There are several the children can reach out to counseling by young people and they can reach out to counseling given by adults.  
     So looking at the figures you can see that in all three parts of the work they are doing they had a huge increase during the pandemic.  these are statistics until April so for the time that children and families have been in lockdown.  And especially an increase in the online counseling for children, but also in the parents' telephone hotline where it increased by 54% from March to April.  
     Having a deeper look into the details, the helpline remained open for all of the time.  And they increased even the times when children can reach out, extended them during April with plus 10 hours per week for the child help line and the chat.  And also 30 hours per week for the parent’s helpline to address all of the calls and messages they received.
     The details of the reports they had to address saw a bit different data like we heard from Beeban before.  So they had expected to have more context about domestic violence, about grooming and potentially harmful content, but that was -- that increase was not as much as was expected.
     But they had an increase in reports about violence which was physical, emotional, and also sexual violence.  Children had a lot of reports or just questions about love and relationship online and also about cyber bullying.  So it was not only harm, it was also like positive experience where they had questions regarding that.
     And then the question that came from parents like about gaming, data protection and excessive use were less relevant for the children, but they came in from the parents.
     We have -- I have here some examples from Nina from questions that parents put to the help line.  This was related to where can I find suitable content for children?  What might be the possible risks if my children are more and more hours online?  And how can I talk to my children about these risks?
     Many parents felt overwhelmed with the situation and they were frustrated and got feelings like am I a bad parent?  What shall I do?  But also very, very expressive issues like a son sent some nude pictures to someone he met online and now he is bullied, how can I help him to be protected.
     And issues that are not only related to the pandemic but that also came up during this time of crisis.  And a 13-year-old daughter having a relationship online to an adult and how can I cope with that situation.
     Things that children reported were somehow different.  They felt they are behind with their tasks for school and parents weren't able to help them.  So they are afraid of the future.  But also parents took away the phone so they could not be able to stay in contact with their peers and felt angry but also disappointed about the situation.
     And then children that parents were still working, were not in lockdown, so the children felt alone at home, were scared and sad and couldn't even do something about that.
     And then also children who lived in the families where the parents had problems with each other where there was fights so they were afraid of the situation.  So it's a huge picture of different issues the help line had to deal with.  It was not in all ways the thing that they had expected, which happened during lockdown and the pandemic.  
     And we even got reports from another help line who said that they got more reports about physical, sexual abuse that happened before the pandemic.  So these children somehow during the pandemic when they came -- were not in physical contact with their -- with the offender, they felt more confident to report to a help line to search for counseling.
     So they somehow opened up in that situation when they were not in direct contact, for example, in the sports club or even at school or kindergarten with the offender that they felt cared about.  
     So we have different developments in that situation.  And I do think we are still in the situation that we have not enough means, not sufficient means to deal with the situation.  Help lines are overwhelmed.  They have a lot of reports of parents overwhelmed.  We still need to develop strategies to ensure that people -- that children can benefit from the rights that are dedicated to them, that they can exercise their rights and at the same time being safe.
     Thank you so much for listening.  And I'm ready to take your questions.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Jutta.  Very interesting remarks.  
     So we started with Beeban and Amanda who painted the broad picture around different wide range of children's rights.  Now we have the perspective of a frontline service provider, help line that is attending to calls of the children.  And you shared some interesting data that we can comment in a few minutes.
     And now we also will have the perspective of a service provider, frontline provider which is a law enforcement agency.  And then we can have very interesting discussions around some of your comments and some of the data you are sharing.  Over to you, Cathal.  Thank you very much.
     >> CATHAL DELANEY: Thank you very much.  Let me share my screen.  
     Okay.  So my name is Cathal Delaney, as Marie-Laure introduced me at the beginning.  I'm Team Director, Europol.  dealing with child exploitation and abuse, online and offline related crimes. 
     So I wanted to pick up on from the other speakers and from the presentations that have been made so far is that law enforcement is not always viewed in terms of what we do in relation to children's rights.  But in this area in particular, we are very much focused on the child and their rights and their status as a victim when crimes are wielded against them.  And particularly in relation to sexual exploitation and abuse.  
     We take the role as being inherently protective of those rights and trying to enforce those rights and their right to protection and their right to privacy.  These are very much central to what we are trying do in law enforcement when we are pursuing those who will exploit and abuse sexually children online and offline.  And to make those children -- to try to protect them from that abuse and to protect them from it continuing into the future as well.
     An effective way that we look at this at Europol -- Europol is an agency which is intended to support law enforcement throughout Europe in their work in different crime areas where two or more Member States are affected by the crime, the victim, and different matters that need to be investigated.  
     And the way that we look at doing this is through these four different steps -- four different areas.  I won't call them steps because they don't necessarily follow one another.
     You have, most importantly, a collaboration.  So the collaboration that we have with our law enforcement partners and collaboration that we have with the public and the private sector and with nongovernmental organizations and with the different stakeholders who are involved in the different crime areas in our area in particular in relation to children and their sexual exploitation.
     And following from that then we have an operational response which is obviously a huge part of the law enforcement responses to actually do something about what we are being told is happening and take action in relation to that.  And our role rather at Europol is to support the Member States law enforcement agencies in taking those actions and trying to ensure with them that the best possible result comes from those actions.  
     And then we have the strategic response which is looking at the picture of what is going on and how we can use that picture to better protect children and also to contribute to the decisions that are being made by policy makers and by the decision makers both in the Member States and the EU level to inform them about how things can improve and what are the steps that need to be taken to do that.
     And then prevention and education which is one of the very few areas that Europol reaches out directly to the public for.  And that is providing different materials, advice, and ways for the public to protect themselves, protect their children and become more educated about what is happening in the area.  And so that they can do that.
     So in terms of operational response, we, as I said, are very focused on the children and means that we focus first on the identification of the victim.  In any investigation, the first question we ask is where is the victim and how can we help them?
     And we sometimes ascertain that through different conventional methods of investigation with our -- with the partners, with the agencies that have asked for our support.  And we have victim identification function at Europol that we built over the last number of years.  And it is a part of the team that drives the victim identification task forces which take place every year.  One is taking place at the moment.
     And we use the information we gather from that victim identification process and our investigation process. And when I say we, I mean all of the investigators involved in this.  And we use that information to try to determine where a child is so that we can enable them to be reached by the national law enforcement agency responsible in the jurisdiction.
     And doing that also involves intelligence analysis and technical support intelligence analysis for information that we store in our databases about the offenders and their activities and so on.  And the technical support on the ground, on the spot, or at Europol headquarters with the technical expertise and knowledge that they our specialists have in this particular area.  
     And the result of that during the lockdown period was that we were able to support remotely several operations.  One example here was a case in Italy where our colleagues in Australia discovered material online that they believed was recent abuse of a child.  And through the examination of that material and the cooperation of several different jurisdictions that we coordinated, several different law enforcement agencies in Europe, it was possible to discover the particular region in Italy where we believe that the abuse was taking place.
     And then the colleagues in Italy were able to inform their local investigators there about the circumstances of the case and the information that they had related to the suspect.  And ultimately that led to the identification of the suspect and the victim, a young girl, a child who had been abused by him within 10 days of those videos being posted online, which is quite a significant achievement in that particular difficult circumstances.
     And another example was in Spain, where similarly the national agency were able to conduct a search remotely based on information that they had previously received and information that we had added to, again, to rescue a male child in that case, a boy, and to discover the identity of his abuser as well and take him before the courts to be dealt with according to justice.
     And then also we had a case in France where we actually supported on the ground with the technical and intelligence support leading to the arrest of a suspect there.  And the -- and the safety of two of the children -- two children that he had been abusing himself.  
     So each of those are just illustrations of the extent of the efforts that we would go to in order to ensure that children who are being abused online and whose abuse had been posted online that we will do everything that we possibly can to support the law enforcement agencies in Europe and beyond in ensuring that that information gets to where it needs to be acted upon and that children are made safe as a result.  And this is just some additional information in relation to the Italian case that I spoke about already.
     The information that comes from those cases is added to the information that we already have at Europol.  And we have the video analysis system which is for victim identification.  And in the system at the moment we have more than 50 million images and videos that are unique.  And these are not multiple copies.  These are unique images and videos of child sexual exploitation abuse.  
     And because of the efforts that we have made over the last number of years and with our partners through vehicles like the victim identification task force which we hold at least once a year, sometimes twice, we have managed to examine just 20% of that material.  
     And that is to give you an idea of the scale of the problem that we face in relation to the amount of material that is out there.  And I know that network, they have given statistics previously in relation to possibly that many and more images and videos appearing online every year as well.
     And the difficulty, of course, for any child whose abuse has been recorded and whose abuse has been distributed is that there is every possibility that they will at some stage at least be fearful that they will be recognized on the street because -- by somebody who has viewed material in relation to them, who have seen material in which they were exploited and abused.  And that that person could recognize them on the street.
     And this through survivor surveys carried out by the C3N in Canada and other collaborators have established that this is a very real fear for victims.  And you can see how damaging and difficult that would be for them as they go through their lives.
     And what we do at Europol is we have a very strict privacy and data protection regime.  And within our own team, that privacy and data protection regime is very strong.  And we -- because we recognize the importance of the information that we receive not only in terms of criminal intelligence but that it is material in which children have been abused and in which we want to do our very best to ensure that those children and the abuse material that is there is not any further exposed than it absolutely needs to be and is only seen by those who need to see it, and that there is not a possibility for those children to be re-victimized in the context of the investigations that we support and in the ways that we support them as well.
     So in looking then at the strategic response in relation to what we saw during the pandemic, we produced three public reports during that time.  First one is catching the virus.  And the second one was at the beginning of April just within four weeks of the lockdown beginning.  And then we had beyond the pandemic which is at the end of April.  And then we had a dedicated report in relation to child sexual exploitation and abuse, exploiting isolation. And that was published on the 19th of June this year.  
     In each of those reports what we wanted to do as a team was to emphasize what the impact and what the crisis seemed to be having in relation to children and how it could be the case that both the public and decision makers could be properly educated and steps could be identified for them to try to mitigate the damage being done.
     So we looked at -- in the first report, we looked at what the situation appeared to be with information that we got from our law enforcement partners and from the various other sources, and we saw that there did seem to be a problem.
     I won't reiterate again what Dr. Beeban and Dr. Third have already said because it pointed out that the time is likely to become obvious during the pandemic in relation to the children themselves and now which Dr. Third said have become impossible to verify basically.
     In the second report then, we looked at what the future situation was likely to be.  And in the dedicated report.  And then we looked at the whole range of data sources to try to establish what the full picture was and how that picture could be mitigated through the actions of both law enforcement, policy and decision makers, and the actions of the public themselves.
     And what we did from the information was that we produced prevention and education advice for the public and obviously for the different levels of the public, the carers, parents and the children themselves.  And working in collaboration with the safety commissioners and office in Australia and producing the global online safety advice for parents and carers in the European context and adopting what they already produced.  
     Producing videos and information and -- yeah, information for the different levels of parents and children to inform them of what could be done to help them to not be vulnerable in this situation.
     And I think going back to what has been said already and the difficulty of potentially damaging children's privacy during this time and the right to privacy for those children who have access to the internet is very much dependent on having access to this type of information where parents can be educated about what it is that they need to do in engaging with their children and conversing with them and discussing with them what it is that a parent is trying to do in protecting them.  That they are not trying to take away their rights but rather they're trying to supplement them and strengthen them by telling the child what it is that they are trying to do and including them in the conversation.  
     And by doing that to hopefully motivate the child to take this as something that they also have a part in, that they have a role in, and that they need to understand and to take seriously in order to protect their own rights in the future and be able to do that as well.
     In the end of the day, it is very much the case that whatever way we look at this, there is no way that law enforcement can solve this problem on their own.  And we don't want to solve it on our own.  We want to solve it in collaboration with partners, whether those partners are in the public sector, in the private sector, with non-governmental organizations, and with bodies like the governance forum. 
     We want to be working with you in order to solve this problem because it is only by doing that, by having all of us working on it together that we can be effective and that we can produce a result which at the end of the day will protect the rights of children whether they are to health, whether they are to protection or privacy.  And that is something that we as a law enforcement agency at Europol are very focused on and that we as a community of investigators who are very much focused on protecting children and protecting their rights and also want to achieve as well.
     Thank you very much for the invitation and for your attention as well.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Cathal.  Once again, very interesting.  And thank you for bringing in the perspective of the victims.  
     And perhaps for those who may not be familiar with this field of work, starting your presentation by mentioning that the work that you do as an agency is victim focused and centered is something that shouldn't be taken for granted for all law enforcement agencies, especially 15-20 years ago.  
     This had been a very positive progress made by major law enforcement agency, the national and regional and international level that we have witness, and we thank you for that.  
     So, and also thank you for ending on a positive note, mentioning the fact that this issue is really about collaboration, thinking of responses and solutions.  We need to think collectively, and I think this panel is actually a good sort of example of that.  
     Because we are bringing in expertise across sectors from academia, from NGO, from law enforcement so that we can all together put our brains together to look at the problem and the solutions.
     So I would like to go back to some questions that were spelled out in the Q&A section that are actually linked to those points.  They are -- I mean they are all very interesting.  
     I will start perhaps with one on photo DNA because it is sort of linked to the topic of the volume what Cathal was referring to right now.
     And John Carr is asking if you are aware what is happening at the European parliament in relation to the use of a proactive tool that is called photo DNA and potentially its ban and the ban of other proactive tolls to detect grooming and other illegal content.
     And John is saying that the pandemic is reminding us or has reminded us that those two are very important.  And can we have your thoughts on that?  I don't know, Cathal, or some of the other speakers.  I don't want to put you on the spot.  If not Cathal, other speakers.  Yes, Jutta?
     >> JUTTA CROLL: Thank you for giving me the floor.  
     I do think this is also related to the other question that we got in the question and answer section as well from Maimuna Jeng, I hope I pronounced that correctly, who is asking whether these practices like using photo DNA to a detect child sexual abuse material might also be a kind of censoring of the sexual expression of people, especially feminists, he or she writes on the internet.  
     And I think do it is very important to explain from the start that we are not talking about censorship in any way.  We are talking about fighting child sexual abuse material with the means of those tools like photo DNA.
     So that is not about suppressing freedom of expression. In the other way, it is ensuring that children's rights not only to safety, but they also have the right to freedom of expression.  And we need to ensure that children can exercise that right in a safe environment.  So I don't think we are -- we can achieve something if we are talking about whether it is censorship or not.  We need technical tools and I'm pretty sure that Cathal can go more into details how helpful these tools are.  
     And that they are especially, as far as I know -- and I'm not a technician -- photo DNA has nothing to do with mass surveillance.  It is not like surveilling or monitoring the interaction of people.  It is discovering files and images.  But you can explain better, I think.
     >> CATHAL DELANEY: I will take that as well.
     I have to be a little careful because at the end of the day Europol is a UA agency so we're not going to comment on any political developments or anything like that.  And John knows that as well.
     And so let me talk a little bit about the technical issue that Jutta brought up.
     So the purpose of these types of tools is that they will detect material relating to child sexual exploitation and abuse in platforms where that is being distributed.  As Jutta said, they are not being used in order to suppress freedom of speech but rather to -- for a very particular defined purpose in order to detect this material and to inform law enforcement about it, which reaches the law enforcement Member States, 18 of them, through Europol in relation to referrals that are made through the mandatory reporting in the U.S. and through the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children there.  And those number have been increasing the last couple of years to a significant extent.
     And in relation to what is the legislation that was proposed by the commission earlier this year -- and Europol obviously applauds that this legislation was produced and then respects the role of the Europe parliamentary and council institutions in deciding how that legislation is to be implemented.  
     So, yeah, I -- I mean what I understand -- I'm not defending the legislation.  What I understand is that what it seeks to do is to maintain the status quo and not to go beyond what is already the situation and to close a gap between legislation which comes in to force the 20th of December this year and other legislation that they hope to introduce next year in order to close this gap basically in the law that otherwise exists.  
     That is what our position on it is and the technical aspect that I think needs to be understood about it.  And about the other technologies that are being used to do the same thing.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Beeban, you raised your hand.  You wanted to add something about this topic?
     >> BEEBAN KIDRON: I think -- first of all, before I speak, I want to thank Cathal and all of the colleagues at Europol for what they do on the frontline and we really recognize that that is different from those of us who talk about policy, and thank you very much.
     But I think I can't make a political point just like you can't.  And I think I would like to make a slightly broader political point.  
     I'm disappointed that policy makers have sort of been backed into a corner about talking about freedom of speech versus child sexual material protection and the other protections that we see.
     I just want to make this analogy.  It is like if in the milk system we put a little bit of poison and every 10,000 over breakfast somebody got sick, we wouldn't sitting there going on the one hand, freedom, and on the other hand protection.  We simply don't have the right framing in this virtual world.
     And the framing that I would like to see policy makers take because I accept some of the arguments about the tool itself.  But let's do it this way and say if you cannot do your very profitable business without carrying, you know, industrial level of child sexual abuse, then you are not fit to -- you are not fit to trade.
     So I see it as a business practice issue.  And that the solutions then will have a lot more attention and the solutions will have to be much more effective.  Unless you can do that, it is -- it is a not fit purpose.
     And I haven't -- you know, again, I think I said it at the end of my opening remarks, you know, this technology is marvelous.  Look at what we are doing, we are in different parts of the world all speaking together.  The truth of the matter is we have got to have a much more zero kind of attitude for this and say it is not fit for purpose.  So what are you going to do with it?
     And maybe new tools and maybe these tools and some restrictions to their own services and their own sprint, but it is not about freedom of speech.  That is not an unqualified freedom against all other freedoms, and these are private companies.  
     They may be the public highway, that is something we allowed, but they are private companies and not fit for trade if this is the trade that they enable.
     >> MODERATOR: I would like to jump in and link what you just said, Beeban, to a question that Sonya Livingston is asking about solutions.  And Sonya is saying that the panel has raised a very troubling set of problems facing -- sorry, I missed -- oh, God, I lost the question.  Where is it?
     My apologies.  A set of problems facing children during the pandemic.  So to your point, Beeban, what immediate actions can you call for from the government or from the industry?  Can you think of something very specific?  You were talking about being the industry perhaps.
     >> BEEBAN KIDRON: I think we have to be careful because the short-term things we call for are just not the whole solution, and it is always a very difficult place to be.  I think, you know, I would like to see rigorous application of their own age restrictions, yeah.
     Right now, you know, so it doesn't solve the whole problem, but it does mean that 8-year-olds aren't using services that they just don't have the maturity to deal with.  And I think that there is certain parts of their design they should disable immediately.  And I have talked to some of them about this.
     But and I -- and I -- maybe I could just stop on this exact point which is, you know, why is it that it is routine and normalized that strange adults are introduced to children as friend requests?  I mean in what world does that make sense when at the front line, you know, colleagues are trying to deal with grooming and child sexual abuse.
     And actually I had a recent conversation with a senior safeguarding police officer in one of the nations and we talked about -- and he went back and looked at past cases.  And he actually started seeing how kids were being introduced, you know, through these benign apparently things.  This is just a commercial thing for their own network effect.
     So we have got to, you know -- it should not be that a child is offered friend requests of adult strangers period.  They don't need it to make the system work.
     So I think my long-term thing is that we have to start doing impact assessments on services.  We have to see where the risks are.  Take out the risk because the risk is a harm that hasn't happened yet.  And that would mean our colleagues who are dealing with harm at the other end, ya, would have a whole lot less to do if we made it a little bit more difficult and less sticky in the first place.  
     I actually think we need a wholesale regulation, I think we need algorithmic oversight.  I think the other big thing we have to make a difference on here is the difference between individual pieces of content and enabling them to spread.
     These are two different processes.  One is a bad actor, and one is a business model.  Allowing, enabling that spread is also criminal in my view.  So I think there are things -- and I don't want to take all of the time -- but there are literally a whole host of things.  
     And in terms of 5Rights, you know, who I'm talking about, we have a very good publication on the website saying priorities for the online homes bill which doesn't cover all of this but covers a few pieces of it.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  So we're talking here about algorithmic amplification, right?
     >> BEEBAN KIDRON: Yeah.  I mean if you think of me sitting in this room alone, whatever I put up, only those who try and come to find and see it.  If you deliver it and spread it around the world, therein lies the problem.  
     However bad, if it is isolated in one place, ya, and this is something that I don't think policy makers are quite yet attuned to.  But a lot of the problem we have here, whether it is misinformation or child sexual exploit is about spread, is about network effect, and actually is about automating the bad instead of automating the good.
     >> MODERATOR: Very well.  Automating the bad.  
     So to move on because we have another two questions which I think are very relevant.  One is about the dark web.  And again, perhaps that should go to Cathal.  
     And another one is from Abhilash about self-generated images and regulations.  So the one from Sivasubramanian Muthusamy is asking what is the proportion of these crimes in the dark web to that of relatively normal internet activity in the internet space?  
     Or how do those from the dark web connect to and interact with children?  I think we can apply this question to the COVID-19 pandemic.  
     >> CATHAL DELANEY: We gave an example of one of the forms within the dark net.  And that form was particularly -- those couple of forms actually and they were particularly concerned with what they called capping which is capturing video streams that are produced by children for various different reasons.  
     And so it can be that they are produced because the child is being sexually extorted or coerced.  It can be that they are exchanging material with a peer.  It can be that they believe they are exchanging with a peer, but it is actually an adult.  Or it can be that they are broadcasting unfortunately, and their own abuse online in order to get likes and to gain popularity and status and so on, which is to me rather tragic, but it is the reality.
     And what we saw was that there was an increase in material being formed in relation to capping.  And there was an additional form in relation to this in order to enable it.  And both of them had a significant following in terms of numbers and both were on the dark net.  
     And so to us it was an indication of where their interests lay at that particular time.  And that they saw this as a fruitful and useful way to gather and exchange and distribute data between themselves and make it available to one another in order toe able to have access to it and to reabuse essentially these children.  
     The material comes from the different sources in various ways that I described but most come from the internet because the interaction between offenders and victims on the dark net is very low because that is not the way the dark net is built.  
     It is built to ensure that people are anonymized and that their identity is not available.  And making connections takes more effort there than it does on the care net.  
     What they will do is they will source this material from the care net and then post it on the dark net.  Or they will begin the relationships that they want to in an open forum, and then they will move it to a private forum, which is something that we are all very well aware of as a modus operandi.  And then within that private forum they will then abuse the children themselves.  
     Occasionally it has been the case that we have seen where groups have formed in the dark net in order to do this type of abuse, particularly the capping and so on.  So the proportion of offending directly against children which is taking place in the dark net is very low.  But what the dark net does is it amplifies and at an order of magnitude the actual abuse and re-victimization of those children through the exchange of that material among those who are frequenting that space.  
     And it also enables them to amplify the idea among themselves that this type of abuse is okay, that it's an acceptable thing for them within their society to do and that this is the right place to do it because it protects them from being detected.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Cahal.  We'll move on.  We have six minutes left so we will take one last question before we wrap up.  
     It is from Abhilash Nair and asking an interesting question about how we regulate self-generating materials and the tension between the laws that criminalize the child sexually abusive material that they were drafted with the objective of protecting children from predatory adults.  
     But now we think that the data is suggesting that there are rising self-generating images by the young children themselves.  And then if we apply those laws then we will criminalize the children's behavior.  But at the same time we need to deter the behaviors.  
     So Abhilash is wondering what the panel thinks, how do we find a balance?  It is a tough question.  Jutta, you want to answer that?
     >> JUTTA CROLL: Yes, only a quick answer.  I do believe we need to differentiate between children who are forced or even blackmailed to take these images and children who do it deliberately.  
     I would say it is somehow at a certain age exploring your own sexual orientation and your personal development, it might also be part of that process to take images.  But then we come to the question that Beeban raised earlier.  It's the difference between taking an image and spreading the image.  
     And that we need to address the issue that of course children have to develop their own personality, the right to have their own identity and sexual orientation is part of that process.  And what about planting the images all over the internet and then they are probably also misused by other people.  
     And so we need also to talk about how we can stop the spreading of these self-generated images.  I would not talk about criminalizing children by law for doing -- for taking images, but it might be a criminal act to spread that around the internet.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I think it is a very clear answer.  Do you want to add to that on the particular point, anyone?  Yes, Beeban, please go ahead.
     >> BEEBAN KIDRON: Just to say to underline the fact that actually where the law has been developed without this concept in mind that children might self-generate these images, I think we have to decriminalize children, so we have to take action.  
     So I would agree 100% with Jutta on this point that there may be some times -- some places where we actually need to make an intervention in existing law because it didn't imagine this scenario.
     And very, very few children should be criminalized for this sort of activity.  I mean only in very, very extreme cases where -- you know, not the social sharing.  And there is a problem and I know there is a problem even in our primary schools which means kids under the age of 11 are being put on the sex register.  That's just -- it shouldn't happen.
     >> MODERATOR: I think it is a topic that deserves a session on its own.  
     And I will -- I will take the opportunity to refer the participants to a very nice campaign, a video that is on Europol website that says from the top of my head says no.  If I'm not wrong, it is in all of the European languages.  
     For those not from Europe, you will find either English-speaking, Spanish-speaking or French-speaking and other languages that you might need.  But it is very well done and speaks for itself.  
     And I do use it personally to trigger discussions around the risky behavior of self-generating and solutions.  And, of course, there are other material out there.  You can find it in the eSafety commissioner -- the Australian eSafety Commissioner website and other organizations.
     Yes, Jutta?  Sorry, I thought you were raising your hand.  We are wrapping up the session, and we have one minute to go.  
     And I would like to thank the speakers for their very valuable presentations, ideas, insights and there are certainly key takeaways that we can, you know, take with us.
     And I'm tasked with doing a report, so I have plenty of notes and we recorded the session.  So you have set so many interesting things and very applicable to our respective field of work that I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart.  And also acknowledging that some of you had to wake up very early this morning to connect, and but it is all for the cause, as Cathal said at the very beginning.  
     I would like to before I end, I would like to make a call to the participants because the IGF this year is initiating a call for voluntary commitments, is asking all of the participants and the speakers to this year to the virtual IGF to make a pledge to move forward the goals of the Internet Governance Forum and the recommendations from the digital corporation road map.  
     I invite you from whatever vector you belong to, to go to the website and look for the web form where you can make a commitment so that within the next year until IGF 2021 you commit to take forward one of the actions and the goals of the Internet Governance Forum.  
     With that, we can end the session today because I suppose we will be cut off if I don't stop now.  I thank all of you and I wish you a very good day, if you are starting the day, and a good evening if you are ending the day.  Thank you very much to all of the participants. I hope you enjoyed the session.  Bye-bye.  Thank you.
     >> JUTTA CROLL: Bye-bye.  Thank you for your excellent moderation.  Bye.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-3-of39-policy-responses-from-covid19-and-the-digital-economy^^

     >> MR. YOICHI IDA:  Let's get started.  Okay.  So good morning, good afternoon, and good evening to all the participants today to the OECD Internet Governance Forum Virtual 2020.  I'm Yoichi Ida from the Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and Chair of OECD Committee on Digital Policy.  Very glad to have all of you here today.
     Thanks to digital technologies, we can still hold the IGF this year, remotely and virtually connected together.  This year of 2020 has demonstrated the critical role that digital technologies play in all aspects of our lives, from education to work and to health.
     It has also shown the role that they can play in contributing to the crisis response.  While there are many aspects of the digital economy affected by COVID-19, I believe that three main issues stand out.  Let me offer them to help frame our discussion today.
     First, we saw the pressure on communication infrastructure.  Second, there were risks for privacy, security, and data protection.  And third, we had the dissemination of mis and disinformation online.
     These topics are addressed in a series of policy briefs produced by the OECD's Committee on digital economy policy and published on the OECD's digital hub to help countries respond to the crisis.
     Additionally, I am pleased to announce that the OECD's biannual flagship publication, "Digital Economy Outlook 2020" will be launched later this month.  This important publication analyzes data on a range of digital issues, and I believe it will be instrumental to putting COVID in context as we learn more about its effects on digital issues over time.
     Today we will explore the way in which COVID-19 has catalyzed the digital transformation by reflecting on two important questions.  First, in which way has COVID-19 acted as a catalyst for digital transformation?  And second, what are the digital economy divides, limitations and risks revealed by COVID-19?
     With that, I would conclude my opening remarks and give the floor to our Panelists.  We will hear representatives from international organisations, government, business, and civil society reporting on lessons learned, but also on the policy responses device the to address the COVID-19 pandemic.
     We also look forward to discussing with the audience and, therefore, invite you, the audience, to raise questions and share thoughts on the topic.  We will open the floor to questions and answers following the panel discussion.  Please write your questions in the Q&A space and we will read them to our speakers.
     So I will now give the floor to Ms. Audrey Plonk, the Head of Digital Economy Policy Division of the OECD.  She will share with us the work of OECD on digital transformation.  So Audrey, the floor is yours and you have five minutes.
     >> MS. AUDREY PLONK:  Thank you, Yoichi.  It is great to be with you today.  I want to thank the IGF Secretariat and my Fellow Panelists for participating in this open Forum.  I would like to thank also my colleague Lucia Russo for putting it to us.
     I want to look at the "Digital Economy Outlook 2020", what we call the DEO affectionately here.  It is a snapshot of the state of the digital economy and the policy environment that we find ourselves in.  This forthcoming DEO which is our third after combining several flagships together to look holistically at the digital transformation.  This iteration will focus on how the COVID-19 pandemic is amplifying opportunities and challenges from the digital transformation.
     If you are not familiar, what you see here on your left is are growing digital framework.  It is a set of policy areas that we think is critical for governments to consider in shaping a common digital future to improve lives and to boost economic growth.  When we look at this year's digital economy outlook what we really take away is the fact that the digital economy and the digital transformation is a journey and we are really at the beginning of that journey.  It is a moment for us to make a major impact in how the story plays out.
     I want to touch on three areas.  First is access.  The second is society.  And finally, on trust.  These have been selected and, as in Yoichi's excellent framing at the beginning, but also to work in concert with colleagues that will present coming after me.
     First, connectivity is improving on our journey.  And COVID-19 is certainly fueling demand for connectivity.  We have seen some operators experiencing as much as 60 percent increase in Internet traffic than before the crisis.
     As of June of last year, 25 percent of fixed broadband connections in the OECD were fiber.  That is important for the digital transformation.  Eight years prior to that only 12 percent of fixed connections in OECD countries were fiber.
     But there is still more to do.  If we are at 27 percent, we have a long way to go.
     On society, this health emergency that we've all experienced has shown, as Yoichi said, the role that digital technologies play in all aspects of our lives, from education to work to health.  Internet uptake has increased, but not equally among and within countries.  And differences in Internet uptake are linked to age, education, and income levels.  And the divides remain in capabilities and effective use of technologies.  Specifically we see that people experience technology differently when they have comprehensive numeracy and literacy skills working in technology-rich environments.
     Finally, on trust, certainly not least but maybe last in my presentation, as a generation, and this generation looks at the increased use of personal data generated from IoT and many digital technologies, we see increased risk about security as well as use of data and privacy.
     The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated teleworking.  It has taken people at an unprecedented level online for eCommerce purchases.  It has created a fertile environment for cyber criminals.
     And as Yoichi said at the beginning, one major concern for OECD countries and beyond is the outbreak of disinformation and misinformation online, particularly about the pandemic.  We've seen it spread quickly and widely and expensively.  It is affecting how we respond and recover from the situation.
     And digital solutions, we've all watched track and trace apps and other digital solutions come into play to help us respond to the crisis.  They have implications for privacy and it is something that is extremely important for all of our economies to consider as we move forward.
     In summary, I just want to say that we certainly have seen our dependence on digital technologies accelerate that journey that we are on.  We are moving quickly beyond that initial phase into the next phases.  And we have a lot of work to do to get the policy environment and the technology in a place that it can benefit our economies and our societies as a whole.  While many countries have national digital strategies, we've seen an explosive growth in countries thinking about digital transformation holistically.  But there is still room to grow there as countries try to implement those strategies and move them forward.
     With that I will turn it back to you, Chair.  Thank you.
     >> MR. YOICHI IDA:  Thank you very much, Audrey, for these insights.  Very interesting presentation.
     So we look forward to the publication of the "Digital Economy Outlook 2020" on the 27th of November.
     With the working with the Chair on eCommerce, the COVID-19 outbreak creates a fertile environment for cyber criminals.  Digital security agencies in the OECD promptly responded by sounding an alarm and supporting rollout of critical activities, particularly in the health sector.
     Now I am happy to invite Mr. Yves Verhoeven to share his perspective in this regard. Mr. Verhoeven is the Director of Strategy at the National Cybersecurity Agency of France called ANSSI and the Chair of the OECD Working Party on Security in the Digital Economy.
     So Yves, you have the floor for five minutes.
     >> MR. YVES VERHEOVEN:  Thank you very much, Yoichi.  Thank you very much, to the organisers for the invitation and hello to all other Panelists.
     So within this five minutes I will try to share with you those perspectives, the French national perspective and one from the situation of the digital economy Working Party of OECD as Chair of this Working Party.
     So from the French national perspective, what I would like to share is the fact that with the lockdowns, obviously people suddenly had to work remotely from home in most countries in the world.  So a large amount of online services had to be opened and organised quite rapidly, often with a strong compromise on digital security.
     There was a strong risk appetite, a sudden very strong exposure to vulnerabilities and to digital risk.  However, no major disruptive incidents has been noted or reported to ANSSI.  So French cybersecurity, since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic on the French health sector.
     But the context has created an environment of opportunity for cyber criminals definitely using coronavirus social engineering.  One very important thing in our experience was raising the awareness of the public against the risk of phishing and ransomware which has really increased in number.  So for instance, for individuals we have to raise awareness concerning attention to the seriousness of so-called medical websites or telemedicine consultations.  
      For professionals we had to raise awareness in sending risk of fraudulent bank transfers and the importance of having proper systems in order to preserve company's assets.
     So IT security advice for remote working in the COVID-19 situation was critical.  We shared some information.  That is the employees and employers would really stay ahead of the wave of cyber criminality.
     Focusing on the crisis itself, the health sector has been considered as critical sector, critical activity in France, before the COVID-19 outbreak.  And a dedicated plan has been conducted by the Health Ministry together with ANSSI in order to improve the resilience of the sector.  So specifically the health sector was supported in order to improve cybersecurity.
     However, during this pandemic, new actors, several new actors and sectors were identified as critical.  In particular, for providing goods which was really essential with the lockdown.  And we had to develop new policies and new practices in the direction of actors which were not identified as critical before the crisis.  And we had extensive use of remote diagnostics, for example, diagnostic tools.
     Now at the current state of the pandemic there is a strong work on securing the production of vaccines, of course, from digital activity cyber attack.
     And last but not least from the national perspective, we have obviously been involved in the security of contact tracing apps and we have used extensively best practices in terms of security by design, privacy by design, designing open source code and calling for background checks in order to gain the trust from the public in order to be able to have an important agency impact.
     Now, as OECD Working Party Chair, what I would like to say, the Digital Economy Working Party chair, we carried out a written consultation in April and May in order to gather the best practices from policymakers and discuss the challenges associated with COVID-19.  Two policy notes on digital security during the COVID-19 crisis were issued by OECD and published on OECD's COVID-19 policy hub.
     So the first one was published in April.  And highlighted the increased digital security risks with the phishing campaigns of malicious actors taking advantage of the crisis situation.  And also highlighted the important role of governments in monitoring trace, awareness, supporting vulnerable group and facilitating multi-stakeholder cooperation.
     As a comparison note on seven lessons learned on digital security and COVID-19, it is to be published very soon in November.  And it records the importance of digital security risk management even during a non-digital crisis, such as the pandemic, and the fact that seeing that there was a massive switch to telework and teleconferencing tools, there was use of insufficiently secure teleconferencing tools and this highlighted the importance of enhancing the digital security product as well as providing transparency information on the reality of the security of products.
     On this specific topic, the OECD would raise the report early next year, to assess how teleconferencing products.
     In addition, other organisations need to adopt good digital security practices and the digital economy outlook mentioned by Yoichi and Audrey shows less than 40 percent of companies maybe ICT security risks in the European Union.  This number is too low.  Even for organisations that have a risk management framework this was bypassed during the crisis to ensure business continuity.
     There is clearly a need to incentivize organisations, particularly SMEs, and certain sectors like healthcare to adopt emergency plans and risk frameworks.
     The OECD will continue to monitor the lessons learned from the crisis and facilitate the national dialogue ensuring of best practices as part of the development of new OECD recommendations over the next two years.
     That's all I wanted to say.  Thank you very much.
     >> MR. YOICHI IDA:  Thank you so much, Yves, for these insights.  As we know, communication infrastructures are the backbone of our functioning digital economy.
     As I mentioned in my opening remarks, the COVID-19 has put an unprecedented pressure on the networks due to the increased traffic for the many activities performed remotely and throughout demand for high quality connectivity.
     So now I am happy to invite Bengt Molleryd, Senior Analyst at the Swedish Post and Telecom Authority and Chair of the OECD Working Party on Communication Infrastructure and Services Policy to share his views on these issues.  Bengt, the floor is yours.  You have five minutes.
     >> MR. BENGT MOLLERYD:  Thank you very much, Yoichi, and thank you for the introduction and for inviting me, and thanks to Lucia for organising this panel.
     So really, it is under scoring what Audrey already said.  Access, connectivity, it is the key factor.  I mean basically because the health emergency has been the turning point in the push for connectivity in many countries, with businesses, society, and policymakers realising that this is now the urgent to act.
     A large share of people work remotely.  Policymakers realised that connectivity is at the heart of the economic recovery.  So it is really the prerequisite.  Reliable connectivity is fundamental for the digital transformation facilitating interactions between people, organisations and machines.
     And certainly we have a lot of connected devices.  It could be I-I or 5G or gigabit networks, et cetera.  All of these are combining the interconnected society.
     And expanding connectivity to achieve an inclusive society is such a heart of the policy agenda in all of OECD member countries.  And a growing number of OECD countries consider the Internet as a basic right for citizens and many OECD countries have changed the legal framework to include broadband as part of the universal service framework.
     As countries, whether the COVID-19 health emergency policymakers have become keenly aware that connectivity more than ever is essential to ensure that economic activities can continue in the remote manner.
     More than estimated, roughly 1.3 billion citizens in the OECD countries have turned to digital technologies to work remotely and study at home, work at home.  For the same semblance of socializing over the Internet.
     The COVID-19 health emergency has fueled the demand for broadband communication services with the whole of the Internet infrastructure experiencing as much as 60 percent, as Audrey said.  In that respect it has brought great pressure on the networks.  What we understand so far that the networks have pretty much been able to cope with the increased demand.  Also due to the shift in demand over the full day and at nighttime.  So this seems to be working so far.
     However, the persistent disparities in access to communication services among and within countries are likely to accentuate the consequences of the crisis and more generation of digital divides.  Therefore, policies that seek to foster connectivity for all are not only important but essential.  To close the connectivity divide, people not only need to have access to broadband, they need to be connected well, which means access to high quality communication networks and services at affordable price is.  On everyone can fully benefit from their use in the digital transformation.  As Audrey highlighted in the introduction, 20 percent is a good number, but still there is a way to go in order to facilitate unlimited communication to everyone everywhere.
     Therefore, regulation of policies that foster competition and investment in communication infrastructure becomes even more crucial.  In the immediately yum and long-term upgrading networks for the next evolution of fixed and wireless broadband in the medium and long-term will ensure reliable resilient connectivity for all.
     In my home country, Sweden, the communication networks and Internet have so far held up well and no major disturbances have been reported.  But the national regulator has monitored the situation closely, and building upon previous testing and crisis planning has been functioning, maintaining the critical infrastructure.  So it has been working so far.
     In every function despite these challenging time.
     Just under scoring that connectivity is essential but it is not U.S. to take on all the digital transformation, but it is a cornerstone.  And building upon that, we have the entire digital transformation that is ongoing, as was said in the introduction.  Big steps are being taken in the COVID crisis but there is more to go.  We are still in the early phases.  So thank you for that.
     >> MR. YOICHI IDA:  Thank you very much, Bengt, for these insights.
     So Audrey has shared with us highlights from the "Digital Economy Outlook 2020" providing evidence to allow our better policies at the core of the OECD mission.  
      I will now invite Mr. Mark Uhrbach, chief of digital economy metrics at the statistics Canada and the Chair of the OECD Working Party on Measurement and Analysis of Digital Economy, to share his perspectives on this topic, both on the Canadian experience and with regard to the measurement perspective.
     So Mark, the floor is yours and you have five minutes.
     >> MR. MARK UHRBACH:  Thank you very much, Yoichi, and thank you very much for the opportunity to speak here today.
     So as mentioned, yes, I'll make a few remarks here in terms of kind of measurement more broadly but then also touch on some of the examples that we have seen in Canada over the last seven months.  So as mentioned by colleagues earlier, the COVID-19 pandemic has certainly accelerated the adoption of tele-everything.  So we now find ourselves in a place where we may have expected to be in five or ten years, but this has all happened very rapidly and resulted in a lot of changes.
     ECommerce, eLearning, telework have placed incredible strain on broadband infrastructure.  As has been mentioned this has responded strongly but created new demands for their services which will require further investment.
     We have done some work here at statistics Canada this summer.  It was demonstrated that more than a third of individuals have chosen to spend more money on their home Internet connection or mobile data connection during the pandemic to try to meet some of these needs.
     So the COVID-19 pandemic has been transformative in many way, it has open the digital divides that encompassed more aspects than we traditionally measured such as the digital divide that Bengt mentioned previously.
     National statistical offices are responsible for providing indicators to monitor, such as hardware and infrastructure over the past 20 years.  As Audrey mentioned earlier, this year's digital economy outlook points out that Internet usage has significantly increased over the last decade but continues to vary widely across and within countries.  In 2019 we saw the proportion of adults accessing the Internet ranged from over 95 percent to less than 70 percent among OECD countries.
     These differences in Internet uptake are linked to age as well as education and income levels.
     We can see now in most OECD countries that Internet usage is basically universal amongst young people, those aged 16 to 24 years old; whereas only about 58 percent of those aged 50 to 74 used the Internet on a daily basis.
     So the current situation reveals some of the challenges that are posed by this gap that still exists, and also as I mentioned earlier points to some potentially new digital divides.
     One of the short-term divides that I will focus on now that has been noticeable over the last months is the Gulf that has emerged between those who have the capacity to work online via telework without interruption and those who are unable to.  While the jobs of some individuals have disappeared due to the economic interruption of the pandemic, there are also many individuals in service sector jobs or in other industries, including front line workers in many countries, that have been able to participate in the economy through most of the pandemic but they may have reduced hours of work or certainly a greater health risk as they must work outside of their own home.
     This digitalisation of the economy we are witnessing is going to be a driver of structural change in the economy.  We have seen in Canada already that the share of businesses with at least 10 percent of the workforce teleworking has doubled from just February to May in 2020, up to more than a third of businesses in Canada.
     So while this new sort of normal of telework may open up more opportunities and flexible work options for those who can do it, for those in many industries, their participation in the economy will continue to be constrained.  And what this does, what this has the potential to do is open up the risk that is exposed by this new digital divide is that a greater Gulf emerges between the haves and have-nots in society.  The data that we collected over the summer in Canada has shown that the most financially vulnerable in the Canadian economy, young people underage 25 and those that have a high school diploma or less were the least likely to be able to do their jobs remotely.
     Additionally, the declines in economic activity disproportionately affected many other vulnerable Canadians, including women, new immigrants, minorities and low wage workers.
     We have seen through data we collected that digital minorities are over represented in segments hardest hit, including food and accommodation services.  This has contributed to high rates of unemployment in these groups.  As a result, recent immigrants were more likely than Canadian born workers to go on unemployment in March and April because of shorter work tenure and representation in low wage jobs.  Without appropriate policy and programme interventions there is increased risk of an irreversible digital divide due to the speed of this digital transformation.
     In the mid to longer term, skills gaps, those that can access the Internet effectively as mentioned earlier, have the potential to continue to widen the digital divides.  So this current situation certainly press a great challenge for programmes and policies as they try to keep pace with the evolving circumstances.
     Certainly from a measurement perspective, this extends as well.  National statistical organisations must continue to work together through international groups such as the OECD to ensure that we can provide appropriate and relevant statistics that are released in a timely manner to support this policy and programme development.
     As we move forward with the effects of the pandemic, the frequency and type of indicators will need to continue to evolve and respond as well.
     Thank you very much for the opportunity to join this session today.
     >> MR. YOICHI IDA:  Okay, thank you very much, Mark, for these insights.
     So the COVID-19 crisis has also led governments and businesses to see the potential of artificial intelligence to contribute to the response.  For instance, in the research field.  
      I will now invite Ms. Golestan Radwan, Minister Advisor for Artificial Intelligence at the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology of Egypt, and member of the African Union Working Party on AI, to provide her insights from the national perspective as well as on the role of AI during the crisis.
     So Golestan, the floor is yours.  You have five minutes.
     >> MS. GOLESTAN RADWAN:  Thank you, Yoichi.  And great to be here with everyone.  Thank you very much for the invitation.
     I will go quickly.  I have just one slide to show you.  I hope you will be able to see it in a second.
     Like many of you I am wearing two hats today.  One has to do with the African Working Party on AI and the other of course is my Egyptian hat.  I will try to cover both very quickly.
     The chart that I hope you are seeing on the screen now is from the McKenzie Global Institute, actually.  It shows the acceleration of digitisation efforts due to COVID-19 across different sectors and across different parts of the world.
     And we have seen for Africa, it has led to some acceleration in the field.  So the suspect, finance, insurance, government, retail trade.  The starting point was pretty low.  So we are expecting some marginal improvement but not leaps an bounds.
     Which actually leads to what I would like to say about Africa in the rest of my five minutes.  So just to give you an idea, Africa has been relatively fortunate when it comes to COVID-19.  So far we recorded just over 1.8 million cases in total.  With death toll of around 43,000 people.
     Of course, what it does is highlight many of the problems we already knew existed, capacity, lack of capacity-building across the board, lack of infrastructure, the digital divide which actually not only exists between countries or persons over the same country but also has emerged between the quality of the response of larger companies versus SMEs.  The SME sector has been hit quite hard in Africa across the board.
     Of course, the lack of financial means to implement response tracking.
     According to an assessment paper by the ITU, the increase in traffic over networks has resulted in an acceleration of CapEx, releases to the extension of capacity such as operations and maintenance CapEx.  However, on the other hand not related to capacity for example network modernization, is being postpone the especially in less, more emerging countries within Africa.  And while the top five African telecom operators spend 5.5 to $6 billion in 2019, it is expected it will drop to 5.5 billion in 20.  This is a quick insight into how Africa is doing.
     Now, an important factor that the pandemic highlighted is the importance of regional cooperation.  And some measures taken by African institutions, for example, the African Union has even established an African task force to develop a continent-wide strategy and sectoral strategy to combat the virus and its impact.  African Member States are taking a number of measures, of course, as well to contain the spread of the virus and mitigate especially the socioeconomic impacts.
     The African Export-Import Bank has made a proposal that invites all African countries to cooperate to finance COVID-19 vaccine manufacturing.  Hopefully this will set a precedent for continent-wide efforts to address more challenges as we progress through and following this pandemic.
     This is actually one of the reasons why the African Group on AI was formed to find ways to overcome barriers to cooperation on the ground on a large scale and be able to mobilize resources in the adoption of AI for development purposes.
     So, for example, we haven't been able to hold another group meeting of the African Group on AI because the AU wasn't equipped for online meetings for a long time.  However, this has changed quickly and they have been quite flexible in adopting their procedures.  So it wasn't just an infrastructure problem.  It is also a problem in processes and working procedures which we also find in some other international organisations.
     The response, however, has been quite good.  I think this is the kind of thing that we need to bear in mind.  If we want to have fast response to crisis going forward but also as international and regional organisations to stay relevant in a rapidly changing world we need to revise our working procedures either in governments or in international organisations.  It is not just a matter of adopting technology.
     In the few seconds I have left I will just walk you through a couple of quick examples of countries.  So, for example, in Egypt we have quite a high class density in schools and Universities.  Social distancing wasn't an option and we had to shut down and switch to online teaching.  Which was fortunately possible in Egypt unlike other Africa condition countries.  That meant building infrastructure for this, even for exams in some cases.  The experience has been so successful that a change in higher education policy was introduced recently to ease class congestion on the longer term, by which youths in Egypt even after the pandemic will adopt a hybrid approach where students are only expected to be on campus two to three days a week.
     In terms of AI, we launched a tracker for COVID-19.  Before the pandemic there was a lot of skepticism around utilizes AI in the medical field.  People prefer speaking to a human being.  The pandemic changed that behavior quite a bit and usage levels have soared with that system checker, boosting the chances of the digital AI health sectors in the longer term.
     Like many places with he explored contact tracing apps, but on our side they have also like in many places raised doubts.  And awareness of digital and data privacy issues to the point where in the end we refrained from adopting them.  This is another kind of side effect of COVID-19, that it raises the level of awareness of personal data protection that I think we wouldn't have achieved otherwise.
     Thank you very much.
     >> MR. YOICHI IDA:  Thank you very much, Golestan, for these insights.  And now it is very interesting to hear the perspective from Egypt and the contribution from the African union Working Group on AI.
     Japan has started a project with the AU to involve networks and connectivity on the occasion of COVID-19 expansion.  So we hope we will have some chances to work together.
     I will now invite Ms. Carolyn Nguyen, Director of Technology Policy from Microsoft, to share her insights from the industry perspective.  Carolyn, please.
     >> MS. CAROLYN NGUYEN:  Thank you, chair.  Good morning, good afternoon, good evening to everyone.  Thanks so much for the opportunity to participate in this discussion.
     What I would like to share with you is, as the chair said, really our experience in combating this very sad and urgent pandemic.  As COVID-19 outbreaks continue across our communities and countries, digital technologies as have been noted by everyone, have played an essential role.  Our data showed that the world has gone through two years of digital transformation in two months.  Combating COVID-19 has and will continue to require all of us to work together.  And so what I will address is some of the work that we are doing to contribute to global resources and the role of technologies.
     However, I will start by saying that three trends are very clear:  The importance of partnership and international cooperation across the public, private, and nonprofit sectors.  Also the need for voluntary and responsible data sharing in enabling rammed response as part of that collaboration.
     The vital role of digital technologies which means the urgency of secure, resilient and accessible cloud services, which then as other speakers have noted does highlight the ubiquitous Internet access as the enabling of wellbeing.
     Others talked about various examples in terms of use of technologies including healthcare bots that can help to scale digital resources and also how to help and identify misinformation -- sorry about that --
     However, supporting this mass migration to a virtual environment also requires additional efforts to shore up and make sure that there is a safe and resilient infrastructure.  To address the need for a safe digital environment, we have provided guidance on preserving privacy within our ecosystem partners as people connect from home and as government and healthcare authorities fight the spread of the disease.
     We are also providing guidance to employers and employees on best practices for digital hygiene and also working with governments and others to produce public safety resources, including addressing digital safety for children in particular.
     The scope and scale of the surge and demand or our cloud services was completely unprecedented.  We were able to sustain resiliency by shifting workloads between our 60 data centre regions around the globe as the epicenter of demands shifted with the spread of COVID-19.  Part of our work in maintaining resiliency and in particular critical care, is we compiled a list of customers that are providing critical life and safety services.  This included first responders, government agencies, energy companies power hospitals, retailers offering essential supplies, banks that are processing small business loans so that these services can be monitored and be quickly brought back online in case of issues.
     We had to work with governments around the world to add data centre workers as essential service workers to maintain this digital infrastructure.
     Regarding divides, it is clear that digital skills are more critical than ever and will be critical to the economic recovery.  It is also clear that the brunt of global unemployment will be borne by those with less formal education, people with disabilities, people of color, and women.  Further exacerbating other digital divides as has been noted.
     In June Microsoft launched a global skills initiative to bring the skills to 25 million people worldwide by the end of the year.  What we are leveraging is data from our LinkedIn economic graph to identify in demand jobs and skills needed to fill them.  And also access to learning and practical resources from LinkedIn, Microsoft including certification as well as GitHub for practical learning spaces.  Microsoft is providing $20 million cash grants plus technical assistance to help nonprofit organisations worldwide to assist people who need it most.
     We are also pledging to make stronger data and analytics available to governments so that they can better assess local economic needs.
     Another divide and another issue as has been noted is connectivity.  As part of our air band programme commitments to connect people in unserved and underserved areas around the world we are working with service providers and innovative solutions including providing care to remotely located patients, support testing of open source ventilators, and setting up wifi hotspots in large community spaces.
     These examples have demonstrated the importance of data and AI in our world.  COVID-19 has further emphasized that data and furthermore the need to share data responsibly, including personal data, enabling its flow globally and along with responsible use of AI, are now critical part of rapid responses.
     Some examples.  The Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 interactive dashboard that visualizes and tracking cases in realtime is accessed more than a billion times each day.  This information is used in public but also outlines courses of action.  The data is then made available in GitHub can be used for the use of critical resources such as ICUs, beds, medical supplies, et cetera.  AI for health initiative is part of our commitment to help COVID-19 research, focus on areas where data and likes can have the greatest impact including treatment and diagnostics.  GitHub is holding a series of open source projects that anyone can join.
     These efforts heightened the private public partnerships and the strength that each can bring photograph in our perspective, COVID-19 provides an urgent but real world context for many of the digital policy initiatives underway at the OECD.  Privacy, AI, responsible data sharing and the importance of cross-border data flow with trust.  And something that Audrey mentioned earlier on, the importance of a holistic regulatory approach such as the growing integrated digital policy approach.
     We would hope that this can provide the impetus and the collaborative environment that leads to enabling policy framework and new governance approaches that are based on data that can help us fight the COVID-19 crisis, but also build the digital infrastructure that is needed well beyond the end of the crisis and can help sustain growth.
     Thank you very much.
     >> MR. YOICHI IDA:  Thank you very much, Carolyn, for these insights.  And yes, previous speakers have mentioned the opportunities raised by the COVID-19 pandemic for the digital transformation.  They also touched upon the many types of digital divides.
     I would like to invite now Ms. Carolina Botero from Colombia and the representative of the Civil Society Information Society Advisory Council, CSISAC, to the OECD to share with us her views about the challenges raised by COVID-19.
     So Carolina, please, you have five minutes.
     >> MS. CAROLINA BOTERO:  Thank you very much.  First of all I'm very glad to be here to speak on behalf of the CSISAC to provide a brief overview of policy responses during this COVID crisis.
     In my case I will focus as you mentioned on some of the challenges that these policy responses are facing, especially considering technology measures taken.
     So being the last one talking, it is difficult not to repeat what has already been said, but I'm sure since my point of view comes from my position as part of civil society group this intervention will bring another point of view and will remind you all this is by the way the important piece of the multi-stakeholder approach adopted by OECD.
     The first thing I would like to talk is especially on the digital divide yet again.  As has been addressed, connectivity and digital skills are essential in a digitally transformed society.  Those challenges will be important to the digitals and inequities in our society too.  The logistics must leave no one behind, understanding and fighting for the different digital divides will be key and measuring them is a challenge that Mark already explained.  I will add to this that the key is also because the increasing digitalisation is going to data mine the exercise of human rights as well.  Therefore, all societies will need to identify, measure, assess and address the different digital divides tied to the use of technologies.
     We are especially concerned that COVID proved that social economical gender and geographical conditions are data mining people's digital divides and this has increased the system inequities in our societies and making clear that there are people that can embrace transformation while many others will need help.  The complexity of this situation has opened been undermined by the measures taken during COVID but will need to be addressed sooner rather than later as shown in some of the arms featured in the analysis that OECD has been gathering, addressing the emerging divides.
     Let me talk about the tensions of these human rights.  Since early March, civil society around the world warranted adopted regulations and measures needed due to the pandemic, will also need to address tensions with human rights.  Among many challenges it is clear now that the access and use of data by government was a measured too and in the midst of the urgency many did not properly perform evaluations or design the checks and balances to deploy those measures in recognition of the above tension.  Using emergency powers through laws, administrative degrees or administrative orders to access and use data was taken and it is urgent now to draw the lesson.  It identified real opportunities and deployed corrective measures as the impact of those actions will remain as a legacy of COVID times.
     Third, finally I would like to address the challenge of increasing surveiled society.  Again, the acceleration of the digital transformation meant the increasing use of technology, but it also showed that in the urgency of the crisis, technology has been deployed with little reflection on its impact on human rights and democratic values, including trust that has already been mentioned.
     From the civil society perspective technology can and should play an important role during the crisis as one we faced with COVID.  No doubt it provided means to keep communication, work, education, and of course access to healthcare and the means to tackle them.  However, the same technology has enhanced surveillance by design in every aspect of our lives.  Platforms for schools, work, communication in general, contact tracing are just some of the examples.  We have an increasing digital landscape both in the public an private scenarios where the big eye is will following us everywhere at all times.  Guarantees is one of the key elements of democratic society because it is needed to enjoy other rights such as freedom of expression or freedom of association.
     Finally, the societal design issues that we are making today have the power to normalize behaviors which on the different circumstances we would have considered a risk to human rights.  The COVID crisis and this situation will remain as an important challenge for a democratic discussion and its risks.  I believe that OECD will be a major player to guide our countries through this process.  Thank you very much again.
     >> MR. YOICHI IDA:  Thank you very much, Carolina, for these insights.
     So thank you once again to all the Panelists for your great contributions to the discussion.  And now I would like to open the floor to the audience to raise any questions and some interaction with the speakers.
     But unfortunately we have probably two more minutes before interruption.  So may I take one or would questions from the audience?  And I would like to ask Lucia, to help me in this.
     >> MS. LUCIA RUSSO:  Thank you, Yoichi.  There is one question for Sally.  
      "You spoke about raising awareness for privacy issues resulting from the consideration of tracing apps.  How union form was the reaction you described in the AU?  What conclusions will Egypt and possibly the AU draw from this specific experience?"
     This is for Sally.
     >> MS. GOLESTAN RADWAN:  Thank you, Lucia, I actually answered the monitor in the Q&A space, but to repeat quickly.  That particular data point was just drawn from Egypt.  That was based on the experience within Egypt.  I don't have data on the rest of Africa, but I do know that some other African countries have chosen to adopt the use of contact tracing apps.
     As I mentioned, the main lessons learned for us are the importance of social dialogue and consultations but also on general awareness when it comes to specifically to the adoption of AI applications and especially when it comes to data privacy topics.
     And the public response that we have on the front was actually quite telling.  This is an experience we want to repeat in terms of having that public dialogue before launching any such apps on a wider scale.
     >> MS. LUCIA RUSSO:  I don't see any other questions.  Yoichi?
     >> MR. YOICHI IDA:  Thank you very much, Lucia, and thank you very much, Golestan.  I think we are almost reaching the end of the time and I think that the discussion was very, very interesting and very rich.  So I would like to share with you my key take aways from this event.
     So it was very interesting to hear the different national perspectives and I noted several commonalities with my own national perspective.
     All the speakers pointed out to the role that COVID-19 has played in the accelerating the digital transformation and in showing us the potential of digital technologies in fields such as education, teleworking, healthcare and so forth.
     However, another recurring reflection has pointed to the issue of digital divide.  Among countries, within countries, between regions and between population groups.  The potential of digital technologies is yet to be grasped by all groups equally.  I hope you will all look forward to the publication of OECD's "Digital Economy Outlook 2020" which will be published on 27th of November.  
      So lastly, once again I would like to thank all the Panelists and also the audience for this very rich discussion and very interesting event.  If you have any more questions or any comments from the audience, is there any way to receive it, Lucia?
     >> MS. LUCIA RUSSO:  I think under the event page, there is space to ask the organiser.  So I will send it forward to you in case there are any questions.
     >> MR. YOICHI IDA:  Thank you very much.  If you have any more comment or questions, please contact us as mentioned.  So thank you very much again to all of you and I hope we will see each other very soon.  Thank you very much.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-4-dc-equitable-access-to-digital-content-lessons-from-covid-19^^

 
     >> MODERATOR: Good afternoon, good morning, good evening, everybody.  
     Welcome to the IGF session on Equitable Access to Digital Content, Lessons from COVID-19 brought to you by the Dynamic Coalition on Public Access in Libraries.  
     You are very welcome to join us for this session.  My name is Stuart Hamilton.  I'm the Head of Libraries Development for the Local Government Management Agency in Ireland.  And I'm also the current President of the National Authorities on Public Libraries in Europe.  
     And I'm also very happy to be part of the Dynamic Coalition of Public Access in Libraries and have attended many IGFs in this capacity.  I'm going to chair the session today.
     And we are here to focus on access.  The Dynamic Coalition on Public Access in Libraries has got a long history now as being one of the key places within the IGF where public access to information is discussed alongside public access to broadband infrastructure.  
     Our Dynamic Coalition believes that the world's 406,000 public libraries offer an amazing and already existing resource to help policy goals in the digital and development context.
     Now specifically today we want to talk about access during the COVID-19 pandemic.  The last six months have highlighted crucial questions around access to key digital resources and services when crisis hits us.  And I know this because of the situation we faced here in Ireland.  On March 12 this year, overnight we had to close the country's 330 public libraries.  And we instantly saw massive shifts of our users online.  
     We have seen triple digit percentage increases in new users of our ebooks and online services for emagazines and newspapers.  We had hundreds of thousands of views for our online story times.  And we've had very crucial questions posed by policy makers about how we continue to provide access to wi-fi and PCs whilst our buildings are closed.  
     But it's not just Ireland.  I mean all over the world we have seen educational institutions and their libraries undertaking novel and new ways to ensure their students access to educational materials.  We've seen publishers and other vendors launch initiatives to extend or offer easy access to online resources.  We've seen a lot of conversations around the extension of open access, particularly resources that support research on COVID-19 and related areas or that ensure the continuity of education during lockdown.
     However, this has been far from uniform across countries and even within countries.  And this, of course, has deepened existing digital divides and created new inequalities.  
     Under lockdown conditions, lower income, remote and otherwise disadvantaged communities could have limited access or be entirely cut off from work, education, healthcare, or other dimensions of participation in society.  
     So we're facing very big questions about the money, the resources and skills that we need to meet the public huge demand for our services during the pandemic.
     And these discussions and their outcomes are going to change the library sector in years to come.  We think we have to have some fundamental discussion, investigation into the nature of digital inclusion in this new environment and the policies that we need to address it.  And the IGF offers that space to have the discussions.
     So what we are going to try and do in the session today is to take stock of what we know, to look at some of the emergency responses of libraries, of governments, and publishers and other key stakeholders to the COVID-19 crisis.  And to look at some of these responses and the impacts they have had on digital inclusion and access to information and content.
     We're going to particularly look at the current policy context and the lessons learned during the pandemic.  And then look at those -- how those policy questions will inform us in the future when there may be, hopefully not, but may be similar emergencies similar to this one.
     The format to the session is going to be in three parts.  We're going to establish the baseline first.  We're going to and look at where we are with policies around public access to broadband, public access to information in libraries, and looking at challenges we faced ensuring access to information during the pandemic.  
     And obviously we're going to focus very much on open discussion in the third part of the session where we want to hear from you about your own contexts.  
     We've got a great lineup of speakers, and I'm going to introduce them as we go through.  But I'd ask you to remember that this format, I think, gives you the opportunity to comment in parallel with the speakers and to use the chat function for your observations.  
     You can share your own experiences there, and you can ask questions, which I will do my best to round up or bring into play when we have an intervention finish or at the end when we get into open discussion.  I'm very much encouraging you to get involved in the chat function of this.
     So let's kick off, let's move on.  In the first part here, as I said, I want to establish the baseline for the session by looking at public access solutions in broadband policies.  
     And to do this, I'm going to call on Valensiya Dresvyannikova who is the policy and research officer at IFLA, the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions.  
     Valensiya's background is in public administration, but at IFLA she focuses on internet governance.  So it is perfect to hear about digital matters from the library sector's perspective.  She's going to set the scene for us and talk about how public access is an important tool for response and recovery.  
     Now, some of you may recall from last year's Dynamic Coalition meeting that our report looked at the role of libraries in broadband plans.  And this year we've had the chance to look at several case studies to see how this is being implemented on the ground.  
     So this initial intervention before we get on to COVID-19 will give us kind of insights into the impact of public access and what good practices can ensure maximum results.  So, Valensiya, over to you.
     >> VALENSIYA DRESVYANNIKOVA:  Thank you so much, Stuart.  Thank you, everyone, for joining us today.
     Hello, everyone.  As Stuart mentioned, I'm Valensiya Dresvyannikova, Policy Research Officer at IFLA, which is one of the founding members of our DC-PAL.  
     So as Stuart has highlighted, these past few months have, among many other challenges, underlined the urgency of taking more action to address the digital divide.  So What does this mean for public access strategies and for public access solutions?  
     On one hand, these last few months have shown us how public access solutions have adapting to continue to support digital inclusion throughout the pandemic.  
     Where possible, we saw libraries and similar facilities taking on a wide range of initiatives ranging from expanding wi-fi coverage to hotspot, laptop loans, and many, many other solutions.  And we'll have a chance to look at these in more detail very shortly thanks to one of our key speakers, Don Means.  
     We have also seen how questions around public access remained relevant throughout the different stages of lockdown, social distancing, of tentative reopenings, and second waves across different countries.  In many situations, public access, including access to computers and workstations, was seen as an important priority.  
     And there are cases, for example, in the UK and Belgium where libraries have worked to adjust and offer public access services naturally with strict safety measures through different stages of lockdowns and reopenings.
     This has been done, for example, by appointment or reserve computer use for essential tasks or prioritizing use for people who do not have individual internet access at home.  And it's also worth noting that where this was made available, these public facilities were often used for particularly essential tasks.  
     So access to government services online, to benefits applications, to job applications.  This points to the important role that public access can play both during the peaks of the pandemic and the recovery that is yet to come.  
     So when we look at lessons learned and the possible policy changes that support digital inclusion, access to content and access to services in the new-normal and during the recovery and for the possible future crisis, here we can look at the role -- it's worth looking at the role and the value and the potential of public access.  
     With the urgent need to bring more people online, we can start by taking a closer look, indeed, at what policy tools we have at our disposal and within what policy frameworks we are working at the moment.
     So, as Stuart mentioned, in 2019, DC-PAL has launched a report that examines the role of libraries in broadband policies.  While having looked at about 13 national broadband policies that reference public libraries, we have seen that the roles, the different roles that libraries can take to support this inclusion varied substantially.  
     The includes, for example, affordable access to the internet, of course, but also digital skills training, also local content creation and more.  Similarly, we have seen the different policy tools and mechanisms that can support and deliver on this -- on these roles.  
     So building up public connectivity infrastructure, equipping libraries with ICTs, using mechanisms such as universal service access funds or public/private partnerships and many, many other approaches.  So having charge of these policy options this year, we have built a list by looking at how these policies have actually been implemented in practice in several different countries.  
     Through the past months and with the wonderful help of our colleagues in different countries, we were able to prepare several in-depth case studies that look at how library connectivity and public access policies and initiatives have been implemented in Colombia, in Kenya, in Lithuania and in Romania, and what the impacts of these interventions have been.  
     So to begin to introduce our cases, in Colombia, several projects associated with the national plan in 2014-2018 have contributed to wide broadband connectivity and to public access.  
     Through the national fiber optic project, hundreds of libraries and other public institutions have been connected to fiber infrastructure that Punta Semidigitale (phonetic) set up public access points in libraries and similar facilities across the country.   
     We looked at a particular case of a municipality where a network of local stakeholders works closely together to ensure a best possible fit to local circumstances and local needs and also expanded on this project with more initiatives.  
     And finally, in Colombia the project used an appropriation of ICT in the public libraries was developed by the Minister of Culture and the National Library and supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and also focused on having libraries offer public access and ICT-enabled services.  
     In second set case study in Kenya, the National Library Service and the Communications Authority of Kenya have worked closely together to set up public access points in libraries across the country, in public libraries.  They have started with a pilot project, equipping 10 libraries with ICT with connectivity and training for the library staff.  
     And soon after this was scaled up to 46 more public libraries across the country.  This project is an example of how universal service funds can be leveraged to support digital inclusion through public access in existing facilities.  
     In Lithuania, the third case study, several different projects have been implemented.  Some with the government, some through European Union programs or with the support of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation Global Libraries Program.  
     These various projects in Lithuania focused on building access points for the public or infrastructure development or updating library connectivity infrastructure in particular.
     As a part of the current broadband policy, the Minister of Culture and the National Library are implementing a project that has renewed public access facilities in libraries, upgraded internet connection, and delivered various advanced technology facts for library uses.  For example, focusing on engineering and robotics and graphics design and more.  
     And finally, in Romania, a six-year build the internet program, running from 2008 to 2014, also funded by the Bill and Melissa Gates Foundation, has equipped 80% of Romania's libraries with the ICT equipment with internet connectivity as well as special skills training for the librarians.  
     This connectivity infrastructure and capacity building has then helped libraries across the country to introduce many digital inclusion services which were later referenced in the country's digital agenda.  
     These are just a few case studies, of course, and we are working to add more examples and further insights.  
     And while all of these cases have employed different mechanisms, they follow different formulas, what we did notice is there were several recurring themes and common findings that can offer us some more insights on good practices regarding public access projects and what works and what can be achieved.  
     A first set of shared themes has to do with the impact to public access.  Across all of the case studies, some recurring themes helped us highlight that, one, intervention supporting public access in libraries often help users from more marginalized groups, from more vulnerable groups.  Or, for example, in Lithuania later studies suggested that public access facilities in libraries are supporting digital inclusion of older community members as well as residents of rural areas, People with Disabilities, lower income or less formal qualifications.  
     In Romania, the infrastructure and capacity building intervention allowed libraries to introduce targeted services for youth, for children, as well as older community members.  In Kenyan libraries, public access facilities are particularly popular with youth and students.
     A second lesson was that setting up public facilities in libraries has made it possible to introduce more services to help meet the needs of communities.
     Well, it almost goes without saying that many, many, many libraries that have been benefiting from these projects have introduced digital skills training.  Whether in the form of formal training courses, whether in terms of informal support or help advice, this was a key element of their work to support digital inclusion.
     Public access facilities themselves contributed to broader societal development goals.  For example, whether it is educational goals or employment goals or access to health information or e-government services of their users.  
     But what was also striking is that once these facilities and libraries have been set up, this paved the way for offering more services that help meet the needs of their communities.  More different programs or offerings that are tailored for local needs.
     For example, in Romania, the rollout of services from different libraries ranged from entertainment to culture and heritage and skills building.  In Colombia, libraries are able to contribute to local content generation.  And actually one of the reports summing up the results of the intervention highlighted that libraries are able to introduce 300 new unique service projects for their communities.
     And in both Colombia and Lithuania, public access facilities also started offering access to advanced technologies, helping people get familiar and develop skills in different areas from engineering to robotics to artificial intelligence and graphic design.  
     This widespread adoption of various accompanying services alongside the fundamental public access facilities means that even when people have home connections, they continue to use public access facilities like these in libraries and in similar organizations.  Public access solutions essentially are about more than just connectivity.
     Also, once established, these services offered an excellent platform for further growth and expansion in Colombia, in Lithuania, in many other countries what we have seen is that having set up this infrastructure libraries are able to partner with national, local authorities and agencies and NGOs and commercial partners to further develop services and deliver on access to information and services in areas like agriculture, life-long education, literacy, or administrative matters.  
     So essentially what this shows is that -- what this helps show is that public access is an excellent steppingstone for many other interventions.  
     With all these potential in mind, the other set of lessons was about what works and what can help maximize policy interventions that support public access.  
     Lesson one was that taking stock of the infrastructure of community needs is very useful when preparing the rollout of such post interventions.  In general, a common formula for setting up public access appears to be ICT equipment plus connectivity plus training for the library staff.  And these are crucial elements, but it is also good to check if all the other fundamental infrastructure needs are met and are in place.
     For example, we're talking about conditions of premises or even things like furniture and equipment.  For example, in Kenya, an exercise that was undertaken at the very beginning of the intervention showed that local area network infrastructure would need to be set up for several libraries.  
     And for some, it was also important to secure an electricity source.  That is why the project has included building up local area networks as well as introducing solar panels as needed.
     The second lesson shared was that skills building for the library staff is integral.  This was introduced in many interventions including Colombia, Kenya, Lithuania and others.  And this enables librarians to deliver equitable additional skills learning opportunities, roll out new ICT-based services, amplify the impact and the value that public ICT infrastructure offers.
     Finally, there is across all of these case studies, there have been a diversity of possible funding sources that can enable and support a rollout of public access facilities.  
     Support can come from a combination of sources.  These include local government budgets, universal sponsor, private foundations, and so on and so forth.  It is also vital to ensure continued sustainability of public access facilities as these case studies have shown.  
     This entails planning for long-term expenses and maintenance of the facilities.  This has been had, for example, in both Colombia and the Kenya case studies.
     And what we have also seen is that leadership is critical, and coordination and partnerships can help ensure maximum impact for the rollout of these facilities.  For example, a partnership between a local non-profit organization, the public library network, and Mayor's office in a city in Colombia, the specific case study mentioned earlier, this helped establish a successful public access model that was tailored for local needs.  
     In Kenya, the National Library Service, KEN-LS, has also continued facilitating the rollout of the project once the infrastructure was set up.  They have helped coordinate the introduction of ICT-based services in libraries across the country on a trial basis.  
     And this means that they can replicate scaleups and most successful and in demand products across different libraries in the country.  
     Similarly, in Romania, the National Association of Public Libraries and Librarians, once the infrastructure was set up helped build and launch many different projects either in partnerships with organizations, with individual libraries, or by itself.  And individual libraries themselves were able to continue building on this and taking the impact further.
     And a final lesson was that impact evaluation and assessment are critical.  For example, once case in Kenya has shown that the -- has included building a system for reporting on the use of public facilities on -- often feedback.  And one of the findings was, for example, pertaining to the speed of the connectivity and the number of computers.  
     The initial plans included two megabytes per second speed for the public access facilities.  That was the second half.  In the end of the intervention, all of this has been scaled up to 10 megabytes per second.  Again, based on the received feedback, based on the shifting community needs.  
     These studies showed that both the potential public access in ensuring meaningful inclusion as well as the policy tools that can help implement this.  
     And as we have continuously seen, access is -- of course, meaningful access comprises many dimension and this ranges from inclusion to skills to affordability to access to content and services.
     And this shows both how public access can help contribute to this and what good practices that may be worth replicating or learning from.  And this helps us move on to the broader discussion on -- on both access to meaningful access to content, to services, and how public access can continue to do this during and after the pandemic.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Valensiya.  So there is an awful lot of information to unpack there.  And the Dynamic Coalition is going to be releasing this sort of updated report which we will talk about later as well.  
     But I think what the intervention there from Valensiya does is give us a little background information that we need to understand really the impact that public access can have with those four case studies, with bits and pieces around, you know, what can be provided.  And the impact it can have, really particularly as you pointed out, Valensiya, on marginalized communities.  
     And in many cases exactly who policy makers want to reach in that context of digital inclusion.  
     There's a couple of things that I'm sure we will come back to from the start of your presentation there around sort of access to government services online and benefit applications which I think are relevant when we get into some of the COVID discussions.
     And that's where I want to go now.  We're going to move into the second part which is really about the new challenges that we are facing.  How can we continue to provide equitable access to content and services during the pandemic?  So what have the impacts been of our responses to the emergency and what further questions do they raise?
     So I'm going to start by calling on Nkem Osuibwe, who is the Director of Human Capacity Development and Training for AFLIA.  
     And you mentioned your connectivity in the chat there so I hope that you are with us.  I know that you are opening up knowledge and equitable access to information for the development of Africa.  And I understand you will talk to us today about how African libraries responded to the crisis and then how to take action on some of the gaps that emerged with particular reference to African realities and the challenges and possibilities.  So over to you.
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: Thank you very much.  Can you hear me?  Can you all hear me, please?
     >> MODERATOR: I can hear you.  I'm guessing other people can, too.  Although I can no longer hear you now.  
     Nkem, can you hear us?  Someone was remarking to me the other day that a lot of these online meetings are now like seances whereby you're calling off into the ether for somebody.  
     Nkem, I'm going to give you another chance.  We can always come back to you.  Can you hear us now?
     Okay.  Well, I think it shows that often we do have connectivity problems and a new environment is no different here with online meetings.  
     I'm going to pause Nkem, and Don, I think I will come to you if that's okay.  I can see you online there.  So Don was going to be our second speaker and he's moved up in priority now.  
     Don Means is the founding chairman of the School's Health and Libraries Broadband Coalition, which is a DC-based advocacy organization promoting government policies and programs to get gigabit fiber to libraries and other community anchor institutions.  
     So he is here representing the Gigabit Libraries Network, which is a global coalition of tech savvy innovation-focused libraries.  And he's also in his capacity as the principal investigator for an IMLS grant enabling libraries to deploy their own community-scale wireless networks.
     So Don, I think we're going to hear from you on how libraries are supporting response and recovery in the COVID situation, and I think you're going to bring in examples from what must be one of the longest running shows of the COVID-19 period.
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: Hello?
     >> MODERATOR: Hi, Nkem.  Has the connection -- I was going to bring in Don.  Are you able to hear us?
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: Yes, I can hear you.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  Let's take Nkem whilst we've got the connection.  So, Don, we will come back to you.
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: I will try not to rush too much, but I have to now that I have the --
     >> MODERATOR: Take your time, take your time.
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: All right.  So I want to talk about access to information, how African libraries coped and then what we did and challenges that we were facing and possibilities.  And then actions that we have taken and what we hope to do.  
     So during the COVID-19 pandemic, at the height of it, because in Africa, it is -- we did shut down immediately.  And then I don't know why it is still here in (break in audio) as well as other parts of the world.  
     But when we started, African librarians started disseminating information about preventive measures even before the general lockdown across the entire continent.  And then during the lockdown, a few African libraries providing services, but mainly through the social media.  You know, serving as translation of COVID-19 information into different languages and then supporting remote teaching, learning and then research.
     We have drawn a survey to find out what was really happening then.  And from this survey, we found out that there are key areas that we need to deal with or that need to be dealt with as the COVID-19 has a new normal.  
     We found out that African librarians need functional emergency plans that will integrate how libraries can provide access to information even when the libraries are closed down.  Not just emergency plans of in the event of fire, you go to the exit, but what if the library does a shut for a long time.  What happens?
     So we are working on plans with libraries that (break in audio).  These are the things we can do even when we are not inside the library building.
     Then we also found out that there is need to improve the ICT internet infrastructure in African libraries to ensure that there are facilities for information access, even as everything goes online.
     Because we notice that the infrastructure for carrying out digital or online services is quite poor.  So we are working on that.  Then again, another thing that we found out in the survey is that we need to up-skill the competencies of African librarians to be able to provide access to information online.
     And then we also notice that the advocacy skills that we need to show off that so librarians can understand the issues at stake as pertains to internet and how to advocate for maybe better internet access.  And then how to advocate for revision of the library rule, digital inclusion.  
     Then we also notice there is need for libraries to advocate for policies that encourage open nets so there will be resources that they can access even if the library doors are closed.  Resources that -- e-resources that they can access.  Those are really the highlights of the next steps after our survey.
     And then I want to talk about taking action.  What are the realities, the challenges and possibilities?  
     Reality one, Africa is a continent, not a country.  Why this is coming up is that we found out that, you know, you want to do something with a group of people but because Africa is made up of different countries, there are different types of government in part, there are different policies, and you find out that you cannot now have a blanket solution because we are a continent, not a country.
     The challenge that we saw is the government policies that will enable increased access to libraries differ from country to country.  We found out that what are things in like a place like Cameroon and let's say Nigeria, they are all different.  
     And because of that, we now scheduled training for National Library Associations to understand what needs to be done, how to do it, and the standard with them to achieve.  Of course, with fingers crossed.  Maybe it works, maybe it doesn't work.
     And for the action taken, and we have been able to organize the first intervention which is more about internet governance and how to approach it, how to advocate for it, who to talk to and the issues at stake, so to speak.  
     And then the second reality, reality two is the cost of data is high in Africa.  The average price of one gigabyte of data is around 7.2% of the average monthly salary of Africans in different countries, give or take.  And this is way higher than many people can afford.  
     And that is the reason, you know, this challenge is there in Africa.  How do we get libraries to be favored, in quotes, in the provision by internet service providers.  How do we influence policy makers to recognize why does the subscription of libraries need to be subsidized?  Then again, how do we advocate for alternative routes for internet provision in African countries.  
     Possibilities, again, that we are looking at, again, more training for National Library Associations to advocate nationally because it is not something that we can do on the continent-wide level.  It is something that has to be brought down to the different countries so that they know what they are facing, you know, knowing the people in charge can now advocate for.  
     And then a position outlining the visible standards and codes for provision of internet in African libraries.  And then seeking websites or platforms that can offer offline possibilities to African libraries.  
     On the actions we are taking is that the next webinar will address the training aspects of this.  We have started work on standards for the entire continent.  Then we have reached an agreement with the Wiki Fund to provide the African libraries the opportunity at least to access Wikipedia even when offline, even when offline.  But it has been tied to a lot of activity to activity where the libraries will compete, you know, depending on how they perform.  Go home with the software, with the program that is the wiki fund so they can be able to account Wikipedia when offline.  
     And digital infrastructure in African libraries is minimal.  Again, you know, it is easier for somebody, let's say, in South Africa or libraries in South Africa that you can't compare the libraries in South Africa with the libraries in Chad.  That is why I started with the thought that Africa is a continent and not a country.  So, you know, these differences are there.  But generally the digital infrastructure is minimal.  
     So the challenge there is how do we influence the policy makers to recognize why this is important in African libraries, for African libraries.  For access to information, for access to education.  Why, why, why we need it.  So that is the number one challenge, how do we convince them?  
     And then again, and how do we reach out to internet service providers to see what they can do because we have seen what NTN has done in South Africa and Etel in Uganda.  And we are wondering, you know, we are working towards can you expand your scope of operations with this since there are libraries all over Africa that can use your services that you can help with this or that.  It is not easy now, but it is a possibility that we are looking at.  
     Then right now, the action we are taking on this is that we are running the African libraries to find out what is it that you really, really have?  What do you need?  Do you think your community can cope with this or that?  
     You know, because if you leave it open, general, you find out that you might be advocating for infrastructure that is not really needful in a community but that could serve another group of people better.
     So that is the point we are now to find out what is existing in your libraries.  That thing that is existing, how many people does this serve in terms of access?  Can you cope with all that?  Would you need more?  What do you need to do?  How many people do you think it will serve better?  That is the point we are at and that is what we are working on now.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Nkem, that is helpful to have the view from Africa, a continent and not a country, as you say.  
     And with libraries getting out in front of situations before lockdown and getting information out there, we know we can play a role.  I'm sure we will come back to the points raised in the discussion.  
     I will go now to Don.  Don, I have pretty much introduced you.  And in the interest of time, we will go straight in and let's see your viewpoints on how libraries have responded to this crisis.
     >> DON MEANS: Thanks, Stuart.  Valensiya, also thank you.  Can it only be 12 months since we were together in Berlin?  It seems like years.
     But it's great to be back with the DC that does important work in raising awareness libraries play in providing public access.  There is no one that does it better.  It is part of their charter in the first place.  
     So, as Stuart said, we are the Gigabit Libraries Network.  It is about a 15-year-old open consortium.  And we are active in policy and also on a project level where we have raised funds to then support various projects.
     I also have an unstable internet connection, like Nkem, so I hope it is holding up.  I just upgraded my service so it's unstable.  
     We started fiber to the library in 2007 with the basic idea that the fastest, least expensive, most equitable way to deliver next generation broadband in every community was to run gigabit fiber to the 17,000 public libraries in the U.S.  We are still working on that.  
     Stuart mentioned the Schools, Health, and Libraries Broadband Coalition we helped co-found on the same principle that these are priority endpoints, public service points.  And also by connecting them you have extended the infrastructure deeper into communities and to markets, which allow last mile interconnections so that we can reach every home and business.  
     It is a double win, and it is a -- we would say it is a primary role for universal service funds is to connect libraries, schools and clinics and so forth.
     The roles that we saw, we came to libraries from that infrastructure perspective.  We have been working kind of community network since the 1980's actually.  But we saw three important roles we saw for libraries in that regard.  Kind of emerging digital roles over 10 years ago.  
     One was as early adopter.  People usually don't think of libraries as early technology adopters, but in fact in the context of the wider population they are.  Many people had their first experience of broadband at a library.  We were all doing dial-up and people said oh, you need to get this broadband stuff, you get a lot more bits.  They go, what are you talking about?  Well, they went to a library and experienced streaming media through the internet and go wow, that's cool, whatever that is, I want it at home.  
     So this role of libraries playing the role of demo site and showcase for really what are consumer products and services helped drive demand for those.  
     Now this is a point I'm trying to make that libraries foster expansion of services and commercial services and that the provider should understand that important role about libraries.  It is true since books themselves 100 years ago.  
     The other couple roles.  One was touched on, of course, relates to access to public information services.  So-called eGov.  And as more agencies in the U.S. are under budget constraints, they are pointed over to the library.  
     You know, you want to fill out a form for the vehicle department?  Go to the library and they will help you.  Well, it is a natural that libraries can be the human face of e-government which is faceless by definition.  We are sort of talking face to face here.  
     And the third role relates to disaster and crisis response.  And we thought about it then in terms of what we consider sort of normal disasters like floods and fires and so forth, you know, libraries playing a role of shelters and distribution points, information hubs.
     Well, we didn't anticipate the pandemic, but here it is.  It is a crisis, indeed.  And so that led us to early this year in March with the declaration of the pandemic to launch what Stuart referred to as libraries in response.  Or we set that up with the basic question of what is a library if the building is closed?
     It was just, you know, that okay, what do we do now?  And as has also been touched on, the demand for digital services has gone way up.  And at the same time, the availability of physical materials has dropped to nothing or just slightly.
     And so we ask this question, we started having weekly sessions which are ongoing.  I will put that in the chat.  We've had 26 sessions so far around this basic question of what is a library if the building is closed? 
     We've had everybody, architects, librarians, advanced thinkers, we've had, you know, the founder of the internet, the father of the internet Vint Cerf, the head of the Federal Libraries Agency in the U.S., we've had librarians from Europe, from Africa, from the Americas talking about their various circumstances.  It is amazing how similar they are.  And the first point that we have covered in this is access.
     We divided it into really four topics.  Internet access, digital services, physical materials, and social infrastructure, which was not something -- it is obvious, but you have to think of it and we didn't think of it in the beginning until we had a presentation from a librarian in Denmark who reminded us the role that libraries played in social cohesion and community identity even.  
     So the first one is internet access which relates to the second one, digital services.  So in the U.S. before the pandemic, roughly one in three adults access the internet at a library in a public library.  That is like people 14 and over.  That is 80 million people.  It's a stunning number.  And most of them had some other source of internet access, but many did not, it was their sole source.
     But there are all kinds of reasons.  More comfortable.  The internet connection is stable and faster.  It's quiet.  All of the kinds of reasons that people go to the libraries.  For help, for example, is a really important one that's also been touched on today.  It's not just access, it's not just connectivity, but it's the enabling part, the support, the training and the kind of thing you get at libraries which librarians do.
     But internet access or access to digital services is kind of missed here in a lot of cases that the library's demand for digital services has gone up but so has the demand for internet access because you can't get to the library digital services without some kind of access.  
     So we have been busy in developing projects using wireless technologies, open frequencies like TDFlight Space which is just kind of emerging around the world (break in audio) around the walls of the building.  I may have dropped there for a second, but it looks like I'm back.  
     Talking about how libraries can build community scale networks using open source or spectrum frequencies like wi-fi and TV white space.  This is important both to extend access because as I gave the example that 80 million people have to go to one of those 17,000 facilities.  
     It's out view that every neighborhood should have a library outlet.  It doesn't have to be a full-time librarian and books and everything, but it can be some point of presence for the library to be accessible and proximate to everybody.  Everybody in the world should be close to some kind of digital services and information like that.  And rather than depend on a third-party, a carrier or someone like that, libraries can create these themselves if they acquire a little more skills and technologies get cheaper and easier to do.
     So we have done these series, these sessions every week, nearly every week since March.  And we have another one coming up tomorrow, and I put the link there, and you are welcome to check it out.  
     IFLA is hosting and recording these sessions.  They are posted on the pandemic response page there at gig libraries.net.  You are welcome to come.  It is no charge.  We're talking with some various universities, some library schools about incorporating these into professional development programs.  
     There is just a lot of interesting stuff that has come up.  It is very wide ranging and not necessarily just from the librarian perspective but from as broad as possible perspective.
     So we are also in the process of translating and transcribing the sessions to be searchable and indexable and more accessible to more people.  The libraries are leading, we think, in response, which was the thing we started with.  
     But now we're talking about recovery.  It may be a little early, but we don't think it is too early to be thinking through this pandemic to beyond the pandemic and what it is people are going to be needing besides expanded access.  
     But that is absolutely what people are going to need.  They needed it before.  They need it now, and they will need it after, if there is an after to this pandemic.
     So I think I will stop there.  And thank you again for having me on.  And check this out and join up.  It is open.  And good luck, IGF.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, Don.  Thanks.  And I like the simple sort of triple conception of access to connectivity, to wi-fi and sometimes beyond the buildings, access to digital services.  And then that social cohesion piece.  
     And I think if those are things that you are interested in, the archives of Don's recordings are well worth checking out.  So many different perspectives on that.  
     Now moving on quickly, and also on the west coast of the U.S. Mark Graham is the director of The Way Back Machine, the internet archive.  I would imagine that is a machine that everybody participating at the IGF has had occasion to use at some point.  
     Mark will give us an overview of the Internet Archive's work during COVID-19.  It has had a high profile and a good one and some great work there.  
     So he's going to talk about the work with books and the Wayback Machine, a little bit on the Turn All References Blue project with Wikipedia.  And then I think a very interesting piece we hope on controlled digital lending which had a very high profile during the pandemic.  Mark, over to you.
     >> MARK GRAHAM: Great, thank you very much.  I appreciate that, Stuart.  
     So it'd is good to be here.  I'm actually relatively new to IGF.  I went to an IGF forum many years ago in Brazil.  I was the co-founder of the Association for Progressive Communications, APC.org, which is a frequent IGF participant.  
     And Don, I'm also remembering 25 years ago crawling around in a school in San Francisco with John Gage of Sun Microsystems on the net day project initially beginning to get, at that time, co-ax at the school.  
     So I am the Director of the Wayback Machine at Internet Archive.  The Internet Archive is a 23-year-old non-profit based in San Francisco with the mission of universal access to all knowledge.  
     The organization was founded and is still run by Brewster Kale.  And we work in a variety of medium.  We work in books, music, software, movies, and the web.  And other medium as well.  78 records and, et cetera.  
     I'm going to focus today on our work around books and also the web.  So what do we do?  How do we do it?  
     We basically take analog information like a book, we digitize it, we preserve it, we make it available.  We also take digital information like web pages and preserve them and we make them available.
     We do these activities at scale.  So today that is millions of books.  And today we archive about 1.5 billion URLs every single day into the Wayback Machine.
     We make our books available through Archive.org and also through the OpenLibrary.org website.
     We make books available, if they are publicly accessible, anyone can take them and download them.  If it is a modern book, we make them available through a controlled digital lending.  The controlled digital lending is a process by which libraries are able to make books available in a digital format.
     We have been practicing controlled digital lending at the Internet Archive for more than nine years.  And there are now more than 80 libraries that participate with us in controlled digital lending, that use controlled digital lending of making books available.  
     In a nutshell, what it is about, it's about a library taking a book, a physical book that it owns, digitizing the book and then lending digital copies of that book to people with two primary controls -- to patrons with two primary controls.
     The first control is that they can only make one book available at a time based upon the number that they physically own.  So if I own two physical copies of a book, then I'm a library, I can lend out two digital versions at a given time.  
     And the second control is digital rights management.  So these books are encrypted with DRM, the same kind of DRM that's used by the standard e-book publishers.  
     So once again, controlled digital lending has been followed by Digital Archive for more than nine years and more than 80 different libraries participate in controlled digital lending.  If you want to learn more about that, ControlledDigitalLending.org.  There's a white paper and many other documents about that.
     Earlier this year on March 24, the Internet Archive launched the National Emergency Library which basically was a relaxation of the wait list of books available through controlled digital lending.
     And we did this to meet the needs of people at home with libraries closing all over the world in the face of COVID-19.  We saw the participation of people accessing books dramatically increase and we worked to meet their need.  And we got hundreds, if not thousands of responses back from teachers and students and medical professionals and others thanking us for the efforts.  
     During the process, we were sued by publishers.  The lawsuit will -- is currently scheduled to go to trial in November of next year.  And in the course of that, on June 16 we ended our National Emergency Library.  I should note the National Emergency Library, we announced it would be a temporary measure and during the time of the pandemic.  And so it was always our intention for the National Emergency Library to be a temporary thing.
     However, while we stopped the National Emergency Library, we continue to make books available for lending through controlled digital lending.  And we also continue to acquire and digitize books.  
     To accelerate this effort, we purchased one of the world's largest used bookstores last year called Better World Books.  And Better World Books is now wholly owned by a non-profit, so it is a non-profit used bookstore.  And we currently are taking books from the conveyor belts at Better World Books and putting them in shipping containers and shipping them to the Philippines where we have a factory setting where we digitize the books.  
     Prioritized based on books referenced in Wikipedia articles.  It also references earlier to other folks here about Wikipedia.  And we currently are digitizing several thousand books every day.  The shipments containers of books going from the U.S. to the Philippines.  
     We bring the books back here to the U.S. and we store them in our physical archives so that we can then lend out a copy, digital versions of them that we have physical copies of safety tucked away in our physical archives.
     So I have now mentioned this idea that a book can be referenced by Wikipedia, and wouldn't it be great if it was accessible via a click.  So that is the vision behind Turn All References Blue.  That anything -- I will blow it up a little bit -- anything anywhere online that references some other thing that could be available online we think should be available and it should be available via a click.  
     You shouldn't have to go search for it and then go to some other system and apply for a registration or something.  If you are reading a Wikipedia article and you see a reference to a journal article, you see a reference to a book, you see a reference to some other medium, maybe a news article, television news or radio, for example, we think all of those resources should be a click away.
     So we are working hard to do that.  For the last many years we have been archiving every single link that is added to each of the articles and all of the 300 Wikipedia sites worldwide.  That is millions and millions of URLs every single day if you count all the links that are referenced from all of those links.
     Because of this, we have been able to identify more than 12 million links that have gone bad that now return a 404 on a Wikipedia site and fixed them by editing those links and pointing them to the Wayback Machine where people can get the web page that had been there before the link went bad.
     We are now also adding links to books. We've now added more than 600,000 links to books this year.  More than 200,000 books so far. And my queue right now of books to link up is about 100,000 additional books that are waiting for our software to link up.  
     We are doing this right now in 46 different Wikipedia language editions.  And the vision is to pursue this on every single Wikipedia language edition in the world.  We are not by ourselves, but in partnership with many other entities around the world.  And I welcome the participation of more, especially National Libraries and other organizations that can help us acquire books in multiple languages so that we can digitize them and connect them up to Wikipedia articles worldwide.
     Every year we host a library leaders forum.  We just finished three 2-hour sessions of that the last few weeks.  And the videos for those I'm going to make available via a link as soon as I figure out how to copy and paste my links into the chat thing here, which I think I'll do after I finish talking.  I'm also going to add some links to some videos, the recent video of our founder Brewster Kale talking about the lawsuit.  And a recent video of Chris Freeland who is the head of our open libraries program.  The open libraries program is the program of libraries that participate in controlled digital lending.
     And, you know, I think we may be going a little over.  So I'm going to stop there and maybe leave more time during the open session for questions and answers.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, Mark.  And good luck as you explore the chat on the right-hand side and try to get the links in there because they are quite interesting.  
     I mean what I think we are getting to now is some things, really concrete things that have come out during the pandemic response.  And the work of the Internet Archive and the response it made with the emergency library really is one of those things.
     And I think why Mark's presentation is valuable is not only to draw our attention to that but also to draw our attention to the corresponding response it received and the environment in which it went into with the lawsuit against it.  And some of this sort of tension, tricky areas between trying to make more digital information available and then finding, you know, the restrictions that are there from the current policy and legal environments.  
     And our final intervention I think is going to touch on some of these issues as well.  Teresa Hackett is the program manager at Electric Information for Libraries, or EIFL.  Another cofounder of the Public Access Dynamic Coalition.  A tireless advocate for an international copyright law reform.  
     She's developed a lot of widely used resources for libraries in this area and she's done a lot of work on building the capacity of librarians to tackle what can be very tricky copyright issues.  
     So Teresa is going to look at access to knowledge is a public health issue in the pandemic and some of the issues that have emerged for libraries.  And she's going to talk a little bit, I think, about the library and publisher responses to COVID-19.  And then get us a bit closer to some of the concrete measures taken by governments in this area.  And then I think she's going to finish with a look at options under global intellectual property framework rules to help safeguard the central library service.  I will hand it over to you.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Okay.  Thanks very much, Stuart.  And I'm going to try and do all that in 10 minutes.  I have got some slides so I'm going to share my screen, if that's okay.
     >> MODERATOR: Go for it.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Yep.
     >> MODERATOR: I hope you are allowed.  If not, we will work it out.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Can you see my screen?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Okay, great.  So thanks very much, Stuart, for the invitation to speak at this event.  
     It has been really interesting so far to hear all of the practical aspects.  And now I think Mark's presentation has led us quite neatly into some of the policy areas.  And particularly the areas of copyright and access to knowledge.  
     And I would like to acknowledge two of my copyright colleagues, Louise Villeroyal and Camille Francois from IFLA who have given me some ideas for putting this presentation together.  I will talk about access to knowledge in the pandemic.  Looking at access to knowledge as a public health issue.
     And I guess until now, we have thought about access to knowledge for education and research and the life-long learning and employment and health information and engaging citizen engagement.  
     But in the pandemic, what we have found is that access to knowledge has actually become a public health issue.
     Because if you are visiting your physical library or working in the library or handling library books, then this is a public health issue.  We know, for example, that there are some problems where you have books that are in quarantine.  Those that should be in quarantine for a certain number of days or hours.  And there is a lot of pressure on those books, especially textbooks when students need those books to do their exams.  So we know that there is some, you know, issues around quarantine.  
     So copyright law and copyright exceptions can facilitate social distancing.  So if, for example, your copyright law allows the library to make a copy of the book or the article or the journal that the user or the student wants to access and then they can send that, they can scan it, digitize it, and send an electronic copy to that person so that they don't have to come to the physical library to get that information, then copyright exceptions are facilitating social distancing and facilitating public health guidance by our public health officials to stop the spread of coronavirus.
     So some of the issues that emerged for libraries in terms of copyright are the issue of lending print books during the lockdown.  And that is usually done by what we know as controlled digital lending that Mark has just been talking about.  
     The other issue that has emerged is textbooks in electronic formats.  So there are very often no purchasing options for libraries to purchase e-textbooks.
     So the library has the physical textbook.  The university library has the book in their library.  The students can't get it because the library building is closed.  But at the same time, the library cannot purchase that electronic version of the textbook from the publisher because the publishers want to sell those books directly to the students or to the lecturers rather than the libraries.
     Connected with that, there are problems with the pricing models for e-books which can be very expensive.  And then, more generally, there has been issues with the provision of online education and learning and copyright use terms and licenses for e-resources.  And then the use of using -- the ability to use research tools like text and data mining that is very important in a pandemic.
     So looking now at some of the responses from the different stakeholder groups, there have been a number of responses from the library community.  And I give here just a couple of examples of different approaches.  
     One of the first responses was from ICOLC, the International Coalition of Library Consortia, that issued a statement back in March asking publishers for temporary relief in their licenses to help with the closure of libraries.  For example, waiving the limits on the number of simultaneous users that can access the e-resources and lifting restrictions on the photocopying and allowing the use of all of your copyrighted sections even if they are restricted in the license.
     the Association of Research Libraries in Europe called on the European Commission and Member States for a public interest defense that would support libraries and research in times of crisis.  
     Another European NGO, Communia, argued that the basic rights should be applied as a break on the exclusive rights, exclusive copyrights in exceptional situations like COVID. 
     And then over in the U.S., library copyright specialists were reaffirming the role of fair use in supporting teaching and research.  So fair use has been helpful to libraries in the U.S. in adapting to this COVID situation.
     In addition, there have been a number of responses from Civil Society of which libraries are part of the coalition.  So there was an open letter in April calling on LIPO to take a stand so that IP systems are supported during the pandemic and encouraging Member States to use flexibilities in copyright law to support access to education and research in these times.
     And then there have been a number of pledges, open COVID pledges.  One led by Creative Comments, another by the Association for Learning Technology asking rights holders to make their content freely available during the pandemic times.
     Then publishers have also been responding in a variety of different ways.  So, for example, for home schooling, some publishers have made access to digital learning materials free of charge during the pandemic.  Other publishers have given permission for read aloud sessions from public libraries where this is not already permitted under copyright law, of course.
     In other cases, publishers have agreed with libraries to make certain library books available for research on a streamed basis.  
     And then other publishers have sent reminders that copyright law does still apply during the pandemic and that licenses are needed for certain activities, especially for working from home or in companies where their employees are sharing materials and a license may be needed for that.  
     And then in terms of higher education, there's also been a lot of activity.  Many publishers have responded so they reduced their digital licensing fees, or they provided content -- COVID-related content, access to COVID-related content for free or in some cases making their whole portfolio available.  
     They lifted restrictions on the concurrent users or remote access.  So ICOLC have been keeping a tracker of all the responses by publishers in the area of higher education.  So there is 112 publishers in the tracker.  
     What is interesting, we can see that already 50% of those concessions have expired.  So I put a screenshot on the screen there.  And it is just from one of the pages.
     So you can see that the publishers that are listed in dark color in black there where the concessions are still applying.  For all the other publishers, in these instances the concessions have expired.  
     Of the 50% that have not expired, some will be expiring at particular dates, maybe in December of this year, but most are to be determined.  So I think it is a sign of the changing times and the developing situation with regard to lockdowns and access to digital resources.
     Government is supposed to be responding, of course.  So at the beginning back in March we had 15 major countries wrote a letter to scholarly publishers asking for COVID publications and data to be immediately accessible to support public health.  
     UNESCO mobilized and is encouraging them to promote science and cooperation at this time.  The World Health Organization issued a resolution.  And one part of that resolution was asking for the removal of obstacles to universal equitable access to affordable health technologies consistent with the WTO TRIPS agreements or the agreements of trade-related Aspects of international property rights. 
     The World Health Organization also developed the COVID-19 technology access tool which is a voluntary asking rights holders to voluntarily share their knowledge and IP to advance science and technologies for COVID.  
     I think what is interesting about that is that until now there have been no commitments made into the C-TAP by pharma, by the pharmaceutical industry.
     And then WIPO, the World Intellectual Property Organization, has launched a policy tracker where they are keeping a track of all of these legislative and regulatory measures as well as voluntary actions by rights holders.  
     So then I thought it would be maybe also good to look at what binding government measures have happened and have taken place.  
     So we look first at the area of copyright.  I think the first country out of the blocks was Hungary in April.  In Hungary, the government issued a new decree easing copyright rules for the online use of education in an emergency.  I believe that some of those measures are being made more permanent.  And they are doing a fast implementation on Article 5, the article to do with online distance learning.
     And then also the government of Japan brought forward provisions for the use of material in online classes by one year.  So they were due to come into play next year and they have been brought forward.  And they have also offered to pay the copyright fees for the first academic year.  
     Australia is moving ahead with amendments to exceptions for education and library services and draft legislation is expected by the end of this year.  And the motivation in the case of Japan and Australia was that the need for change was highlighted by COVID.
     But I think what we can see from these three examples -- and they are the only examples that we have been able to find -- is that in most cases they are not initiating new developments, they are fast tracking developments that were already happening so bringing developments forward.
     So then maybe I thought it could be useful then to look at the patent side, another aspect of intellectual property rights.  Things are moving more fast in that area, maybe governments are moving forward into vaccines and so on.  
     Here we can see we've got seven governments have made resolutions or taken action specifically on patents during for COVID.  So it's a mix of resolutions or government use authorization or compulsory licenses.  
     And I think what was also interesting about this group is half of the countries are from the developed world.  And I think what we can see from both those examples on the copyright and on the patent side, that while there has been  a lot of declarations and high level resolutions and all this great rhetoric, it has actually not been matched about by any concrete action or not by a lot of concrete action at the national scale.  And so we have these aspirations but when it comes to the actual country, not that much has happened so far.
     That is what makes this initiative, this recent initiative interesting.  So at the WTO TRIPS Council meeting in October, India and South Africa made a joint proposal which is co-sponsored by Eswatini and Kenya.  And what the proposal is to have a waiver from certain TRIPs provisions for the prevention, containment and treatment of COVID-19.  
     The provisions include copyright and related rights, patents, industrial designs and trade secrets.  So very important that copyright is part of that resolution or part of that proposal.  
     And the proposal is that it should be in place until widespread vaccination is in place globally and the majority of the world's population have developed immunity.  
     Now, this has been discussed in the TRIPs Council.  The TRIPs Council will reconvene before the end of the year and make a decision.  And then that decision will go to the ministerial conference for a decision.  
     And the motivation from South Africa when they were presenting the proposal at the TRIPs Council, was that nine months into the pandemic voluntary approaches have proven to be insufficient and in a global pandemic we need concrete action and we need a global solution.
     So another option available for governments in the pandemic is there is a very interesting provision in the TRIPs agreements called Security exception, Article 73.  And this states that nothing in the TRIPs agreement should prevent Member States from taking any actions that it considers necessary for its security interest in times of war and also in times of other emergency in international relations.  
     And so some of the examples that governments might want to -- measures that governments might want to take are a waiver from the implementation, application and enforcement of copyrights, which is similar to what the South Africa India are proposing in the TRIPs Council.  
     You could also take an indemnity against -- give indemnity from infringement claims during times of COVID and also to take up some measures dealing with competition, for example, to alleviate the problem of the e-book pricing that I mentioned at the beginning.  
     And importantly, or just a note to mention here that least developed countries can already do these things without having to avail of the security exception because least developed countries have their own general waiver of TRIPs which is until July 2021 next year.  And, in fact, right now an extension to that waiver is being discussed and negotiated at the WTO.  So LDCs already have policy space to do these things, and then other countries can invoke the Article 73.
     And then, finally, what is so interesting is to look at this in the context of everything else going on in COVID.  So we've had unprecedented government interventions in all areas of our lives that we would never would never have imagined until very recently.  So we've had interventions in real property law, so no rent increases and moratoriums on evictions.  There have been intervention in competition where supermarkets are allowed to collectively discuss supply chains to keep food on their shelves.  And there has been deep interventions in the area of civil rights with travel restrictions and business closures.
     So I guess the question is, is it now time for us as a library community to safeguard our essential library services and to put this on the map as well?
     So thank you, Stuart.  That is a very quick run-through.  And I'm happy to supply the slides.
     >> MODERATOR: Definitely some interesting slides in the chat.  I draw the panelists' attention to the chat if you are not looking at it.  Teresa, you raised a few questions there.  I've got a lot myself.  
     We've got about 15 minutes left, and I think it's important that we actually tackle a couple of questions that have come up from some of our participants.  
     And we do have one from Moustapha.  And Moustapha, you may have to qualify this a little bit for us.  I think it came in when Mark was speaking, I can't be sure.  
     But Mark, I will let you take it and see if you can pick it up.  But it's a question saying he wants to know the quality of projects that you are funding, is it related to online education?
     You can interpret that how you will, but maybe what are the online education elements of some of the stuff that you are working on?
     >> MARK GRAHAM: I also have to say in full disclosure, my wife, Dr. Lisa Petrettis, runs OERCommons.org which is one of the leading libraries for metadata about open educational resources.  
     So OER and education is really core to the mission of and practice of the Internet Archive.  In particular, one initiative between Internet Archive and the parent organization or OER Commons is the universal school library, recognizing the unique needs for students in America, K-12, the definition of school library which are being either shut down or destaffed at quite a rapid clip.  
     So yeah, I would say, you know, we make millions of books available.  If you go to OpenLibrary.org right now, you can see we have got them categorized by grade level, by subject matter, et cetera.  
     So absolutely.  Education and learning, life-long learning for students in school but throughout people's lives is a core part of the mission of the United Archive.  
     And I noted we recently have launched an alpha version of Scholar.  
     So scholar/qa.archive.org.  And we have more than 30 million open access journal articles there.  I don't mean just pointers to them.  I mean we actually have archived more than 30 million journal articles and PDFs that are available through the Wayback Machine.  
     And just this morning in response to an article, a research paper many of you may have read a couple of months ago about the disappearing online journals, there was an announcement by the directory of online of open access journals and DO -- of a consortium of organizations including the Internet Archive that have come together to specifically preserve journals from small publishers.  
     I could go on and on.  In the interest of time, I will stop here and note there are many links that I put in the chat.  And I'm always available, [email protected], for any questions from anyone.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Again, drawing people's attention to the chat.
     And also there's a great example in there from Russia from Maria, see if you can capture that because there is really good stuff in there about the Russian library's response.  
     Teresa is going to share her slides in some way, shape or form, we'll work out how to do that.  
     But there' a question that you might want to put to Teresa which is from Avis in Cameroon asking about sort of revisions of law, policy and regulation that enable the use of platforms for education.  
     I might narrow that.  I think maybe you could say something about the work that IFLER and IFLA and the other library organizations have done in terms of trying to find a standard on copyright exceptions and limitations.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Yeah, sure.  So thanks, Stuart.  
     So I think it is very important to have policies in place and also to have laws in place.  And one of the areas that we have been working on globally is to ensure that every country has a copyright law that enables libraries to undertake basic activities and that there is a kind of a level playing field for libraries all around the world.
     And I think one thing that we have seen from the pandemic is that this -- the librarians all around the world in many different countries have been sort of frantically reading their copyright laws and delving deeply into the laws to see are we allow to do this?  What's the position?  Can we do this?  Do we need permission?  
     So it's really highlighted the importance of having a legal framework that supports these activities.  And some of the activities are really quite basic activities and some of them -- and it's just that they have become critical in COVID times.  Like the governments in Japan and in Hungary and in Australia have realized.  Because digital is normal, and why should I not be able to -- be prevented from using digital technologies?  
     So we are working together to -- with IFLA at the World Intellectual Property Organization so that we can have basic rules that will apply to libraries everywhere and that there be particularly regarding cross-border so that libraries can share resources when needed.  Especially research resources and unique resources that are not available locally.
     So that is something we are working on.  I'm not sure, Stuart, if that answers your question.
     >> MODERATOR: That is good.  And if you have links, do throw them into the chat.  
     We have got only a very short period of time left, and I want to finish with Valensiya in just a second.  But I do want to see if the panelists can do something very important and very quick for me.  
     If there was one policy change that you would want that could safeguard digital inclusion through access to information, as in this COVID-19 context, what would it be?  
     And you need to do it in one sentence.  So I would like to see this.  This is a function of us not having much time left.  So Nkem, I don't know if you can hear us.  Can you go on that one?
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: Yes, I can hear you, thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: What one thing do you want to see? 
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: More access to information through libraries and libraries to have the infrastructure for people to access information even if the doors are closed.
     >> MODERATOR: Very good, I like it.  And, Don, I come to you next.
     >> DON MEANS: Sorry, Stuart, I just dropped, I didn't hear what you said.  I think you asked for a single action?
     >> MODERATOR: Single policy change you would like to see to secure digital inclusion in this COVID period.
     >> DON MEANS: I would like to see universal service.  Adopting this core value that everybody should have some type of basic level of access.  And that is public access.  In our view, that is the cheapest way to provide that.  It's not the best, but it is something to get you started or in a backup.  
     And so using funds from this huge telecom market, the tiny portion of that to provide access to everybody is a single best use of that and thing that can be done, I think.
     >> MODERATOR: Good stuff.  Thank you very much.  Mark?
     >> MARK GRAHAM: I would like to see the courts and governments around the world uphold the principles and practices of controlled digital lending, extending the role of libraries in the digital age.  
     And also, as noted by Teresa, address issues of e-books in particular, the general trend in which e-books cannot be purchased but only licensed, which is part of an overall movement that the lawsuit against controlled digital lending is really about.  Which is whether or not any of us, especially libraries, will be able to own books and journals and other materials or whether forever we will only be able to license them under strict conditions by select publishers in which the availability to the patrons can be severely limited or blocked completely.
     >> MODERATOR: And while I was going to basically use my one for that, I couldn't agree with you more as somebody who is now working very much with national purchasing of e-books for public libraries to see the prices being three times the price of a print book.  It is not sustainable so we need to take action.
     >> MARK GRAHAM: And only for a year.
     >> MODERATOR: Yeah, yeah, and then explode after 26 uses.  Thank you very much for the snap reactions.  Valensiya, very quickly, what is next for PAL-DC? 
     Oh, sorry, Theresa, I didn't give you -- go on, Theresa.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Can I have a snap reaction?  
     Support South Africa in the proposal at the WTO TRIPS Council.  I think that would be a great help in the pandemic.  And I also echo the e-book issue.  
     And I put a link in the chat there, there is a -- I will put it again because the UK librarians are organizing campaign on the e-textbook issue and I think it's got some very good interesting information there.
     >> MODERATOR: We've supported that through a statement in Ireland as well.  Valensiya, what is next for the DC-PAL?
     >> VALENSIYA DRESVYANNIKOVA:  The very immediate next steps would be, of course, be to take stock of everything discussed here and feed that into the following decision-making process.  
     We, of course, also look forward to finding out more about different countries' experiences with supporting inclusion in different countries and drawing lessons from that.  
     And just as a way of wrapping up the session, one of the outcomes would be to, indeed, summarize the policy advice that has been given and offered so far.  
     So this is the moment to sort of bring it all together and see if I got your opinions correctly.  In general, the key policy changes to support should include access to content, access to services, through the pandemic.  
     What you would need is improvements to the infrastructure, including public access and libraries.  Universal service, supporting the principles of universal service.  Potentially drawing on, where possible, funds from universal access of funds by telco, et cetera, et cetera.  
     And then we have the point regarding the need to build up sustainable models of access to digital content.  And that includes addressing the questions around controlled digital lending and getting engaged in available international and national processes such as the WIPO process as Theresa pointed out to stand for sustainable access to additional content.
     >> MODERATOR: That is pretty good.  And we look forward to seeing that codified and written down and taken forward and we will feed into the Dynamic Coalition meeting next week in the immediate short term.  
     So again, there's a fantastic, interesting piece of information from Russia in the chat there if you haven't seen that.  
     Thanks, everybody, for joining us.  There has been a lot of information here.  And we really (garbled audio).  Goodbye.    
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-4-dc-future-unclear-data-and-bodies-in-post-pandemic-times-raw^^

>> MODERATOR: Hello, everybody and welcome to the session of the dynamic coalition on internet governance.  The first online DC session and we are pleased to have the full session looking at one of the key themes in IGF 2020 which is the question of data.  And what we try and do at the dynamic coalition on gender and internet governance is really ensure that the issues that we are discussing related to internet governance are looked at through the Lens of gender.  So that is what we will try and do in this session.  And before I introduce our panel there is a tradition that we follow at each and every DC GIG as our short form is called for the Dynamic Coalition on gender and internet governance at each reiting we have a small presentation which looks at a phenom none called the gender report card a tool used in at least the last nine IGFs or so to really look at the gender composition of the IGF and critically think about gender composition as a critical tool in internet governance as well.  Before we move to the future I'm pleased to invite Debarati Das to share the gender report card from IGF 2019.  Debarati?
     >> DEBARATI: Thank you.  Hi, everybody.  I'm Debarati.  I will just share my screen.  So, every year at IGF as part of our work in the Dynamic Coalition on gender and internet governance, we do analysis and sum remember of the gender report cards the sessions at IGF fill out after they have completed.
     I will take you through the observations from the IGF 2019.  So here you can see the gender distribution of online and offline site participants and last year at IGF only 39% of participants were women.
     And it was a 2% dip from IGF 2018 which was a previous year when we had 41% women's participation.
     Here you can see the gender diversity and percentage of female participants in presentation brackets 86 sessions filled out the field and most sessions had female presence in thebracket of 25 to 50%.  In 2018 most were in the greater than 50% bracket followed by 50%.  Even here there was sort of a dip.
     We also all look at how many sessions fill out the gender report cards and how many do not.  Last year at IGF, gender report cards were filled out for 94 sessions out of 118.  This was quite a positive finding because this showed an increase in the number of reporting sessions by about 40% compared to IGF 2018.
     We also look at how sessions engaged with gender.  So 93 sessions at IGF 2019 provided information on this.  And 24 sessions did not fill out this field.  And as you can see here, 41 sessions which is the highest number of sessions had partial focus on gender or topics that intersect with gender closely followed by sessions which did not engage with gender at all which are 38 and only 14 sessions directly engaged with gender as a topic.  That's what I had.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks so much, Debarati.  I put a message in chat saying that if anybody has any questions, on the gender report cards they can either be added on chat or on the Q&A tab at the bottom of the screen.  And I will keep a watch on it.  Nothing so far.
     So let's move on then to future unclear data, bodies, gender and sexuality.  And I'm pleased to introduce the three fantastic panelists.  All of whom are leaders of their organizations.  So alphabetically Anja Kovack is the director of the Internet Democracy Project and is based in New Delhi, India.  And the Internet Democracy Project does really amazing research and advocacy through a feminist lens on a number of issues.  Last couple of years really focusing on bodies and data that.  And then Joana Varon, the Executive Director of Coding Rights based in Brazil and works at the intersection of technology and other social justice constituencies and I think is known for really strategic and creative communication.  And ways to really engage audiences around the issues among many other things.  Welcome, Jo Ann ma.  And our other speaker is Sadaf Khan for Media Matters for Democracy based in Pakistan.  And Sadaf is one of the leaders of Media Matters for Democracy which is again known for a lot of policy work around media freedoms and internet freedoms and rights in Pakistan.
     So thanks all three of you.  And the reason we invited all three of these speakers is because all three of them actually wrote really powerful essays looking at the intersection of bodies, data, gender and sexuality.
     And I'm going to put the link to the essays in the chat.  But I would like to actually start by asking each of our speakers if they could briefly summarize the key ideas that they raised in those essays and if any of you would like to read out a little, you know, excerpt please feel free to do that as well.  We allocated 10 minutes roughly per speaker.  And Anja, may I ask you to actually begin and.  And I also wanted to say that the name of the essay that Anja has written that we are referring to is When Our Bodies Become Data Where Does That Leave Us and I'm putting a direct link to that actually in the chat.  Okay.  Over to you Anja.
     >> ANJA KOVACS: Thanks so much and also for the invitation.  It is nice to be with feminist friends and talk about data governance after a long time.  Excited to be here.
     As you mentioned already in the last two years quite a lot of work that we have been doing at the Internet Democracy Project has been focusing on data governance.  What we tried to bring in the essay was one specific aspect.  We know that with datafication of society this is something that all of us are affected by, but what we really wanted to bring out is that for people at the margins, the consequences of losing control over our data are particularly devastating.  And particularly we want to highlight the concept of privacy as boundary management to really being central to how we understand those new dangers and what is really happening here.
     Boundary management is something to complicate but something that we are all doing in our every day lives all the time, right?  It is really about the decisions about what to share, what to reveal or not about ourselves to others.  And you do that when you go to the supermarket and they ask for your phone number, you do that when you consider whether or not to share your sexual orientation with your family.  All of these are decisions in which boundary management is taking place.
     Some of these decisions might seem trivial in themselves but what is important is that collectively they really affect our ability or our capacity for self-determination.  And in that way also to live a life of dignity.  Especially for those whose identity is already marginalized it is is important to have the space to step back from the social environment and develop a critical perspective on validate your own experiences and beliefs and desires even if they are the not aligned with what society values.
     That is really important if the social is not to overwhelm our own sense of identity if we are fully to become ourselves, so to say, right.  And boundary management, the thing we engage in every day is what allows us to create that room for ourselves.
     So that understanding that this is really important even though we don't see it reflected very much in traditional dates around privacy that talk about privacy in the home where it is something you either have or don't and it is static as well.
     Even though a lot of the traditional perceptions are that kind.  Privacy boundary management is a concept understood by people who think about the lives of marginalized people for many years and I wanted to read a brief part of the essay quoting Dr. Ambetka.  In the 20th century before the internet came into being one of India's foremost intellectuals was already sharply wear of the importance of being able to dynamically control what information about ourselves we share with who and when.
     While Gandhi called upon followers to relocate to the India villages recommended that the country's those who were in the per vasive Cass system move to cities instead.
     The anonymity of the city would give them a better chance to escape the rigid requirements to build better lives for themselves.  In villages, your Cass will already always be known.  In the cities you still remain some measure of control over whether or not to reveal this information.  Recognized that boundary management is not only important because it allows us to control what we share with others, he also understood that this control is crucial to living a life of dignity.
     And that is the end of the quote.  The challenge today that we face and that all of us face to some extent is really that in their quest to make us more and more ledgible, trans parent, predictable, governments and companies are fundamentally undermining our capacity to engage in that kind of boundary management to autonomously manage our bodies, ourselves and our lives as we see fit.
     How did we get there?  First of all, a challenge a big challenge is that in most dominant discourses data is treated as a resource, as this thing that is out there, up for grabs that sits on everything but is how independent from the medium that generates it and that is why you can just take it if you get access to it.
     At the same time, data is also increasingly seen as telling the ultimate truth.  Your body's data and only the data will tell us who you really are and you see this, for example, in the growing number of countries relying on digital IDs based around biometrics.  If the biometrics, if a machine has to verify the biometrics is failing to verify you, you are not who you say you are even if you are standing there and making that claim.
     So what we see is that increasingly our bodies, the data about our bodies is actually privileged over our living and breathing bodies and telling others who we are.  We can no longer represent ourselves.  This is really in many ways the end of agency.
     There are many examples in the essay, but here I thought I will briefly touch on one.  There were two researchers who trained an algorithm to actually tell whether outcomeor straight, gay or lesbian.  So basically to read people's sexual orientation.  That study was highly criticized, very controversial.  First of all, because it has the potential to out people on a massive scale, right?  And since in so many countries not being heterosexual is still a crime, this has really, really potentially deadly consequences for people.
     The algorithm wasn't always accurate in its categorizations either.  But because of that aura of truth that is there around data, people often tend to believe this in any case over what a person tells you and Geneseeing that sexual orientation is criminalized in many countries, this is really, really risky.  This example also really shows how increasingly the expectation we do still have and what was referred that at least in urban spaces our faces are in some ways also private.  We have spaces of privacy even when we are out in public.
     What algorithm searches these do are also undermining that.  When you goout in public space now increasingly you do not have that anonymity anymore that was considered so empowering.
     These are really important harms to do with anonymity and privacy but there is a second set that the example brings out and that raises the broader question of dignity also.  That is about biometrics showing who we really are, right?  In a way what the two researchers were doing was really reminiscent of the pseudo sciences that were popular in the 18th and 19th century which Claimed it was possible to determine somebody's personality or even their moral character from their faces or fair skulls.
     Many of these the most horrible aspects of these theories were debunked especially in the 1960's but some of their impact actually remains.  So, for example, if you look at the genocide in Rwanda in 1994, one of the origins of the genocide has been traced to Belgium and German colonizers who divided the population based on the measurements of people's faces.  What is scary is that the basic premise of the colonizers at that time has been brought again in research.  This might sound like an extreme example but actually facial recognition technologies at least in the country like India already affect in many different ways how freely we can live.  Just one example, it is increasingly used by police to identify habitual protesters.  Even though protesting habitually is not a crime under any law in India.  This is just one other example how that space is really shrinking.
     There are many more in the essay and some of those examples also built on the points I just made, but really the overall point that I then wanted to bring out here and that the essay is trying to make is really that that capacity for boundary management is really crucial to living a life of dignity in the digital age Al age and if we want to continue to live or have that capacity to live a life of dignity going forward as well, it is really crucial that we reclaim this.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, so much, Anja, for opening up the conversation with really a very thought provoking concept and sort of, you know, the boundary management concept, right?  Really taking the whole question of data, privacy, dignity, agency into a whole other realm.  Thanks very much.  I will invite Sadaf to go next.  And again, as was the past, I'm just going to -- give me a moment.  The name of the essay that Sadaf wrote is data bleeding everywhere a story of period trackers.  And I'm just going to post that link and invite Sadaf to start as well.
     >> SADAF KHAN: Thank you.  I think when we were writing and working on this essay last year we had no clue that basic concept of privacy versus healthcare would become so important in just a year.
     When I started working on the essay and I'm sure I hope people are participating will read it later, the premise deals with how women are using period trackers, what kind of information are these period tracking apps collecting, sharing, caring and how is -- how the users are engaging with the premise itself and whether they are conscious of it or not.
     I will start with today because it is called post pandemic it seems like a futuristic thing especially in countries like Pakistan where internet penetration is only 17% and the subjects and people I reached out to interview for this essay hadn't really thought about what they are doing and whether -- and they didn't see their data as something that invades into the privacy.  I found it fascinating, Anja, when it you talked about that because in the mind of various users period tracking apps which are interlinked the boundary doesn't exist and they had not thought about the fact that the data that they are entering that is so personal that they don't even talk to their doctors about it usually is actually being shared as part of a big data app.  And not just one third party that they give consent to but everybody else they are connected to.
     The question is paramount in a lot of people's minds.  Especially because we have seen the same thing being carried out and exploited in a way much more invasive than this.  In Pakistan created and took over tracking app like various other governments and ours is linked to the GPS signals of the users diagnosed with COVID and allows other users to enter data that they think or know have been positive or are display is symptoms of the virus.  So the main question that I title in the essay has become kind of Paramount and has come to the forefront as well.  I will read a bit from the essay before going into key questions that came up when I was working on this.  I keep saying questions because I left a lot of questions in there as well.  That was one of the key things when I engaged with other people and I come from a journalistic background so my essay includes a lot of journalistic investigation into the users.
     And so what I found Paramount was that the questions I was asking them was bringing forth their questions in their minds and I think that is a good thing as well.  But nobody had really explored the answers before the questions were posed to them.  I will read a bit just the beginning to say why I was interested in writing this article and why somebody who works in the field that really connects with the data and really explores this area still uses these apps because convenience becomes at times Paramount for us.
     To my initiation into app was early.  I switched to a period tracker.  The miscarriage had triggered an irregularity in my cycle that had not been there before and helped me track the change and maintain a detailed health log and helped me connect with other women going through the same thing and facing similar emotional and physical fallouts.  It offered a space that helped me ooh heal.  It was months later that I started thinking about the details of the health log I was maintaining on eve from my height height and weight and moods but it was clear that much of what I was noting down would never ever make it to my gynecologist.  However, in the vulnerable state that I was in, it was helpful to click on options that helped me label my own emotions as anything but grief.
     Eve's how are you feeling prompt asks users to choose from a variety of emotions and you can be happy, emotional, stressed, calm, tired, in love, angry, sad, energetic, confident, motivated excited and once you tell eve which emotional state fits your current mood, eve will ask you to de-construct even further.  Love life, family, school work, and others.  Every time I completed a health log on eve, the applications and algorithms were able to add more detail to my health records based on the app made better and more predictive positions and post relevant articles and posts to me.
     As long as I save eve regular updates every bit of information I received from the gems that eve selected to the community posts that made to the top of my timeline were completely customized to my own needs at that moment.  No wonder I felt that eve was a friend, a therapist and a gynecologist all rolled into one, free convenient bottle.
     And I chose to -- this was not really the beginning that I had planned when I started thinking about the essay.  I chose to go with this because this vulnerability and the fact that a number of users who were using this app were so emotionally involved and connected whether they were trying to conceive, whether they were using the app as a contraceptive method, whether it was just a way to track their periods, the vulnerability that came in, they were not in the best of their health at that time and the best of their moods at that time and needed some kind of support and some kind of community.
     And it made me wonder whether if this was not the very nature of period tracking apps and the nature of pregnantly tracking apps.  If we would as users be offering this data so freely and openly to the applications.
     And I want to highlight two or three things that came up in the essay.  One was the fact when I talked to the users about how they felt in control of their own data, the main premise that came was the use of anonymous digital identities.
     So people were simply putting in an anonymous name and feeling secure about the information they were putting in.  This becomes very important because while a lot of people feel that the kind of information period tracking apps ask for and are of no use and even if they are leaked they will be anonymized what I found out in the terms and conditions is that a number of the apps see the user as data as well.  And when you think about the fact that stories shared by the community and comments left on the app which are much more personal and much more identifiable and much more intimate than what just clicking an option would be, you are all feeling towards offering that kind of trans parentcy to the data to the app changes.
     However, regardless of the fact that everybody seemed to be using the apps on their own mobiles meaning they were connected to the real phone numbers and often connected to their Google accounts, they are often signing in through Facebook, they still felt secure in the fact that simply anonymizing their names or using a different name on the app somehow made them anonymous and somehow made their identity a secret to the app in that way.
     The other thing that I probed and found out was that people had not been thinking about, you know, the period tracking app is seen as a mine where everybody is doing the same thing.  So there was -- as a community where everybody is doing the same thing.  A bit of comfort I'm talking about my sex life but a dozen other women talking about their sex lives, too.  And this is a big deal for women coming from a conservative society from Pakistan where it is not okay to talk about things and go in detail and it is considered a sin but the fact in that community being that so many people are doing it makes them okay.  If I asked about the participants they were getting and when I looked at my own experience when I started tracking the pregnancy on the apps immediately on Google and Facebook and every other thing I was using on my mobile, all the ads were changed to pregnancy related stuff and baby things.  People had not thought about how third-party data sharing works and that is something coming to the forefront again with the COVID-related apps.
     The third thing that I think was really prominent to me is the fact when people think about the consent they are giving to applications they haven't really thought through it is not informed consent.  When I asked if they knew that their content was being shared or the app's had the permissions to share their stories and permission to share their comments on articles and whatnot, nobody really knew about it.  And they did look uncomfortable even though they did try to kind of cover but they looked kind of uncomfortable with the fact that this could be happening and that is where the questions I was mentioning earlier came from, came in and they were like, you know, what would the application really do with this data?  Why should I be concerned even if they are doing that, my name is not there?  Why should I be concerned if somebody knows the volume or the consistency of my period?
     And it doesn't really do anything to me.  And yet if you start looking at how these apps are progressing, we are still in that part of the world where internet penetration is not high.  But telemedicine has made a huge, you know, I don't want to say comeback, but triggered in a way that nobody is prepared for yet.  At least Pakistan.  I'm sure in India as well.  What I found out in the U.S. and different European countries where most of the apps are registered, companies can buy premium accounts for all of the employees.  It is one thing to think about Google and Facebook where Google looks larger than life and not consider what they have.  But the employer is a small entity.  If that is the way things going somewhere in the world that is the way it will be everywhere.  Technology progresses in similar ways in different countries.
     The idea of employers asking access to it and that is something that has not been thought of and something that is becoming increasingly the limit now I feel because even right now we have the telemedicine health service for our team because of COVID, the health insurance is there and a lot of people are switching to it.  A few telemedicine services that we connected to, told us that their business had increased 500 times just during this one year.
     So because of the fact that this -- I don't know in contradiction, this conflict between being able to have access to great health services versus what are you offering and on what conditions you are offering the data information that is something that has not opinion thought through by the general users, there needs to be more information and more engagement.  And even if people choose to still offer the data without having the protections that we necessarily need or the kind of protections we as advocates advocate for, they should at least know what they are doing and at least have a clear picture of the costly conditions, the possible implications, the vulnerabilities in the systems that is being offered.  That kind of mars the data that they are offering to the applications.
     I think I will end there.  If there are any questions, please feel free to put in Q&A and inject.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks so much, Sadaf.  What was really interesting is how the issues that you raised actually speak to the issues that are around boundary management and how do we see boundary management vis-a-vis humans and software and also the implications given the number of health apps and telemedicine, et cetera, right, for privacy boundary management et cetera.  So thanks very much for contributing and building that conversation.
     And our final speaker is Joana Varon and the title of the essay is Cavaliers the future is trans feminist from imagination to action.  So As Joana Starts to Talk About Some of the major issues that came up in this essay, I'm just going to paste the link here.  Over to you.
     >> JOANA VARON: Okay.  As the article is also kind of visual, I will share my screen.  And go through it with you showing some of the pictures.
     Can you see my screen?  Okay.  So, this article for me in the beginning was meant to be an interview with the Katarina who wrote that feminist.  But then it was right when the book was going to be launched and the pandemic happened and my head was upside down with the changes that was going to happen from then onwards.
     And I was starting to think about future, about alternatives and how do we bring back our imaginations about technology and feminism into practice, into action.
     So that is why the title and it was a mix of personal narratives and experiences with technologies.  So I will read some parts of it.  The departures from the question what would the future look like if algorithms that command our daily interactions were developed based on feminist values?
     What if the technologies that we cherish were developed to crash instead of maintain the metrics of domination?  Composed by capitalism, Pate yaky and white rue semcy Sunday colonization.  To reclaim the question together with other colleagues such Asa is a, Claude Juliano who whom we are developing the article for what we called the or cal for trans feminist futures which is a card game that have several decks that we use for codesign workshops to envation and change the manners of technologies that we have now and to enable also that anyone can even people who are excluded from the process of developing technology to get together and think, for instance, what a trans feminist period tracker would look like.
     And so it opens the space for imagination.  And for me, technology was very connected to my imaginaries before the internet when I was playing video games.  And I will read you a part of the article.
     In which I was describing my experiences with video game before the internet.  And that I said that still, those imaginaries were playing and being amazed of being able to live in other scenarios in life, those imaginaries are still continue to feel very gender normative into which I was misfitted.  I was asking questions like why did it always need to be Mario or Luigi?  Why did we need to save the princess?  Why was the princess not using her own strengths and tools to unblock her own path?  Why was a always a blonde white pretty dressed princess who needed to be saved.  Why couldn't a princess save another princess?  Why couldn't I save the turtles instead of Mario?
     And then the internet came, and for me it was finally a feeling of autonomy, of mentality in which we were transforming from media consumers to media creators, finally able to queer genders to let our imagination fly loose with those new tools.  It did sound like a tool for revolutions.
     But then we had Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Amazon, all the white male dominated big five in the silicon valley who started to monopolies most of the platforms and our imaginaries.  Now they use the terms community while they are actually turning us into addicted users with our desires becoming the product and the targets exactly of those running that matrix of domination.
     And and I think that is where we stand now.  So how do we break this?  This matrix of domination is in more hands trying to manipulate us with our data.  But also with algorithms censoring our production with an example of a gift that we shared during the day of lesbian visibility in Brazil, lesbians call themselves Sapatelle.  It is like a word that is like Dyke that has been reappropriated by the movement and that also goes for frog so we posted the dancing frog and it was censored on Instagram because because of the word sapatoao.  So the monopolies and the imaginary -- the monopolies of our imaginaries are taking away our rights to express ourselves with our own words.
     And the emergence of what social narratives above call surveillance capitalism has also opened the space for practices of gender surveillance.  So threats now read here this Part either by threats by partners who spy on devices, a web full of ads that hiddenly reinforce gender roles, miss men infill I. traiting dating apps and period trackers that turn our blood into money for others or are even funded by the anti-abortion movement to spread misinformation that prevents access to sexual and reproductive rights.
     So all of these trends on the internet are getting use even more complicated because there is also these trains in which our bodies as Anja was saying are becoming data sources from data recognition to the collection of DNA.
     And in the next hours we will launch this web series at Coding Rights called from devices to body the first part of which is exactly about the DNA data collection.
     And one of the key questions here is that if my cousin or my sisters or my sister do DNA ancestry test, people can use her DNA to figure out what is my DNA.  So as Anja was talking about, boundary management, if we don't discuss DNA data collection, the issue of considering the privacy is a collective matter we can see more evident because it is not about my -- only my consent anymore.
     So so watch out for the series to come soon.  And I think I need to wrap.  But what I'm focused now is on this.  Okay.  Let's problem atize and talk about DNA and AI and how the strains and monopolies that have conquered a lot of our imaginaries about technology over the internet, they are moving to other kinds of our digital interactions through AI systems, bringing, again, this matrix of dominations.
     So I think in one hand, we should not expose this problem, but on the other hand, also recover the imaginaries and think recover and rethink imaginaries to have and trace our own path.  And I will end with this quote from Ursula Le Guin.  Ursula said the thing about science fiction is it isn't about the future, it's about the present.
     But the future give us great freedom of imagination.  It's like a mirror.  You can see the back of our own head.  So I will finish here.  Also, an invitation for us to keep problematizing and watching and pointing and exposing how this matrix of domination is pertaining technologies in many of our digital interactions but also imagine alternatives so from this imagination we can later prototype and live them.  Thanks.  Stop sharing.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks so much, Joana.  Again, so sort of taking the conversation, you know, back to values and how do we sort of get out of this movement that we find ourselves stuck in, right?  And what kind of values can we use to sort of build towards the future and really I think putting back the imagination.  Not as fantasy but as actually as a political tool, right?  That we can use to kind of build our futures.
     So I think now -- and it is interesting that the whole concept of surveillance capitalism also I think has come up in many of these discussions and is clearly something that is very on our minds.  So I wanted to actually ask all three of you, and again, we can go in whatever order is comfortable.
     You laid the ground out for us really well.  And these are all aspects of the whole sort of big mosaic, right?
     So looking forward, trying to imagine a future which is not as bleak as it seems at this moment.  You know, what is the change that you -- each of you would like to see based on what you have presented.  And, you know, it would be great if you could go a little bit into that and then actually if we have time for another round, then I would like to ask you all sort of the policy implication of that.  But if for now if we could just talk a little about the change moving forward.
     And I also want to invite participants if they would -- thank you very much some of you for sharing comments and if you have any particular questions for specific panelists or thoughts, or any general questions, please do use the Q&A function at the bottom or the chat.
     Yeah.
     Okay.  So should we sort of do the same order because I kind of -- now my head is stuck in to following that.  And I think it is nice because Anja lays out the big broad conceptual, you know, sort of gives us a glimpse into one aspect which is clearly gendered.
     And then Joana talks about the future so should we do one more round in the same order and then we can mix it up.  Anja, are you good to go?
     >> ANJA KOVACS: Sure, yes.  Thanks, Bishakha.  I realize that you cannot approach your question in two ways, right?  One is like what is at the end of that imagination in your head at the moment.
     But I approached it or I want to approach in a more practical way.  Because I do think we also really need to think about how do we -- how do we make sure that we have ways to collectively imagine, right?  And that is also really about finding a language to document.  And at the Internet Democracy Project what we are arguing, it is important to put bodies back into the debate.  And actually it is for two reasons.
     One is it is not just about the datafication of our bodies as such, but really all of the data that is being geared about us goes through the instrument of our body in some way, right?  Even our emotions, nobody gets access to until we type them out.  Which places we visit.  People don't get access to unless we walk there, et cetera.
     So all of that data is still generated through this very material locust no matter how disembodied a way we talk about it.  But it is also about the reverse.  The way the data is used, the ultimate goal of that at the end of the day is really to affect our behavior, what we do, right?
     We strictly speaking still think whatever we want.  As long as we fall in line in terms of our behavior.
     And so recognizing that enTanglement between bodies and data and no longer talking about data as a resource and that becomes sort of really I think empowering mechanism to kind of try and start to really imagine some of these things.  And the argument is not that we need to go back to more bounded imaginations of what a body is. in any case that kind of imagination comes from the dual thinking between body and mind that was so popular in enlightlement thinking and has always been criticized by feminism.  Feminism or intersectional feminism has at least that bodies are always relationally constituted.  And what we see really then is that the data, our bodies are being relationally constituted in new ways.
     So feminist thinking around bodies and the constitution of bodies becomes a really useful tool to think with and develop both a language and a vision that can address some of these harms that we are seeing in a more clear way.  Can talk about it and name them.  But also can talk about the alternative imaginaries.
     And maybe I will briefly mention some of the work I did with my colleague Tripti jean around consent.  We have a paper coming out at the end of the month and set up so many of the things that you were saying that the people you spoke to like weren't aware of et cetera.
     This is really a big part of the problem, right?  So our starting point for thinking about consent was well, if we actually see the entanglement with bodies perhaps we should look at debates around consent and feminism and we looked specifically at sexual consent and how it is dealt with.
     What is the did I Wednesday between data governance where consent is failing, it is not doing enough and not working well enough et cetera and with feminism?  The crucial difference is really that feminism has always argued that to be able to consent at all if that is a possibility at all you have to be free from oppression and violence.
     And so what it means is that feminism always puts the power of relationships in which consent is structured on the table.  That brings up a whole bunch of questions.  Do we have influence on the terms of the agreement we are supposedly entering into this?  Can we negotiate before, during, after entering into it?  Can we walk away?
     In strong sexual consent the answer to all of these questions are yes, right?  Negotiation during an agreement means it is not because you agreed to kiss somebody that you have agreed to have intercourse with them.
     And data governance, though, strangely all of this is erased and there is a very black and white, are you consenting or not without really looking at these underlying power structures in more depth.  And what you then get is that consent which is supposedly -- I mean it is still talked about if you look at data governance laws, consent is put forward as a way to enable autonomy.  What consent is doing is cementing power relationships that are already existing by saying to people, right, but you consented, did not you?  You checkd that box.  So the rather than questioning the underlying power relations that structure this, what data governance does is really look just at that top level.  And asking the questions from this perspective makes it possible to develop.  So what we can in the paper and I saw Joana post their work also which we reference as well, we tried to build on it by develop a list of feminism principles of consent against which we then also came up with concrete suggestions for changes that need to be made in policy and that we are now applying against good law and technological initiatives in India, for example.  It becomes a way to from a different perspective rooted in history and bodies of knowledge that we already developed actually make a case to change certain things concrete.  Let me stop here.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, that's really helpful, Anja.  And actually, you know, since Joana did post the link to the article that she has done, Joana, would you be able to also sort of pitch into this and talk about some of the principles of the way you all approached it?  Consent, I mean.
     >> JOANA VARON: Sure, sure.  The article is called consent to our data bodies license from feminism to enforce that protection.
     And on this, one part of the article was exactly to list what are the qualifiers of consent of feminism theories regarding to our bodies.  And what are the qualifiers of consent in data protection legislations.
     So and tried to make the equivalences, no, consent needs to be active, clear, informed, specific, freely giving, reversible, ongoing as a continuous process.  Mutual, comfortable.  Sincere.  Based on equal power.  Considers historical, sociological structures.  Needs to be adapted to contextual situations.  Those were all of the qualifiers from feminist theories when feminists talk about consent.
     When we look at the GDPR, but also at the Brazilian data protection legislation, the list felt quite shorter than this.  And mostly it doesn't, as Anja was mentioned there is no consideration regarding power relations and all of those qualifiers are expressed just by the act of clicking an agree button agreeing to terms of services or a privacy policy that no one read.
     So our assessment is that consent has it is in the data protection framework is a very individualistic and now liberal approach to consent.  And what we need, as I said before, we need to consider privacy as a collective matter.  And if you put the burden on an individual in an unequal power relation to say yes or no, when actually they don't have the or we, we don't have the ability to say no if saying no means some sort of digital exclusion.
     So let me quote (?) AND SHE SAYS ABOUT THE intersection approach towards the possibility of saying no.  It says the experience of being subordinate deemed lower or of a lower rank could be understood as being deprived of no.  To be deprived of no is to be determined by another's will.
     That is the kind of consent that we give today with those terms of services and that is the consent that is written data protection legislation.
     And as I mentioned, is going to get worse because as we are moving also from the devices to bodies, the data collection is moving from devices to bodies, we don't even have that button to click and agree.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, Joana.  Okay.  Sadaf, sort of bringing us back to the bigger question of which we sort of made this little side part but an important part nevertheless is that what are the changes you would like to see?  And you are welcome to answer more broadly or if you would like to talk about consent, it is all up to you, yeah.
     >> SADAF KHAN: So I would like to connect back to what Anja was saying about data governance.  And I think one of the elements that is at least in this part of the world I think not discussed enough is the economy.  There is a lot of talk of policies and multistakeholders but the economies within the capitalist society are created in a certain way.  And it is the nature of that very capitalist economy itself that comes to have an impact on how these technologies are designed and then marketed at men and women.
     And the power dynamics and power relations we kind of keep talking about I think capitalism itself and the economy itself becomes a part of that power dynamic.  So one element that in terms of change that I would like to think about is how do we start to have an influence on these economic structures of big data, of corporate, that states play in the role that third-party applications play.
     So that is one thing.  I do feel that there is a lot of discussions especially in context about (?) universal context and we have seen both countries focusing on infrastructure access.  What I find lacking is again the issue of power dynamics that exist.  If the next billion are connected and the same disparities and same are replicated and enhanced as more and more people connect we are looking at the situation where the vulnerable both in terms of just access and actual harm and vulnerability but also vulnerability in terms of consent of giving the data and giving data and the boundaries that Anja talked about that will be exacerbated.
     Another thing is where I look at policies and we just started working extensively on the digital media and formation literacy of it which has become a buzz word and there is talk about the information disorder and whatnot.  The focus of most of these interventions is like literacy is focused on the technicalities of using the internet.
     The media information in programs in schools and colleges they talk about the technical peck of it and red flags of it but they don't talk about the metadata and what goes on beyond the screens we see.  What is outside of the user interface.
     And a lot of questions that we are discussing now, the AI, the biometrics and facial recognition technologies all connect with things that don't really -- that are not technically qualified as a part of the digital media information literacy interventions that we are seeing being designed.
     Now I understand that this is a technical field and I understand that it is difficult to understand these things.  But it is not that difficult to simplify it and break it down and de-construct on a level see specially if there is already work at the school level, at the primary school level.
     I think in terms of what policy interventions I would like to see and what changes I would like to see, these two areas come most supreme could me the discussion on the economy of the technology, that eventually affects the design of technology as well and the governance obviously.  And a broadening of the digital media information literacy focus to include the questions that we are raising.
     I also think that one thing that we -- that I would like to see happening is a collective reimagining of privacy in the digital age.  Now we live in a very strange environment and I'm sure there is similarities in India and South America as well.  On one happened, we talk about privacy as something that is inherently there, women don't talk a lot about, you know, what they are going through, things that are inside the home are kept inside the home, the domestic matters.
     But if you look at home units and family units there is a lot of invasion of privacy.  Children are told not to lock doors, wifes are Sur veiled, mothers are Surveilled.  There are key questions that should be private to an individual that are probed upon.
     And so when this contradiction exists on the what you correspondent to people of being a private safe kind of society and yet when you look at -- if you de-construct what happens in the home units you see a completely different picture technology and the data we are sharing online adds a complexity that people are not really equipped to deal with.
     Even if you look at case laws and if you look at how legal instruments have been used to look at privacy and I'm not talking about just data protection laws but privacy laws that exist already, I think there is lack of understanding within the Court and within the public discourse on what digital privacy looks like and what should it be for an individual, what should is be for the home collective because there is so many more involved.  Your provider, your work, internet data you are using and then go to big corporate.  So the different layers I think they are not well understood and I think they have to be well understood for us to collectively imagine what privacy in the digital age looks like.  Those three are the things.
     I want to go back to something that Joana was mentioning earlier about talking about the science fiction is for today and not for the future.  And this is something that strikes me every time -- I'm a big star trek buff and there is a future for all kinds of alien species but if you look at the composition of the actual star trek teams and can'ts it is the white male leading everything and making the decision and whatnot and it is obvious that the minority and the women and black men they are just there to add to the diversity of it but the franchise itself, that was the future we imagined.
     So somehow like within ourselves the imagination is still so limited.  And yet everywhere every alien in the world is welcome and considered equal.  So yeah, it really speaks to me what you said that we need to the imagination I think it does come to speak to the world that we are creating today.
     >> MODERATOR: Racing a bunch of important questions and policy questions and what you said about star trek, right, you really pointed out a bias that in terms of sort of who is the sort of technology subject in a sense, right?  And who sort of the diversity but yet other species of sort of all welcome kind of thing.
     You know, I think a couple of things that I wanted to raise as part of this and we'll then move to the last part of it.  I think one of the points you were making, Sadaf, about digital and media literacy being very technical.
     I think that is a very valid point and also a struggle like honestly as we are sitting here doing the first workshop tomorrow with domestic workers in India and doing it, you know, online, right?
     And so I think the struggle for us how to use digital media like how to use Google meet, et cetera, I think it is how to understand the concept of data.  We use metaphors and things like that, right?  But often you know, it comes -- it is like when grassroots communities they are thinking about telephone data and mobile data and recharges et cetera, et cetera.
     What I would at some point love to actually really sit down and brainstorm further how can we find ways and means actually to talk about the very critical questions with communities that are still sort of at the early adoption stage or just getting into digital technologies but super valid point.
     So the other thing I wanted to say is there is a very interesting discussion going on around consent in the chat and I wanted to actually draw the panelists' attention to one of the comments.  You know, who talks about sort of the relationship between individual consent being overwritten by public interest during the pandemic, which I think we have all seen now.
     Recently, and notes that it is not necessarily that the support for this is because of capitalism but can be from a perspective or discourse of healthcare, right?  I'm curious if any of you would have any comments around this?  Because I think it is a question that we have all faced in the last few months.
     And you know, yeah.  If any of you would like to sort of just comment on that, I thought I would just share it with you.
     >> SADAF KHAN: Slightly unrelated to what we have been talking about we studied in the last year of the perceptions of the internet.  We were looking at how men and women perceive the internet and what comes to their mind, a gendered study.  And I was fascinated by the idea of giving consent to be monitored by male members of the team of the families and women we when were working with a largely working class group of women, early users and adopters and they termed this like it was culture.  And as Anja was talking about how we disembody the concept of data and the body but it was very physical.
     And women talked about how if they are living in proximity with their husbands and if they consent to being physical with them.  The consent automatically translates to the things they own.  So the idea of being possessed simply because you are having sex with somebody and somehow that concept automatically extending to what you are saying online, what you are doing online, and that being okay and that being not questionable or something that has to be thought through or separately dealt with.  That is something that we I think need at least on my team in our privileged kind of bubbles we had not thought of it that way, that it is not -- we always see that subjugation.  Not that they are invading but that they consented to let them have this access and that was also related to the protectionist mentality.  He is my protecter and if he says something then it is okay for him to say this.
     So I think it is interesting to see how cultural norms that have been very physical are getting so much more prominent as more and more people switch to digital.
     And I think during COVID I see this being, you know, more and more problem.  We do get a lot of calls from people who have just acquired their devices because now they need to for their livelihood and whatnot.  And often rather than asking questions how to use it they will direct them to their husbands or sons or the male in the families.  And the question of consent doesn't arise because they are seeing them as facilitators.
     So just in terms of the terminologies and we are talking about how we engage with people.  I keep wondering whether the concept is there but it is packaged in a different way.  And then we also need to kind of understand the legality that people who are just adapting to technology are using and then use that legality to de-construct the concept that we are talking about.  I don't know how to do it Franksly.
     There is a huge language thing as well.  Technology is predominantly English and we are privileged enough to have that language but just the technicality of it.  I think there is a lot of work to be done in data and how else do we talk about consent.
     And it is such a sacred word that I think we don't want to shy away from engaging materiality that people see it in a different manner.  But I think we need to start questioning kind of our own protection of that word as well.  I don't know if that made sense.
     >> MODERATOR: Actually, super helpful Sadaf and I was thinking while you are talking that you surfaced something that we don't think about that much.  Which is that is there a universal sort of understanding within a culture of something like consent.
     Or does it also correlate with, you know, income, class, and other sorts of things, right?  Like just through the example you shared.  That was what was going on in my head because I think in the feminist movement we sort of assumed a universal kind of understanding of consent, right?  So I think this is extremely helpful.  I think if anybody would like to comment on this, that is fine.  If not, we can move to the last sort of piece of this, because we have about 10 minutes left.
     And the last piece of this, you know, as always, at the IGF is to try and leave to governance and policy but I want to frame in a particular way.
     Last year I spoke about bodies and data.  And everybody found it very interesting.  But there was somebody who turned to the moderator and said like you know, without like genuinely said that look, this is all really interesting, but does this have legs?
     Okay.  And I think what she was trying to say is that conceptually this is really interesting, the notion of us thinking about the body rather than data as a resource et cetera.  But is there something we can really do about it?
     Terms of policies and laws.  Even if we take something like GDPR, would we reframe?  So I'm curious if we can have a little bit of a conversation about how do we bring this extremely useful theoretical construct, right, into policy?  Like how do we give it legs?  Anja, I turn to you again first.  I think I'm stuck in this pattern rut.
     >> ANJA KOVACS: So I'm also still thinking about the question.  Let me maybe go back to that paper on consent that I wrote with Tripti.
     The one of the things that we started with was actually we went back to a feminist analysis by Carol Peyton in particular.  She analyzed a lot of the social contract and the social contract is really what modern nation state is based only and most of our law is based on, right?
     And so the idea of that and liberal theory is that we are all free and equal human beings.
     And if we enter into a contract we do that as free and equal beings.  And a contract is only valid if we have consented to it as free and equal beings.  Now, what Beeban did in her work is call attention to a particular set of contracts which are about property in and the person and that is a recognized concept.  It has been written about and central to the whole notion of consent.  So the idea is that you can sign away your property and your person as long as you consent.  Relations today are based on that.
     We are acting as if we can sign a contract in which we commit that our employer can use our skills or talents or whatever as if we can somehow send those talents to work without us actually having to go to work as well.  So we make something subject to contract in a piecemeal way without recognizing that actually the whole person is being made subject to this contract.
     Beeban highlighted is that the notion of consent is that the fundamental diversity Ren between slavery and modern employment contracts because actually in both cases the entire person has to be there but in order to label contracts we have -- in labor contracts we have consented to doing this and somehow it becomes okay.  If you live somewhere where labor laws are really strong the impact of this is becoming less and less and you do have a sense of autonomy, agency at your place of work if all goes well, right?  But in India, for example, many people and thinking of people like coal miners still don't have that really the line between labor and slavery sometimes there is really, really small.
     So I think those questions around the concept of property in the person as being relevant to data as well because when we sent the data, the point about it not being disembodied is that this is not just something you are going to manipulate without an effect on me.  When you manipulate the data you want to also manipulate me.  On the internet data project we don't think about the internet bodies.  This is me you are manipulating.  That connection is that close, right?  And so if you don't come back to that -- if you then come back to the question of consent, if you look at it like that, if you see that even employment contracts today establish relationships of subordination which which is what we keep coming back to in the examples.
     We don't know certain actress will become rich and powerful on the basis of what they get from us and we don't even though how they manipulate us through it.  It is called numbering when advertising speak.  When does nudging become not manipulation, right?  There are the relationships are subordination being established through consent.  If we Talley so believe in human dignity going forward what are the measures we should take to make sure that the deep inequalities that are generated through the new relationships cannot continue to materialize.
     And so that is why that question about broader -- the broader context is important because if you bring that into the picture, what you start to do is you start actually to be able to say there are certain things we should not be allowed to do.  There are certain things that should never be asked from us.  For example, that what Sadaf talked about the third-party data sharing.  If third-party data sharing so fundamentally undermines the control we have over how we with exist in the digital world then this should just go.
     And for many people this seems like outlandish but let's remember at some point in sometime slavery was legal and yet in no self-respecting democracy today you can signed yourself into bonded labor.  Even if you argue if I wanted to do that and consent to that as a flee and equal human being why should I not be allowed to do it?  We have recognized there is something about human dignity so fundamentally underlied by these conditions that we cannot allow it as a society.  Exactly the same thing we need to move to in digital policy as well.
     So the examples, the concrete suggestions Tripti and I make on consent in our paper are at three levels.  One is at the moment when the data is collected because as Joana also pointed out if you look for an example that consent has to be specific almost every data governance law says that but how is concept specific if the actor is going to send your data to 150 third parties whose consent agreements you have to go and read separately?  This is just ridiculous.  How can we even call this specific consent.  How can this be legal under that language and under any law, right?
     The second set of changes are what can be done with data after it is collected?  And so the behaviors surface and the book talks about as well in surveillance capitalism all of the things that they collect from us but don't need to improve a service.  Why should we agree to that being collected and by default agree to it being collective.  Maybe there are some actors I share this it because I started to trust them.  How is it possible that undermines our control by default should be allowed?
     And the third set of changes are really about the changes that need to be made for people who are already vulnerable.  And this can be focused on specific protected characteristics like sexual orientation, for example.  But it can also be focused on specific situations or relationships.  So again somebody gave the example already of what happens in many places of employment, the kind of data that employers can take.  At the moment we have job data protection law in India that basically your employer can collect any data that they see important about my performance on the job.  So if they want to collect data on my mental health that is okay?  How could this possibly be legal.  They could argue this would lead to or affect our performance on the job, right?  So I think really it is partly about making these statements again and again and asking the questions again and again.  Saying it should not be legal.  It is not because we are doing it now that we have to go along with this, no?  Big companies like Google and Facebook have presented to us in India as in some other countries, the government is working very hard to reproduce the same dynamics of collecting as much data as possible from citizens as well.
     Often to support the growth of a local economic ecosystem.  But it is not because we are going like this right now that we have to accept it.  So I think really yes, there is value, this is operationable.  But we need to really make the effort to imagine along these lines and then to continue to say this should not be allowed.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Anja.  I think you have definitely showed how this can be given legs.
     And I am also conscious that we have literally two minutes left.  So Joana and Sadaflike a tee in uy comment so we can wrap up in time.  30 seconds each, please.  Joana.
     >> JOANA VARON: I just posted in the chat developed lieu the allied media conference and tried to use design justice principles to think about consent addressed to technologies, the developers.
     It is an interesting resource, but still, I think there are more considerations about power that is to be thought of -- talked out loud as Anja said because also consent is in the core of many of data protection legislations but when this comes to the relation with governments, there are many exceptions and so things get complicated.  So my last thought would be really to talk about more about the centralization of systems and technical solutions to be able to track our data where it is flowing and then have proper trans parentcy about what is going on.  Thank you so much for the invitations also.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.
     >> JOANA VARON: It was very nice.
     >> MODERATOR: And last words to you but again tight.
     >> SADAF KHAN: I will be quick.  Something I have been thinking about is the validity and legitimacy we keep giving to global standards and global policy standards specifically.
     The more I look at how the same standards are applied differently and have different implications especially in the global south where context we are going relations with the government states with the concept of democracy is applied differently at a different state of development, the more I feel that there needs to be a more broadened discussion about how do we adapt these, yes, there are standards about principles but there are policies about operationalizing those principles in ways that makes the most sense in different context.  That is one area I would like to see improvement in.
     One word that I will leave for everybody because I'm sure there are people who do policy decision, thinking about oughting the actor what is it called actor centered institutionalism approach to policy research which looks at like how different actors essentially come to play their own Part when institutions are created.  And it is a developing thing in the political science but I think because we talk so much about multistakeholderrism I think that is one of those that we need to start looking at and I'm still trying to learn more about it and read a few articles.  That is one that I would like everybody to read about and see if we can apply it to the multistakeholder approach that we get there and maybe that would offer solutions in improving policy interventions.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, so much, Sadaf.  I put that in the chat.  A useful way to think about the box of policy itself.  Thanks very, very much on Jason, Joana, Sadaf, for this really valuable discussion.  Thank you.
     >> DEBARATI: For sharing the gender report cards of 2019.  Thank you Carolina for your support and thank you Sandra and the other captioner for the captions.  Thank you IGF 2020.  See you all at the next session.
     >> JOANA VARON: And thank you, Bishakha.
     >> MODERATOR: This was great.  My mind is reeling with ideas to be honest.  Okay.  Thanks.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-4-dc-platform-regulations-towards-a-common-vocabulary^^

>> MODERATOR:  We are almost ready to start. We only miss one panelist. Okay, we also have the YouTube link if we want to share it. Julie is online, perfect. So could the tech support please give speaker features also to Julie Owono, so we can start. Okay. Excellent.
Bon jour, Julie. So we now -- I think we can now officially start this 2020 session of the dynamic coalition on platform responsibility.
I would ask my co-conspirator Nicolo Zingales to open the banks with his introductory remarks and we can move to the very crowded panel we have.
>> CO-MODERATOR:  Okay, so welcome everyone, again. It's a pleasure to have so many excellent speakers with us to discuss platform governance. We know platform regulation and platform governance, more generally, is coming, not only to Europe but many jurisdictions around the world. And we are delighted to have engaged with some key stakeholders on a project where we attempted to provide, as the title of this session states, a common vocabulary. So the reason that we engaged in this project with the coalition was precisely because  we thought that there were conversations that were taking place in different environments.
Running in parallel to each other without having necessarily a consistent use of some of the key terms of this discussion. So the idea with this project was kind of to bring expertise from different fields together and try to, at least identify, these range of terms. This doesn't mean that we are suggesting that the interpretation of a particular word should be X or Y but in this glossary we wanted to basically capture the picture of all the different competing and alternative definitions that are being offered.
There were people referring to proactive measures to fight copy right infringement as measures ta are taken even when the law doesn't require you to do so. Even when you receive notification, you take it down regardless if this was a requirement. Other interpretation of proactive measures would refer to a platform looking for content that is potential infringing without having been notified. Similar distinction between interpretability. Being able to send packets to each other and interpretability to actually understand the meaning of each packet in the same nuanced way it's processed, original platform where it is produced. Because of these and other examples we thought it was a helpful experience, possibly for policy makers and regulators to have a point of reference for future efforts and discussions. So today we are just going to discuss some of the issues.
The number of authors was extensive. But we hope that everyone after hearing the session will be interested. And we will go to our shared document where it is possible to make comments and improve the existing document. So with that, I would thank you again, everyone. And pass the floor to Luca for a couple of words.
>> Yes, thank you very much for introducing the debate. Let me also reiterate what you just mentioned. The fundamental goal of the project that we present today. Is to possibly contribute to a well-informed debate. But to include different readings of the same terms, precisely it was not the roll of the IGF to be descriptive to take decisions but to help decision makers have smart high-quality debate. The goal in its mandate, very well to discuss public policy issues.
Issues aiming at regulating platforms around the world. We maxed and discussed many of them in last year outcome for values.
We know that a lot of them have been very recently abled by legislators.
You legislators are going to present the proposal in the coming days. Brazilian congress has been debating the so-called fake news over the past months and it has been harshly criticized also for some misconception in some very broad terms many of us have been involved in these processes. The same term has radically different concepts in different jurisdictions.
This is not an issue if those conceptions are rooted in national law. It's a problem when the conceptions are rooted in misconceptions of technology and how it works and how it should be regulated efficiently. So that is precisely the goal of this glossary we are going to provide. It's for all kind of stakeholders.
We have also referenced different views.
We have tried to do the most academically refined output as possible. But of course, it still needs improvement and that is the reason why we are seeking performance. Not only from academics but very diverse range of stakeholders.
That is the reason why to open the debate today we have invited two guest speakers that have not been directly working on this, on the glossary but are working on this coalition and are extremely interesting and have a global impact on how platforms are regulated. So without further ado. If one by one we will introduce our distinguished speaker. The first one, Julie, not only Executive Director. She is also a member of the oversight board that's been recently launched by Facebook and will start working in the upcoming weeks, or months. We will know more about this. Let me give the floor to Julie and thanking her again for this and for her time.
>> Thank you very much Luca and Nicolo for the invitation. It's great to be here, hopefully we will be able to get back to normal business. As close to normal as possible. Yes, the oversight board which was, whose first members were announced in May, earlier this year, which include not only me but other distinguished colleagues to name a few. Ed, or Mr. carman and other very distinguished professionals.
Actually started accepting cases. So as a reminder, it's a sort of we really would like to see it as an institution that will make finding decision, on Facebook and Instagram. We have two ways to oversee cases. On one hand Facebook is allowed to refer cases to us, cases that prove difficulty for them in terms of their own community standards but also towards international law. That's a very important thing to mention. And also, we will be able to oversee cases referred to us by users.
Users whose content has been taken down and who are not happy with the decision that has been made. In the near future, we will take cases either referred by Facebook or by users who are not happy to see such content online. This is not, I mean this feature is not available until now. Something the oversight board is working on and it involves technical issues that require some time. So this is for the principle. Now for the procedure itself, the board has, which is composed of 20 members. The board has in a normal setting 90 days to make a decision. So from the day we received the case, the user and Facebook have some time to provide additional explanation. Also allow, enable to request bridge from organizations. Expert organizations in the particular fields in which, you know, the particular cases requesting us to look at. But also, we also  --  we will also be able to receive public comments on cases. So there will be an opening for comments beyond the user and Facebook who are concerned by the case. And, well, all this should allow us to make a decision in normally 90 days. But there are also external reviews.
Particularly one that allows, I mean requires us to make a decision in 45 days. So half of the normal time line. And our co-chairs. We have four co-chairs who have also worked on other review. I think we call it expedited review within the expedited review process. Which would require us to make a decision in seven days maximum. So these are really for cases that have, well, that require imminent decision given for instance that the danger and threat that the content might pose for, I mean, real world violence and any other possibilities. Yes, what is important to mention and I started touching upon this earlier is not only will the board oversee cases based on Facebook's values and community standards which we honor and which have themselves limitations. But what's interesting is we also, we will also look at international law. There's a big discussion at the moment whether or not, first of all, international law is feat to defend these new rights. On the one hand. On the other hand, it's also a challenge for platforms themselves who have been, I mean asked by many experts including the former Executive Director, David Kai. Who have been asked or strongly advised to apply the United Nations guiding principles on business and human rights which not require, but strongly invite companies to protect human rights and also provide remedies whenever they, well, to mitigate, to provide mitigating effects whenever they infringe on these rights. So it's an interesting challenge also from that perspective. And yes, a challenge that the board is ready to take. Working for the past, since May, working behind the scenes.
First of all to make sure we are all on the same page when it comes to international human rights law. For many colleagues, it was not a specialty. Colleagues who were really experts in constitutional law, for instance who might not have had as much familiarity with the law, so we have had many sessions on that, with the help of one of our co-chair, Catalina Botero. We also have worked on the technicality. We have a web platform that allows us to oversee the cases in a very secured manner. And we are also working on issues around privacy. The cases we see involve real persons and required to make the necessary adjustments.
Not only to protect the privacy of the individual but also protect it from also outside interferences including government interferences.
All this to say that from my perspective and that's probably why, that's the main reason I chose to join, is that we are really at a crossroads of platforms.
I like to tell them that focusing on the other profits is not possible, and threatens.
We are seeing issues around censorship, internet shut downs. We are seeing a lot of governments who decide to shut down platforms because of the problems around content and lack of responsibility from platforms.
It was interesting for me at this very special moment to take part in an initiative that would come with hopefully interesting solutions that could be applied of course to Facebook and Instagram and why not. That could inspire and give an idea of what the principles and standards, international human rights standards we all work on could be applied to such an evolving theme, which is online content moderation. This is basically a big picture. I hope I'm still in time. Luca?
>> MODERATOR: Yeah, you are almost done with the time. I'm sorry for being not really a gentleman with this but we will have to strictly enforce timing so everybody can speak. And we have also time for questions. Sorry for the interruption, Julie. I see there is already a question for you. Let me give the floor to Lofred Madzou of the world economic forum. He has very interesting visions how artificial intelligence can be applied to platforms.
I don't want to give too much of a spoiler what he is going to say. Lofred, the floor is yours.
>> Good morning, good evening, everyone. Thank you for having me. Luca, I will try to keep it short and on point. A little background, I'm working for the center  for the fourth industrial revolution. Put simply it’s a group, corridor multi-stakeholder collaboration on AI  governance, and more explicit what we do is co-design governance frameworks around specific projects. I will give you an example. Like facial recognition, how do you ensure responsible use of facial recognition. And then work with businesses, governments, civil society and academics, the multi-stakeholder fashion.
The thing I want to really focus on today with you guys is this notion of trustworthy A.I.  You perfectly know that. Most of the platforms are A.I. driven. So A.I. really powers all the applications and their products.
So the question becomes how do we make sure that A.I. is trustworthy? Let me elaborate.  There are so many frameworks out there, so I want to be really clear. What I mean by trustworthy is the behavior of the systems are consistent with a set of, you know, expectations, or requirements to be more specific. You see where I'm going. I think audit of services and products is one of the means we can use to ensure that the systems are trustworthy. I think it's really important for two reasons. The first one is the sure scale of the AI products.
Think of Facebook. Some platforms have over one billion users. Regardless of the size or funding of the regulator,  it will be really hard to match that scale. The question is how can you scale the enforcement mechanisms.
Be like, nope. Assuming we already know what is the right regulation. Let me quickly elaborate on this. On the requirements itself, I will give you an example there are four key steps. The first one is defined. What is the definition of risk use in that context? It has to be contextual, right? I'm looking at the use of facial recognition at airports. Here, I mean we use cases seem to be quite straight forward but it raises issues.
Let me give you an example. If  your face is your means of access for that service and your face data is compromised, it’s a big deal. If your password is compromised, you change it. If your face is compromised, you don't change your face.  So the challenges are really different and the stakes are much higher. But simply, we define this across free access. Governance of that data in that case. The second is access performance and accuracy. Really important. How do you ensure the system is performant across demographics? For females, blacks, regardless race, gender and so on. And last but not least, is perception. How do you  --  could the right civilization of the airports, the rights, human in the loop, rights fall back system, the system is not working. So now what is the parallel with online platforms? One of the defining challenges that we have then is regardless of what they claim, it’s really hard to make sure that we do what they’re doing. Assuming they are doing the right thing or assuming that they want to comply, there’s no bad intent and I think that there’s no bad intent.  How do you as regulators or trusted third party double check their claims by directly sending queries to the system and getting data out to make sure it's effectively complying with ABC, whatever it is might be legal requirements or as we see more and more AI principles being drafted by these companies. So organizational guidelines. That's what my work is really focusing on. I would say it's a promising area. Not only because we are making tremendous progress around explainability around also I would say enforcement of existing regulation, many companies that filled up this space of A.I. risk and compliance from different angles know when to double up these tools. The thing I want to close on is that regardless of the rules we agree on, regardless of the jurisdictions that you operate in, enforcement is key. I think something sometimes we overlook. People spend amount of time figuring out what should be the right regulatory framework. They don't pay attention to how do you enforce it at scale.  Again, the framework has to match the scale of the platforms.
That's what our work is really focusing on. Open for questions at the end but back to you, Luca. I hope it was clear.
>> MODERATOR:  Yes. 
Now this first part of the open debate will be moderated by Nicolo. I see there are already a couple of questions in the chat. So please, Nicolo, go ahead. You are muted.
>> CO-MODERATOR:  Apologies. Yes. We already have a question from Julie here. From Mary. So she asked, does the board's mandate include any work with advising on the community guidelines? Will this decision be used to reshape the guidelines? Thank you.
>> Yes, thank you, Mary for asking. It's important to specify in addition to content decisions, the board will, also has a mandate to make recommendations to Facebook upon Facebook's request. Well, in two cases. So within the decision, the board will have the ability to include a policy recommendation. It's not mandatory. It's upon, you know, the board's assessments of the need of such recommendation. And other cases, Facebook will be able to refer questions to us, recommendations on very specific pieces of policy. Could it maybe you know, Facebook's policy on  -- 
They can refer that to us. We can make recommendations, which are recommendations.
Facebook does not have to take them, I mean, they don't have to apply those recommendations but they do have to take them into consideration and record publicly on what they have done with the recommendation that we make.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you. I may add another question using my moderator’s  privilege. Directed to you again, Julie. What we have been trying to emphasize with this effort is that some concept, different interpretation, different context. I would like to understand what is the balance that the oversight board strikes between values that recognizes the importance for the platform and interpretation of those values in different context. How does Facebook deal with that? Or the oversight board?
>> Yes. The first thing I must mention that I did not say, we review cases that did not have legal implications.
So if there is a law that says this is, this is what we think should be treated, we cannot review that. To respond to your questions indeed, there is a need for context. There's also a need for overarching principles which is what we need now. That's why we are seeing so much inconsistency. Platforms and particularly Facebook consistency applying standards. That’s the void we hope to fill to provide those principles that will guide and make the platform more consistent how it applies its own community standards. Consistency with regards to international human rights standards. I think that's the way the overarching principles will come from and will guide us as well.
>> MODERATOR: Brilliant, thank you. I see there's a comment, it's not probably a question for Lofred. I would just mention one issue that has come up with regard to facial recognition is the inclusiveness. Basically the databases that have been used and you know, the potential discriminatory effects it might have on certain communities. So how can the work of the world economic forum in that regard help us find the right way to approach the systems so that there is no disparate impacts on communities in the minority and not as privileged. So I guess that is one question that connects to the comment that's been made. The other question I will have for you just so we get on the same number of questions for Julie is, with regard to explainability. Do you believe we can achieve again, some general common principles that could be used to explain A.I. without, you know, basically might be up to circumstances. In certain cases you may need more explanation depending on what type of users and targets you have. For the explainability. It would be interested to see how the world economic forum explain principles.
>> These are very important questions. Let's talk to the first one regarding risk. One thing I will insist on when it comes to facial recognition or any technology, risk manifests, in the context which requires expertise. Obviously it's involved in that process. The user of the company use the technology, procuring the technology. People tend to focus on the most risk regarding fairness, accessibility to data privacy infringement and so forth. What I would insist on there's a much more variety of risk out there. I will give a concrete example. If you use facial recognition for accessing a plane or finding a person of interest using technology very different outcomes. The way things can go wrong are very, very different. You will have different people around the room.
The left try to bring the rights around the table to  --  the risks. So try to make sure we don't have any blind spots. Something we would have missed, right. Human beings like us varies, they won't perceive or prioritize but create a space for open discussion and challenge you have better mapping of a risk. The second thing about explainability. I think there's too much on this.  What I will insist on is if something goes wrong I want to make sure they are comfortable in that theme. Being comfortable is being able to articulate what went wrong and why. This means I'm looking at accountability mechanism on the whole and not necessarily on explainability. The progress being done, basically when I look at a system, the behavior of a system, I'm looking to the system two aspects are important to us. The first is documents  --  it means simply how that system has been put together. What is the function. What is the purpose of the system. What are the tests that are running and so forth. Given this nature how that system came about. First point. When the system is deployed in operation, keep track of its behavior. Continued use and check impacts on different demographics across risk mapping we have done together. In doing these two things you are going to reduce or mitigate risks. The key point that's a learning system. It's important to make sure across time it remains consistent or compliant with our requirements.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you. Sorry to interrupt the discussion again but I will be very strict with time so that everyone will be able to provide input into the discussion. Now let's start first (presentation slot and over to you, Nico.
>> CO-MODERATOR:  Yes. Thank you, Luca. I think that was a perfect closing point. Also need to monitor over time. Because this is precisely what we should be doing with this set of definition we are given. We should go back after some time and make sure that they are sufficient reflecting the discussions taking place. So now, let's move onto the second part of the discussion. The first one in our list is our colleague, Ivar Hartmann, director at center for technology society in  Rio de Janeiro.
>> Thank you, Nico. Quickly I would like to thank and congratulate you and Luca for editing the glossary and this session. I was responsible for the entry on terrorist content. I want to make three very quick points that I think underscore the relevance of the contribution offered by this glossary. First is in terms of focus. When we talk about we think of cyber terrorism. It used to be focused on attacks against infrastructure. In the very early days, 20 years ago when people discussed cyber terrorism, that is the first thing that came to mind. That's the first type of threat we worried about. Nowadays it seems the focus has switched to terrorist content on mediums, including platforms.
Media where narratives are developed, strengthened and spread with a global potential but a very precise target. And this is a very powerful tool for cyber terrorism. So that's the first point in terms of focus. The second point has to do with the concept of terrorist content. Which obviously relates to what one means by cyber terrorism and cyber terrorist activities. Cyber terrorist content is related to fear-inducing, and extremist. If you are inducing information and narratives and discourse, as well as extremist mobilization online, this makes it very difficult to distinguish terrorist content from hate speech. Especially more radical hate speech. Now this is a very important distinction, however. Given the punishment is much, much harsher than the punishment for hate speech. Some countries hate speech is not even punished. So there's a distinguish between difficult to make is essential. The third has to do with enforcement. So even for people it is very hard to separate terrorist content from hate speech. So that's for people. Especially people with a legal education, that's already a hard job. But for artificial intelligence this is an unsurmountable task. And we know next to nothing about the accuracy of social media automated moderation of terrorist content. We have no idea if Facebook, Facebook system, or YouTube system is 90% precise in identifying terrorist content or merely 60% precise in which case it would be almost as good as a coin toss. We just don't know. Terrorist content, at the same time it's the type of abusive content governments have demanded platforms to identify and remove the fastest, with the harshest punishments against platforms.
But at the same time, it's also one of the abusive content that is the hardest for automated mechanisms, artificial intelligence to correctly identify. So that's a very worrying paradox there. So those are the three points I wanted to make. Thank you for organizing this session and for the glossary.
>> CO-MODERATOR:  Thank you Ivar. Good dialogue with Lofred's presentation. Perfect. Now, we are moving to another presentation by Paddy Leerseen from University of Amsterdam. Ph.D. candidate. I think on exactly the very topic, the title of our session. So platform governance. I would like to hear then, what are we talking about when we talk about platform governance?
>> That's a great question, Nicolo, like all great questions, it doesn't have an easy answer. I have the privilege of defining governance for this exercise. It's a term we see using increasingly, I think. I try to define what is governance. It's a term that is often associated with regulation. In some cases, some people even consider the concepts interchangeable. So there's some disagreement what precisely the distinction is but the typical interpretation seems to be following Julia Black, governance is like regulation but de-centered perspective, we don't focus on as much on governance as much as the actor who's carryout regulation. We also look at more private actors.
This is why governance has become such an important and often-used term in the context of the internet. Whereas you know, so much of our conduct is guided by private actors.
So that's the most important distinction, I think between the two concepts. And additionally, there are discussions about, there's a debate about the meaning of internet governance and in that literature, one of the important distinctions that is made, for example, highlight that governance should not only be understood as formal forms of regulation. That is to say rule making and enforcement by entities such as ICANN or ATF but also less formalized routines and technical practices that end up guiding our conduct in practice.
So, this requires for example to also look at technical things like interconnection between service providers if we really want to understand how the internet is governed. Those are the insights I bring to my understanding of platform governance. By the way, I'm not monitoring the chat, so please interrupt if there is anything there. That's what I bring to my definition of platform governance, where I think we can make a similar analysis. First of all, an important distinction made by Tarles Gillespie, thinks it's juvenilistic. It could refer to governance occurs by platforms, how they govern us in digital ecosystems but also refer to how platforms themselves are govern bid other actors.
I think that's a helpful distinction that is not often made. Or not often enough, I should say. And here, you know, based on our definition of governance, on the one hand we can see how platforms govern in more conventional terms of regulation of rulemaking and enforcement. So they draft terms of service as rules and they enforce them in practices we now know content moderation. But a broader understanding that looks beyond these classical forms of regulation also emphasizes how platforms govern through technical architecture. Through algorithms, API's design of user interfaces and how they interact with users and coordinate with users.
For example, the regular engagement has with the "New York times", all these back channels, for example, how Google news initiative is subsidizing journalists.
All these things can be incorporated into an understanding of platform governance not captured in platform regulation. Moving toward platform governance you can make similar remarks. First of all, we have regulation of various kinds. Public regulation co-and self-regulation. In addition we can also look at how platforms are governed not just by the law and self-regulatory institutions but also by other forms of pressure third parties can bring to bear. Think of how advertisers boycotted last year. Is not regulation but a form of governance. And similar things could be looked at when we look at how users try to contest platform policies. In light of the time I will leave it there. In short it's a broad category. Much broader than regulation. But it's benefit then it helps to grasp the complexities how platform power is shaped in practice.
>> MODERATOR:  Excellent. This was very useful. Also with the examples you provided. It was reminiscent, as you were going through the introductory part. I'm sure  --  will agree. There's not much time so I will just move quickly into the next presentation. We have Richard Wingfield from global partners digital.
>> Thank you. I will take a slightly different approach from the previous two speakers and talk about challenges that exist when trying to come up with definitions for a glossary such as these. There are three in particular, when I came across when I was looking at the various terms I was trying to provide definitions for. I would be interested in other panelists if they are similar or different than the ones they found themselves. The first is, often we can't even agree what the right term is for a particular phenomenon. Sometimes we might disagree on the definition but sometimes the same term isn't even used by the same actors.
I don't want to speak to other panelists. We have numerous terms used by different actors.
A couple of the ones that came across in the terms I was defining were interesting in the terminology has changed over time. Child sexual abuse. Past language was child pornography. If you look at instruments, protocol, etc.. The term child pornography is used there. That's generally no longer considered to be an appropriate term. The idea this is not pornography and no issue of consent for people involved in this and this is a form of child abuse. So do we use a best practice term that we use nowadays, child sexual abuse imagery. Or a term well documented and well used for a number of years and international instrument, child pornography. That's the question I think is important to consider. Policy makers may be more comfortable using term that's are internationally agreed rather than new ones. Another example, revenge pornography, versus non-consensual sharing of intimate images.
Well intentioned people will use the term revenge pornography as a shorthand, compared to what we should consider the term used. We might agree on the term but there are lots of different definitions. In legal terms are rooted in national law. Defamation. No one disagrees it's a good term when we are talking about someone harming another's reputation. But across the world there are definitions that aren't consistent. Some require intention to harm another's reputation, others don't. Some say if it's a truthful comment it wouldn't be. Some say it has to be economic harm that is caused if you want to defame them, others say emotional harm is sufficient. So if we are trying to reach a common consensus how do we deal with the fact there are hundreds of well-established definitions which are not consistent with each other. Do we choose the one we like the most or reflect the actual usage of the term in international legal frameworks? The final challenge, there are some terms which have a particular meaning in the term of platform governance. Example would be transparency. This is a term well used within corporate social responsibility, business and human rights, broadly referring to openness about what companies are doing. If we talk about transparency in the form of platform governance we talk about details on the content or data shared by a platform. If you look at transparency reports by platforms it's those kinds of things you will often see. Again, does that mean we should look at a narrow approach what transparency means in context of this glossary and the audience. Or reflect that it has a more general term within a broader field of business and human rights, which of course is relevant to the issue of platform governance and what extent should we try to match those two potentially different approaches? So going to stop there. I hope I'm on time still. And look forward to hearing from my fellow panelists.
>>  MODERATOR:  You are perfect timing. And this was great. It felt like a peer review from reviewer one. I think for all of us, it was very useful thinking about the way forward with this glossary. So thanks for that. Now we have Rossana Ducato from University of Aberdeen where she is an assistant professor and affiliate at UC Louvain.
>> I promise I won't be reviewer number two. We will talk about the methodology in a way you suggested us to use. And why I think this glossary is relevant. I think that two of the most relevant problems in the debate about platform governance but also emerging technologies are essentially two. First of all, the complexity of the object. We have to define platform economy, artificial intelligence and so on. Second is lack of mutual understanding between experts or people with different backgrounds.
The object of study, there is nothing to do. Sometimes we have to recognize that it's a complexity so this complexity exists and we need to legal, technical, social expertise. But as for the specific problem, the lack of mutual understanding is something where we have to intervene. And to be honest, I think system academic knowledge, academic and  --  is not acceptable any more. If it ever was. So in order to foster mutual understanding, it's necessary to build, to find a common frame of reference. And using this comparative law, methodology not by accident, think the kind of exercise we needed from the glossary, in a way reminds me crucial lessons I learned from my legal status in particular about the problem of legal translations.
In the sense that, each technical language is strictly intertwines with its own domain and system of knowledge, science and culture to learn a language really means to learn culture. Therefore we cannot simply translate one term from one technical language to the other. And we have to explain what are the foundational mechanism, or particular concept and it's necessary to provide context. This is essentially what we did. This is what they tried to do in the interest of the glossary where they were ultimately making decision making. First of all I started from the I.T. phenomenon. What are the  types of systems now used. Saw they are being regulated so far in both sectors, jurisdiction. As what Richard was suggesting there are differences in some legal domains about the same term. Another  point is to consider, what are the current proposals, if any. And of course, many cases it does not say this is the new recommended system so the exercise was to find the applicable law in the particular context. The glossary mentioned by Nicolo and Luca. Investigate different meanings and applications behind each term. I would like to thank again the two editors of this initiative. I would like to stress this because sometimes we tend to forget we did this during a pandemic. So thanks to everyone and thanks particularly to Luca and Nicolo. I will conclude with a critique and proposal. Coming to the dark side, starting from the dark side. Cray  critique is about the name of the glossary. I think if someone opens a file called glossary and sees 230 pages we are going  --  rate of heart attack on readers.
Seriously. I see this was the initial aim. Since the beginning it was clear we were going to do to write a glossary. But I think that during the writing, during the course of this initiative, now it has become something richer. So I think it's more of a dictionary rather than a mere glossary. And then coming to the proposal, for a number of reasons, limitation probably, all my entries is they are too Euro centric. A proposal maybe for next year, in my opinion would be fantastic to upgrade the entry with input coming from different legal systems. This is an idea, to continue working with this team. Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Fantastic. Yes, I think that's an excellent proposal. That's indeed one of the reasons we are coming together to have other people from different constituencies, different stakeholder groups, different jurisdictions becoming aware of this and contributing hopefully. We hope this session serves to stimulate that. Okay. I will now move to the last speaker in this series. Which is Rolf Weber, professor from the University of Zurich. You have the floor.
>> Thank, Luca and Nicolo for organizing this and doing the work of the glossary. My main interest in connection with platforms is directly towards the regulatory models, probably very close to Chris. As well as literacy of rules. Having listened to the presentation of Paddy, I'm of course not digging any more into the need for view, literacy when designing and assessing platform models. But I may state that  --  obviously linked to regulation. And my contribution to the glossary mainly concerns self-regulation and co-regulation. The legitimacy of self-regulation is based on the fact that leads to a needs driven rule-setting process. And self-regulation could be quite responsive to changes in the environment. Finally, self-regulation is justified if the application leads to a higher efficiency than provided by governmental laws and less likely than compliance with private rules. If you look into the legal environment of platform regulation, we rarely find any multi-lateral treaties and global provisions applicable to the platforms.
We do have a couple of national laws. It's obviously restricted and in so far at least per se self-regulatory mechanisms appear to have certain merits.
Indeed so far we don't see too many standards apart, from efforts which have been taken by this coalition about two years ago. And therefore probably  --  the horizon. To give you an example of a segment of society which usually hasn't been in the past so active, I would like to draw your attention to European law institute. A couple of law professors have published model rules for outline platforms and the purpose of these model rules is to provide for concrete self-regulatory norms, the preparation has been done in view of the expected publication of the additional services act by the European commission to reannounce for end of 2020.  --  the hope to impact the contents of this package. It doesn't suffice. We do have core regulation as a model. In other words if the level of regulation by private actors doesn't seem to be sufficient a certain involvement of governmental agencies becomes desirable, the state legislator can state  --  and leave different principles by way of specific rules to the private parties. There by regulation could remain flexible and innovation friendly. Core regulation, in other words is a regulatory term leading to actual regulation independent from the government as long as rules remain in the legislative framework. Codes of conduct having been prepared by private actors could eventually be either acknowledged, it's been often done in financial markets also media markets and governmental agencies. It could be seen in compliance with the respect of private standards. Theoretical work on the usefulness of current regulatory standards remains to be followed up. Work for the glossary. Thank you very much.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you. Thank you, Rolf. That's another great discussion around regulations, core regulation. And I'm reminded in the chat by Chris Martin it is not just Laurence, actually before him, late Joel Ridingberg who wrote Lex Grammatica. Okay, now I think we have good range of perspective there. There were a few questions. In the interest of time we will read them all and maybe you can respond. There's one directed to Ivar Hartmann. How should or may be solved the task, I guess of fighting terrorism, taking into account the need to gather the terrorist language and vocabulary in different languages. And which languages would be used for filtering such term in practice? Your use cases. And then two comment questions. Bertrand says we should talk not just about governance off and by platforms but governance on platforms.
For example, administrators or groups on Facebook, according to the rights and responsibilities given by the platforms itself. And I would add to that perhaps, I guess this is directed to Paddy, we should also take into account governance of platform workers given we are talking about the work they do to moderate. So that's perhaps further perspective to be included in this. Another point by Bertrand saying what Richard is referring to is international normality convergence. The interceptability of certain types of conduct and similarity of criteria and thresholds around jurisdictions.
And then finally, there's a final comment by  --  Francis. Does this approach on platform governance  --  on platforms and not just collaborative platforms? And governance of and by must also be taken into account on. I guess that's similar to Bertrand's point directed to Paddy. But please, anyone feel free to respond to any of these questions. We have only a couple minutes for this discussion.
>> If I may, I think there was one addressed to me. There was a good point released. At least two methods we know for sure being used by platforms in terms of terrorist content, flagging and identifying. Aside from crowd sourcing flagging, there is someone hired by a contractor, private moderators working. And in that case, we can only assume but we don't know for sure that there are enough, as there should be enough private moderators who are natives of the country, the language of which is being processed and checked and moderated for terrorist content. If Facebook, for instance has the goal of identifying flagging and removing censoring terrorist content in, let's say Farci, then we can only assume that they have enough private moderators that are fluent in Farci and furthermore, this is not only about the language, it's also about the culture, of course. In terms of A.I. and automated decision-making. I think the same concern is valid that you cannot have a tool or an algorithm, a model that was trained to identify terrorist content in English than being applied to identify terrorist content in a different language or something which is not, which is equally as bad but you have a tool or a model that was trained to identify terrorist content within a specific country. Even if it's within the same language but a specific culture and country and then you try to use that model to identify in the same language but in a different culture using A.I. to identify terrorist content. We know that will not work. So part of the mission here I think we are increasingly having to acknowledge. Creating public training sets for these types of abuse of content in multiple languages, training sets that are not, that have not succumbed to bias for instance. That can then be used to publicly test the accuracy of the models that different platforms employ creating these data sets is a matter of public interest now.
>>  MODERATOR:  Sorry for the interruption. We really have to start with the second segment of presentations.
I apologize if we are a little bit in delay. The first one for the second segment is Catalina Goanta.
>> Good evening, from the Netherlands. Thank you, Luca and Nicolo for your hard work convening this workshop and spear heading the idea of putting together this glossary, dictionary. I think that's up for debate. The content I would like to focus is content modernization. The early days of the internet when e-commerce was dominating the business model. Maybe some of you remember the unfortunate trend that emerges around the year 2000. It used to be called skinvertising. They were encouraging people to get tattoos of their logos.
This is an example how social media is becoming the home of social commerce in many new ways. In the past five years to say the lead a very wide assortment of social media users have started to make serious money off their internet presence and we are talking really millions of dollars. These users started being called influencers because they amass army of followers and whose attention is turned into views for the purpose of programs like Google's absence. This has in a way professionalized some of these users, turning them into and now I would like to use a word that I know Chris very much likes, prosumers.
May be considered consumers but also could be considered traitors at the same time. There are a lot of models. I won't go into them right now. But you can find reference not only in the glossary but a book where she looks at consumer regulation and the disclosure of advertising. Maybe a note which I find very interesting, there is absolutely no platform right now. No social media platform that allows users to report hidden advertising. There is no actionable content that deals with hidden advertising although there are mandatory rules in many jurisdictions that definitely mandate the disclosure of advertising. This lacks in the content moderation discussion. The last comment I want to make with monetization for this panel, monetized content can pretty much be anything. Videos of people filming themselves eating. Of travel blogs, gaming. Like e-sports. You can monetize pretty much anything. The good side of this, it opens a lot of opportunities for every single social media user. And this is also one of the reasons why more and more young people aspire to become influencers or content creators on these social media platforms.
However, because you can monetize anything, you can even make money making election-prediction videos and this kind of content has been taken down by  YouTube as recent as yesterday as misinformation or disinformation. We have a draft paper  Giovanni will share in the chat. This is showing itself to be a serious trend in the recent elections. Recent webinar Alex from Stanford internet observatory were mentioning unlike 2016 where during the elections the main source of information might have been some external foreign involvement. This year it's been mainly done by influencers.
That's why we need to look from a regulatory perspective into the commercial interest into their activities because they warrant a lot of further insight. I will leave it to this though we can spend ages just talking about monetization. Thank you, Luca and Nicolo.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you for the excellent points raised. And the questions in the final debate. Without further ado, let me give to my friend, Chris Marsden from Sussex University. I unmuted and then remuted myself. I guess I have four minutes still. I put up a link, a link to an example of common carriers. My contribution to the glossary is about common carriage. Extremely long history throughout tort law. The United Kingdom and United States. It actually goes back to the pub. The pub for those who don't know is a place where people insult each other, speak violently, engage in all kinds of conspiracies in an unguarded and illegal fashion without being recorded for posterity for the entire world. Apart from the last part it's the internet. The last part does change things when it comes to the internet. The interesting thing about common carriage, now historical debate about net neutrality. If you remember is the idea there is no discrimination by carriers, between types of content on the internet so they shouldn't be throttling zoom. Interesting empirical work about the ways which the different carriers, mobile carriers have been dealing with Zoom over the years. I think it's extraordinary a company as small as Zoom has been able to survive the pandemic without being  --  by voice over IP. I should say net neutrality which Luca and I have spent too much of our life dealing with is an area for debate as well. All carriers believe they believe in net neutrality even though they have spent billions of Euros stopping it from being applied properly. So everyone agrees but privately every sun disagrees.
The common carriage debate is essentially a much more nuanced debate than realized by some of the policy makers engaged in this field. It doesn't say you can't have some kinds of discrimination. It says the discrimination needs to be clear and between types not between individuals packages being carried on the internet. So common carriage, not just about people going into pubs and drink but also people crossing bridges and it's actually got a very long history looking at the courage of goods by sea. So the idea behind the way in which you can carry packages essentially by ship. That's why a lot of it goes back to. It doesn't say you have to carry everything even if the ship will sink. It says you will have to offer the same circumstances for one as another. Normally go on in great detail. I won't comment on other things in terms of co-regulation and platform law and so on. Except to say in lockdown, lockdown just resumed in the U.K., which by the way in the U.K., the great controversy around lockdown is the closing of the pub. The closing of the common, as it were, carrier of alcoholics and other people who like to socialize in public. I spent time thinking of legal history of the internet. It's only 30 years old but astonishing how people have a short-term view of it. After the digital tornado, this is a book edited by Kevin Werbach. Retrospective of one of the policies on the internet. Look at way it's strobing, it's beautiful. It's also about the way we go forward the next ten years and another book to share with you is this. Which is, you can see it there, private regulatory enforcement in the European union. There's a chapter on internet regulation, just me poking over the top of it which is by me. That's a couple things to look forward to. I also posted on the chat a reference to an article for Georgetown technology looking at concerns Paddy had, which I won't go over now, because Luca, my four minutes is pretty much up, I'm sure. Thanks Toluca and Nicolo for making it feel we are all together even though we can't be this year. I look forward to being back with everybody, certainly next year or hopefully sooner.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you, Chris, for the nice presentation. And also for the nice wishes of course. We all share to be back together soon. Let me now give the floor to Giovanni De Gregorio. From Milano Bicocca university.
>> Yes, thank you. Happy to be with everybody. It's been amazing work. It's still a draft. The ideas recommend that. I will focus on two contentious issues we addressed in the glossary. The two phenomenon are quite pretty much. I will tell you there is so much connected but what is interesting is that, I will say the disinformation is one of the main critical way why we need a glossary because there is no way to define this phenomenon in a unique framework. I think the debate on this information even if we don't have time to go into the debate is interesting to understand how much is different, how much we need this kind of exercise, also. Legal and policy exercise in the field. Policy and technology. But what is important is that one of course we look at this information, what is important, no matter where you are in the world, regulating this information, addressing this information means dealing with the free speech. But at the same time in terms of the pandemic, it doesn't just concern right to free speech. Concerns other kind of human rights, consumer rights. but also clashing interests. Think about what happens with this information, where have been also around the world where some conspiracy theorists about 5G have led to some attacks on tech engineers ash the world. So this is also online cannot translate in something that is offline hard. When we look also this information around the globe we see so many different approaches. Task force, regulation. The way we look at free speech and balancing between different interests around the world is so different. What Catalina said before. The market. We can see how free speech is perceived in a different way. Not just the Atlantic but other regimes.
This information is critical because it's spread online. This is why content moderation exists.
It's a broad framework. Not just about removal. It's about soft moderation. Also banning, and recommending and understanding what is behind the screen, not just what is removed. Because we can complain about what is removed but if we don't know how it is organized we can't complain because we don't know what happens behind the screen. Of course there are plenty of information  --  self-regulation are very important at the same time. At the same time also they are contributing to increase and compete with public authority. Fundamental rights. The boundary, what you should ask is how to find a balance between private authority and public authority in information society. This is what content moderation provide us when we deal with platform regulation. This also leads to us to understand the logic. Not just content but also data. The difference between content and data is not so much. I would say it's very thin. When we look at especially the solution, policy perspective, because the glossary also works providing what the kind of policy could be implemented in this field. We see different approaches to content moderation. At the same time we can see increasingly call for transparency. I would say -- I say so much things. So thank you so much. And I enjoy so much this panel and more than happy to hear and contribute to this group also in the next months. Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Giovanni for packing in a lot of things into these five minutes.
A lot of elements for the debate. And really to be able to have means of debate at the end. Let me quickly give the floor to Enguerrant Marique. Please, the floor is yours.
>> Thank you very much, Luca. So I will try to keep it short because I fully subscribe to most in terms of methodology to what Richard and Ivar said earlier. Two changes I had, glossary entries. I was in charge of market, and social network. My first change I had in mind was to keep it simple and almost stupid so as many people could get the idea without entering too much in the technicals nor being too superficial. So that was kind of keeping it short. Which was difficult. Doing research you can very quickly enter into rabbit holes where you kind of start making so much -- between the models or different kind of social networks that at the end of the day you make so much distinction it's not relevant anymore because you just have one instance of a platform in mind trying to define what is social network. We have maybe three or four social networks in mind. Whereas there are many, many more social networks on media in place. We need to stay as general as possible. My fear is if we stay too general we aren't relevant any more. We may  --  adequate level of generality to examine. The second challenge I would like to share with you is terms are so deceptive that you end up writing so many things that is contradictory because the literature is not unanimous. So if you think about, I was in charge of the words, share economy. There was a day I refused writing an entry on share economy. I asked Luca and Nikola about that but if we start defining these notions, it needs to be a notion of marketplace because the basic trajectories or the basic instructions are the same as in marketplaces.
Yet there are some specific features which may deserve specific paragraph between need to try to stay as general as possible and not getting into defining all the words that exist into internet governance otherwise at the end of the day we will completely get lost. So I will stay there so we don't lose too much time.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for your points and confessing your behavior in refusing to describe the [breaking up]
Of course, now last but not least we have Yasmin Curzi.
>> Thank you. Hate speech and pornography entries. Both alone contributions from our dear colleagues, Terry and sin cha co. All these topics have much broader perspective but we meant to focus on the gender and standpoint cyber harassment for some can involve offenses in general. We also describe government white paper from 2009, described as broad approach where harmful content is understood as content related sexual exploitation and abuse, intimidation and others in the hate speech entry, I talk about how it's not a new phenomenon in our society. But the internet has enabled it to be carried out on a much broader scale. I also pointed out the discussion shouldn't be centered on waiving the free speech but instead should be centered on how the vulnerable groups such as women and minorities are powerless against violations.
Lastly in the pornography entry I discussed toward the lens of feminist  --  and also explain how the platforms are dealing with the issue in different ways from screening and filtering to excessive censoring. I think that's all I have to say. Thank you, a lot. Once again.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you very much for perfectly respecting timing so we still have finally time for open debate. I would like to invite also all the participants, attendees according to Zoom to raise their hand in case they want to chip in and provide comments or ask questions, I will make sure they maybe are allowed to talk and to speak freely. If we have any attendees willing to provide comments or ask questions please use the "raise hand" option on Zoom. If not,  --  well, there's a nice comment about the need for a glossary for cyber lo  and internet lo in the chat. That's perhaps a little over ambitious, knowing how long it took to realize only this glossary/dictionary/encyclopedia of platform
>> I see the attendees is quite shy. No one is raising hands. I would well there's one question. Maybe terms be relevant also be on platforms like ISB, etc.
Of course. Of course. Many of the terms that are used one example in my mind is Chris's entry on common carriage is a perfect example of how things may be used not only for platform regulation but also for either internet law, or cyber law or you name it as you prefer. We have maybe final remark. Otherwise I will take advantage  -- 
>> If you could share what you mentioned about the D.S.A.
>>  MODERATOR: To share in the chat. What we will do and this is a public announcement is to download all the text of the chat and then share it on our list so everyone can have all the links and everything. A lot of people have been sharing a lot of interesting resources in the chat. So I will make sure we will download it and then share it with everyone on the list. As there is no other questions shared in the chat, I would like to, yes, I'm seeing Chris raising his hand. So please, Chris.
>> I was looking for the little emoticon but we don't have it for the Zoom chat. Just to say, I think one of the great things about the glossary is to get a common understanding. Take a basic example, the term ISP, of course, is meaningless in legal terms in most countries around the world. Not a term we use in the European union or North American legislation either. So I think it's really important to have an understanding.  If you like, that's almost the most common baseline understanding people have about internet platforms and tend to be meaningless. We use I.S.S.P. in Europe. But just to say I think one of the really important elements that we need to think about going forward for the DCPR more generally, is how we can use that common understanding to explain and to translate to each other for next year what this smoke and mirrors in United States means about regulating section 230 on which we all pretend we base our own laws, even though we don't.  And also to explain a little bit what the DSA and the DMA will mean next year, so that we understand if there’s an actual divergence taking place between the two, I suppose you might say standard sectors and legal terms. But I think the glossary is so probably perfectly defined for that debate. Because without the glossary we are speaking completely at a different language to each other. I say ISSP, you say IAP, you say ECSP and there are lots of other things that Luca knows that we have this private language we use that uses acronyms that no one else it seems, even an internet Laureate understands and I think it’s absolutely essential. So, congratulations, guys, on the glossary and I think it’s a really important contribution.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Chris. And actually, there was an initial conversation I had with email with Rossana, she also suggested an excellent term, which is a new coin name, meaning, using Greek word for the common language could be a very good choice also at least as subtitle for the glossary/dictionary. 
I see that participants are now less shy and we have three raised hands. So first one is Courtney Raj, you already have a speaker privileges, so please go ahead when you want.
>> Okay, thank you so much. Can you hear me? Great. Okay. So I just wanted to say, I think this is such a fantastic initiative and it was really interesting to be involved. I think a couple of just thoughts as we kind of conclude the session. One is, as was mentioned earlier, there are kind of a lot of  --  this is maybe more of an encyclopedia than a glossary in many sense, so thinking about what we call it will be important. And I think there’s an opportunity to reach out to other groups where having this common terminology is really only going to have an impact if we are all using it beyond just, for example, this dynamic coalition. So as the outreach and partnerships share for Giganet, I wanted to offer and think about how we can reach the internet governance community and how we can reach out to civil society groups for example and some of the advisory networks on, you know, Christchurch college or the GIBCT, or other things like that. So I think, you know, as this draft becomes more finalized, just thinking about how we then take the steps to make this implemented as a common sense of terminology will be an exciting opportunity.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Courtney for this and actually, yes. Well, our initial purpose was not only to start sharing a pdf at the IGF but also share it by using the IGF website from allowing to comment. Then the pandemics arrived and our plans and timeline were a little bit disrupted.  But the goal is indeed to then now start outreach also to other groups that are dealing with this. We are started to share it and seek for comments not only from people from this coalition, broad range of stakeholders of groups that are maybe well beyond the IGF community. So anyone interested in using this to do outreach and ask feedback and convey the feedback in the header of the document, it is specified to provide them to the coalition directly by email to me or Nico.
But we will centralize this until the end of the year and we will try to review this and maybe we can also ask to help support of the IGF secretariat to have directly the possibility of this on the platform. Unfortunately, it was not possible before because of all the issues that we know but we will make sure to have a sustainable approach to this as soon as possible.
I see Bertrand also has a raised hand. So, please, Bertrand, go ahead.
>> Yeah, thank you, Luca. It was a really great panel. Two quick points. One, I would be glad to have feedback, maybe from Paddy, on this addition of third layer of the governance by and governance on.  Whether this is a concept that gets traction because there is a responsibility increasingly for the people who manage the hundreds of millions of groups that are taking place on such platforms as Facebook. And the second thing was an additional comment to what Chris was mentioning regarding the coordination,  the compatibility, the concept of legal interoperability between basically the regulations that may come out of the U.S. in section 230 revision and the digital services act.
One thing I am particularly concerned about is the terminology that is going to be used for the different layers in the stack of intermediaries from the ones that are very top of the stack that have full capacity to influence the amplitude of the content to the ones that are much lower in the stack. The cloud players of this world and thing and whether there is a useful terminology that could emerge to be more sophisticated than what is currently in the e-commerce directive clearly not sufficient. How do you see this work being conducted?
>> Should I jump in on the first question?
>> MODERATOR: Yes, please, go ahead.
>>  Yes, I'm glad I get to talk about this briefly, because I think it’s a very interesting comment. It’s not a phrase I’ve seen yet, so perhaps you may be the first to use it. In which case, congratulations. The way you slice this thing theoretically, you know, you can go both ways, right? You can also say that the power that moderators have is delegated to them by the platform, as a feature of the platform, and therefore is part of the governance by the platform. But I think there are important ways that users also have power independent of the platform, especially when they are in the high position as moderators, for example of subreddits, or Facebook groups etc.. If you want to draw attention to those dynamics then you think governance on platforms could be a potentially useful metaphor for that. So, I think that's a term that deserves further explanation for sure. So the way I approach it for this glossary project is literature review. How do people use it until now. For that purpose, I would have to find usage to do that. Or you could clarify there are limitations. But you know, hypothetically if you wrote a blog post about this and I could refer to Chappelle has used governance on platforms, then that would work quite well.
>> MODERATOR:  Excellent, just a couple two quick comments on this. First is as I was stressing at the very beginning we aim at consolidating a lot of different views.
Indeed we still have time to add views and what you were stressing, Bertrand, was a good point that should be added. I also shared in the chat doing this panel, another point I think should be added to this as governance, it is not really translate in English literature but is very, develop well-known concept in French language literature. Distinction between governance as the self-processes that leads to regulation and regulation on the other hand, set of techniques of tools that allow to create equilibrium in a system that is naturally not in advance format. So this distinction between governance as process and regulation as a set of tools and technique may also be useful for the debate. And by coincidence I wrote a book on this so I can also share it in the chat. If you are interested. Now, last but not least, we have still an intervention. We have Natalie Van Hamdun who wanted to share something.
>> Hi, thanks, Luca, and thanks everyone on this panel. I had a question that might have come up in your previous dynamic coalition papers. But I’m coming from a cyber security angle where I met Luca before as well. And the global conversation on cyber security and stability in cyberspace, we have developed these norms on a U.N. level but also on a private sector level that have a lot of commonality, that they have become you know, universally applicable forms. I wonder where this process, where does it stand for platform governance, is there a universally applicable principles of platform governance and content moderation. I’m not talking about illegal content. I think what Julie on Facebook said herself they also lack overarching principles which make it a bit sometimes, yeah, random, in the application. So I’m just wondering if there are, in the few initiatives that exist, I’ve seen about the Santa Clara principles on content moderation and safe networking principles, if there’s a commonality and where does this process stand. Sorry for such an elaborate question at the end of such a very interesting conversation.
>> MODERATOR:  I would ask Nicolo to provide his reply on these, plus the final wrap-up remarks so that then we will finalize this session because we are already ten minutes, besides our final deadline. So please, Nico, provide your view on this. I will take advantage of my position as moderator we have all celebrated recommendations and best practices that could be useful for platforms.
I know that Nico also has more views on these, so please, Nico go ahead.
>> CO-MODERATOR:  I think we are already out of time. That is an excellent answer. I can refer to our output in 2017 on platform regulations, why they are regulated and why they regulate us. Where we go through, you know, all the different normative references that were relevant in this space and we try to suggest, you know, some way forward. I guess, you know, we can talk privately, more in detail and now I just wanted to thank everyone and also say it was very useful comment. This one about the languages. And I think we should be thinking if we want to include stakeholder’s view we should be thinking of translating this at some point in some of the other languages, for example, French,  Portuguese and maybe Chinese so we can reach a broad spectrum of stakeholders.
But yeah, when is the right moment that is something that we should also ask ourselves. We should move forward with the comments and at some point decide this is something that should be shared more widely to other communities, other languages. But I think overall this was a fantastic exercise and it’s just the beginning. So thank you for being with us and we will be together on this journey, at least until next year, when we will publish the final outcome. Thank you very much, everyone.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you, bye-bye.
>> Bye.
>> Bye.
>> Thanks, everyone. And especially Nico and Luca. Shout out.
>> Thanks so much, guys.
>> Bye-bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-4-digital-economy-trans-territorial-regulations-and-the-impact-of-digital^^

>> MODERATOR: I and Sebastien and I will help this meeting to go well and with, of course, Anja all the work and I'm the last piece to come but I hope to do well to moderate the session and as we discussed just before the beginning of the meeting I would like to ask you as we received this very shocking and we are so sad news with the news, I would like to suggest all that we take a moment of silence to think about Irene and what she left behind her and how we can do -- how we can do better for her in the next few days and maybe few years.  Thank you.
     >> Thank you very much.  I see many friends of Marlene in the room and I would like that thank you for the time you spend to think about her and I hope that you appreciate the help that she give us and what we can do in the future.  We have some work to do and a very short session of now less than one hour and we have a lot of speakers and therefore Anja, I suggest that we start if you agree.
     >> ANJA GENGO: I agree.
     >> MODERATOR: Maybe you can introduce the topic because you work a lot on that and you deserve to speak about it a bit, please.
     >> ANJA GENGO: Thank you for accepting to moderate the session.  It is a great honor and thank the distinguished speakers that did not just devote the hour, the preparations start the early in the year.  We didn't even imagine that the meeting will go online.  We were preparing to meet onsite and I recall in April our colleagues were prepared to deliver.  Of course, the pandemic has changed and it will impact the discussion on today's discussion.  That the session focuses really on regional and national specificities of the digital economy and the impact of digital sovereignty and focusing on 12 policy areas do compete inputs coming from local levels relaying to the contemporary challenges to the economies and how did the pandemic impact we will look at the differences between the countries and regions.  For the southeast and European dialogues we have Dr. pan (listing names) and I'm apologizing if I didn't pronounce well the name.  With that, I would give the floor to Sebastien to you to guide us through basically to tour the world on this topic and see where we stand and what is the vision for the future.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Anja.  And thank you very much all of the distinguished participants who will talk and give us a snapshot at what is happening.  As you have said in the agenda, you have very strict time and we need to follow this because if not we will be late.  I would like not to take much time as we already did and give the floor to IGF from Bolivia, Javier.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: Good morning, good afternoon, good evening good night to everybody.  Thank you for the opportunity.  I would like to share experience in my country.  The first one is the occasion when got not market to operating two major cities in oh live Jason -- (?) and there were very different approaches because the only city that took the regulation was the city where I live in, la pad.  We make a legal framework call it private partner to travel services hired through digital platforms and the decision took several months with Uber to try to establish the business model that fits in our local reality.
     The municipal government put a special emphasis on the rights the users instead of the terms of use of Uber.  It was between the lack of regulation and the Uber interests.  It was interested because we established a set of requirements to operating in this city so we got an understanding with them, nevertheless, it was it little complicated because we couldn't comply to Uber to apply to all our regulation.  For example for some disputes between the users and Uber it has to be under the Netherlands regulation.  And the other experience is in the community we get roaming elimination revelation between Bolivia, Colombia and Ecuador and Peru.  Alongside with the Latin America, the bank we make the study from 2017 to February 2018.  Until 2020, we have been in many several coordinations between the regulation of territories on the operator, our local operators.  We make different changes to the draft project.  And the very important thing that us as a group of countries, we coordinate and agreed a common understanding for this regulation call it decision.  854.  The key point of this regulation is that we progressively decrease the prices of data CENB II and all those countries that I mentioned until 2022 we will have the same carriers as we were on the home country.  The key point was important to coordinate to reach agreements like we did with Uber and also with many older digital platforms as Netflix and so on.
     Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Javier.  And three minutes.  Great.  Just right timing.  You are very good.  Thank you very much.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: We will pass on to same topic of the floor to Chad, please.  Francois, you can take the floor.
     >>
     >> JUST I NEED TO KILL YOU THAT HE WILL JOIN US IN TWO MINUTES.  HE HAS ISSUES WITH ZOOM SO to he will be a two minute maximum here with him.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay then.  Maybe as we are very short time, may I suggest that we go to the next item and we will come back on that one if you agree with that.  If it is okay with you.
     Let's go to the second item.  And see are countries ready to respond and align their practices with the global friends of digitalization of the economies?  What are some good practices learning from Panama IGF and Albania IGF and at the end of this Part I will come back.  From Albania, we have Mrs. IrenaMalolli.  And I will give the floor to Irina, please.
     >> IRENA: Thank you for to speak about the economy and challenges and grab Pitts of our countries.  I will take the opportunity of these three meetings three minutes of my speech to share briefly what is going on in Albania what is good as example for others and what isn't going in the digitization of the economy.
     The digitization of the economy is really is to a great number of factor label fors -- relates to a great number of factors and developments starting from digital connectivity, fast broadband, digital platforms and digital services at digital skills and other aspects.  And right now we have a good progress in digital transformation of services for establishment of the Albania government we have a great number of online services provided for citizens and business and with more than 700 online services provided through this portal.  And a great number of users are collecting or are using this portal to have services.
     Regarding the digital connectivity, we have good coverage with mobile broadband based on 3G or 4G but no fixed broadband penetration and approved a new government plan for the sustainable on digital infrastructure broadband for 2020-2025 with pure objectives in order to address the digital divide and to have broadband connectivity for all public institutions and education facilities in order to have all inclusiveness.
     Regarding the digital economy, we know that regulation and legal framework is also important to creating vital resources and digital platforms or free movement of content online or something like that.  We recently passed in the government a new law for open data and reuse of public information which aimed to promote innovation in the digital economy and using active (?) or other developments of technology and applications for promotion of digital economy.  Regarding startups and innovation also a new law is drafted aiming to create a regulatory framework and institutional framework in order to promote and support startups in innovation and ICT.
     For cyber security which is so important, in order to promote or to develop the digital economy, we need to have (?) to use online services and platforms and go through online activity and we have legislation in place for network security on information and critical infrastructure to be safe and use task services and also we are working to increase awareness and for capacity building.  Our authority for electronic certificate and cyber security is organizing a cyber capacity to increase for pupils and students and for digital skills to develop specific strategy for all basic levelsester knowledge of citizens using the online services up to advanced professional knowledge or for the business community and for IT professionals.  This is briefly what is going on and a lot of other projects for development in the digital economy are in place and to be developed through different institutions which are working based on this agenda strategy.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Irena.
     And if I can give the floor to IGF member Nayreth, can you take the floor?
     >> NAYRETH GONZALEZ: We have to start with the fact that the digital economy emerged with the introduction of internet technologies.  And that affect only not only the economy but also society because it is currently the most important engine of up know expectations and economic (?) of the world.  To improve the response and aligning of practice with global trends in the utilizations of the economy, in the developing countries such as Panama, we must collaborate fine solution.  Therefore, it is still imperative to work on promote on issues related to ICT for development that contributes to enhanced capacity to quantify electronic commerce and the digital economy.
     We promote this by holding world meetings make up of multisector representative.  Collaborate to close the digital barrier as more than half of the world has limit or not internet access.  Inclusiveness is essential to build a digital economy that works for everyone.
     The case of this is the construction of a infrastructure by the government of Panama in conjunction with the private sector on nearly 100% where she seeks to withstand the infrastructure necessary for internet access connectivity in areas too difficult access in the country.  We are also working on the Panama hub digital initiative taking advantage of the fact that several fiber optic cable pass through Panama.  The digital hub has among its objective to a (?) provide companies dedicate to sale throughout the internet and digital platform to start the operation in the country.  Or to strengthen education as the digital economy we require a series for new different skills as well as protection policies.  It is necessary -- to make life long learning opportunities for all.  As well as the deployment, training, all ways of working barrier and training personnel are needed for new skill.  Panama is working to promote the creation of knowledge in micro, small and medium sized company and user.
     Elementary programs and professional training.  We also have the creation of our (?) which the agreement of establishment of contact networks and training of their capacity related to electronic commerce and that technology.
     The digital economy by establishing the rules of the game.  This task falls to the government in close tiia lock with the other stakeholders.  These require policies that make the digital economy work for the majority or not just for a few.  Policy makers are working on decisions that current trend increasing internet qualities but where imbalance caused by the digital economy.
     (?) in digital products and service must be taken into account.  In this, Panama has to work even more.  For example, it is debating a tax law for services provided and in the internet digital platform.  Last, but not least is not to forget that we must pay attention to the new increase for digital economy has create ranging from failures in cyber security to facilitation of illicit economic activities which closely relate to the establishment of the rule of the game in the country.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Nayreth.  Nice, well done.  And I will leave time for and I suggest we go to the next item.  What is the concrete camps of good practices of cooperation for improving our economies on regional levels experience shared by SEEDIG.  I will ask Olga Kyrliuk to take the floor.  Please go ahead.
     >> O ELGA KYRYLIUK: Thank you.  I must admit that the digital economy we are discussing today is of huge importance for the region of southeastern Europe and it so because leverage in digitization is not purely an economic challenge for our region but it is also a matter of international security of gee row political resiliency and strategic relevance.  Indeed, increased cooperation in the countries in the region could help to strengthen the individual strengths and benefits and also to address the collective challenges.
     Moreover, joint policy and strategic region to help to am plyify the region position at the international level.  Statement, I must admit that joining forces is never an easy task especially talking about such a diverse region as southeastern Europe.  Our region is covered in the more than 20 countries and these countries are very much diverse.  It is even understand this even more in you can see that some of these countries are already part of the European union while others would probably take an indefinite number of years to get the membership.  And also too often the countries find themselves in a position of direct competition with each other because very often they are competing for projects, for funds for investments.  And this also somehow createssen ternal competition instead of making them stronger as one actor at the international level.  But on the other hand, our region could also use this diversity as its strength because instead of taking many years to try to reach fairly equal level of digitalization our countries could instead combine unique resources and try to become more stronger together.
     For example, try to imagine that the breaksthrough in digital economy the southern European region could make if you try to combine human talent in engineering come interesting Ukraine and digital solutions in the field of artificial intelligence from Slovenia and Bulgaria and add on top on that, harmonized and then you have an ideal situation.  For that that has to be the countries and I would probably try to make an assumption here by saying that maybe instead of trying to exceed already existent regional formations our kintries could better focus on joining the forces between themselves and in this way become stronger.  And with the unique perspective, southeastern Europe could become a connecting brick between the increasingly polarized relations between the yew union and United States and China and moreover could become also the digital policy influence not only at the European but also at the global level.  And we should also bear in mind when we are talking about cooperation of the regional level that outcome can't push for strong cooperation just based on the geographical proximity of the country especially in the context of southeastern Europe, they are diverse and fighting hard to protect their identity and sovereignty and that is why we need to be careful when we are coming with the ideas of regional cooperation projects.  But also we should acknowledge that not every digital regional cooperation project requires engagement of every single country.  Some of these projects could be easily started just with few countries onboard and then they could be scaled up if proved successful and if seen as necessary.  And here I would like to refer to the example of four countries from southeastern Europe namely Bulgaria and Croatia and others.
     >> MODERATOR: Conclusion, please.
     >> At enhancing the cross border interkickive pity and digitization.  And as I am running out of time I would like to conclude by saying that countries in our region should focus -- should look beyond the differences and they should unite their forces in order to become stronger and focus more on the cooperation.  And SEEDIG is always ready to be for discussion and decision making.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you again.  Sorry for interrupting you.  We need to try to focus on the timing because if not we will be very late.
     IGF Chad is with us.  Can you take the floor, please.
     >> Thank you very much.  So I bring to Chad what hello, do you get me?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, go ahead.
     >> COUMNOBEYE THANK YOU VERY MUCH.  ACCORDING TO CHAD AS WE HAVE STOPPED TALKING ABOUT EITHER THE FIRST the first thing that happened in Chad here is the changing of the minister before the minister was called the ministry of past technology and new technology and communication information but now the new name is ministry of -- so this is the first thing happened in the period of COVID-19 and is the good thing for us.  According to the sec sore, we can say that the ministry the government of Chad has a lot of area of low and the (?) of internet with fiber optic of Chad ofure stand and Chad and aisle gearia also we have also the great program as difficulties in COUMNOBEYJ.  We know Chad is a big country so if it is not for us to connect all of the territory we know we have one million of (?) so it is not easy.  There is also the problem of the nonurbanization of the town and the problem of culture.  Culture, you know.  A lot of people they don't have money enough or resource to buy a smart phone and to be connected also.  What is interesting in Chad the government has which is called workship, we call it PSDNP, planned strategic poly(?) and then we (break in audio) the goal of connecting all people by internet.  So I think maybe on the future as you know it was difficult for me to be connected because of that situation of our connection is not good sometimes also.
     So according to about what we are going to do, Chad is on the way of (?) so we think that it -- ensure the goal of the government.  Thank you very much.  I don't know.  I'm so late I cannot talk much.  Thank you very much.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  You get it right and on time and thank you very much.  Now we have time for people express themselves and discuss and ask questions.  Don't forget to use the Q&A to put your question if you would like to write them.  Or raise your hand and if you have question you will be able to talk.  And there is no more people who are just listening, you are all as speakers but before you decide to speak, please raise your hand and I can give you the floor and if you like to ask the question in the question and answer place for it as you can see on the bottom of your screen.
     Okay.  I don't see any hands.  If there are no hands and no questions, I will give you some time to ask question.
     >> People cannot use the Q&A part.
     >> MODERATOR: They can raise their hand and they are not doing so either.
     >> Just post in the chat or maybe I can come in with a brief question.  I know that we have been debating about it when the session was -- when we were preparing the session and relates to those that are left behind to vulnerable and margin untillized groups how do we achieve that we all benefit from digital economy when we are not all connected to the internet and in addition to the fact that even if we have connection in terms of the available infrastructure there still is also a huge problem for a large part of the world.  That is something that would be interesting maybe to hear from the colleagues.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Anja, for your help.  Anyone want to take the lead and answer the question?  Olga, Javier.
     >> Ky start.
     >> Thank you very much.
     >> OLGA: Thank you for the question and it is important one and you raised probably the most critical points and this is why exactly at the regional level it is especially complicated because the countries have different level of development in terms of infrastructure and access.  And even if it is requiring a lot of funds to put those fiber optic cables and to bring internet to every village, this probably would take more time time and funds but something that we can do right now and this was your second point is actually to try to educate people to give them those digital skills that they need so let's say once they have the connection in their village or town they are already able to fully use it and to benefit from that connection.  That is why I believe that education at least requires less resource and the current pandemic showed that somehow even those who were not ready fully they moved to their remote learning distance learning.  So probably the pandemic also teached us how to react fastly instead of just taking years and years of discussion and how to actually act in a prompt manner.  So yes, this have very important and probably why the countries are struggling to find a common ground but this is something that every country should address the two issues.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Olga.  Anyone of the other panelists want to take the floor?
     >> NAYRETH: In line with Olga, I think that the COVID-19 has highlighted the importance of delivering the digital technology to ensure a rapid agile response to both the pandemic and economy recovery in its aftermath.
     The current crisis should be seen as an opportunity to bridge the digital divide among reals and increase broadband access to create incentive to adopt digital technology across all key government industry and service sectors and to promote a stronger digital culture across the population.  Javier, go ahead?
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think that increased the digitization or internet.  I heard a statement that said that on the six months we got increased penetration of about six years and here in Bolivia we are getting a loot of requirements for the internet connection but you know, our geography is really huge and it is kind of impossible for them to get to owl of the sites of Bolivia and I think that the very important factor for this aim is to try to develop community networks via free frequencies.  NGOs or public or private entities could use that frequency to get to the very, very remote areas to get the internet connection.  And it is important to remember that the digital literacy is very important.  We need to teach the people how to use internet and how it can improve their social and economic life.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Javier.  I have a hand from Carlos Alberto Alfonso.  Carlos, please go ahead.
     >> CARLOS ALBERTO: Thank you, Sebastien.  I was thinking of examples following what CENB II said of the region of operation and cooperation in countries with common borders and geographical borders and what other ways to help enhance the regional operation or collaboration is by picking up issues of common issues linked to territory questions and which affect the development of the internet.  One single example but, of course, participants may suggest others, the need to organize the spectrum policies at the edge of common geographical borders.  An issue we cannot escape from a regional cooperation with bordering countries.  Another example is like in Latin America, you have Indigenous communities which cross two agree graphical border like the (?) between Peru and Brazil.  And there are other examples.  In Africa, we have several examples and so on.  So these sort of (?) trans border policies is interesting to consider.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Carlos.  Anyone else want to take the floor?  And comment?  Any other questions to the panelists ready in your pocket as you have done already, Anja?
     >> JANUARYIA GENGO: This was a challenging aagain that to put together because it is a broad topic and as you can see from the colleagues, the situation and conditions and our vision seems to be different for what we expect from the digital economies.  Yes, maybe my question would be and I do come from actually yesterday's planning call of this high level leadership track that will be happening at the IGF next year is in terms of the digital economy when you look at your communities, in which sectors you see now currently that the biggest transformation that was caused by.
     >> I think.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think the biggest is the remote education or (?) brought a transformation from the classroom to their houses.  So it was an -- a very deep impact to families for fathers, four parents because they needed to be on their homes to support their child and also the teachers had to use internet and whatsapp and the other educational platforms.  So I think that much work are pending to do on this next years because the COVID will stay here in this world so we need to improve the new policies and as one said trans national policies to get support for the policies.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Javier.  Anyone else want to?
     >> OLGA: I can go next.  I would agree that Javier and I would name for the real the healthcare because it is everything happening and changing because of COVID.  As we see any crisis actually can be an opportunity.  We just need to make sure that we are using this opportunity and catching the right moment to develop.
     And this COVID-19 pandemic it actually revealed a lot of weaknesses and helped us to mobilize the resources.  Even though for me sometimes it was so much high breaking when I got to know that some schools in my native town don't have the internet connection and while I was sure that probably it is not an issue at all for Ukraine because, indeed, the internet penetration has very high rate.  But sometimes you just if you have to be in a situation when you understand this issue still exists and they are not that far as you could think they are.
     So and Of course the healthcare where a lot of things nowadays happening where we are tending to telemedicined a the consultations online and all of these things.  So probably it will be even difficult for us to come back and maybe we will not even come back to pre-pandemic way of services.  The government is developing in many countries in the regional governments are trying to increasely provide services online and once the citizens feel this is useful and this is efficient they would probably incest for all of those things to stay in place.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Olga.
     >> MODERATOR: There are would comments.  How do we eDoo he fine digit literacy.  We also discussed this in the AprIGF.  But it is very to define it, it was from IGF and it was from (?) and why do you think someone should be connected.  I will give the floor and then if there are a last few words from the pantist I was give them the floor.  Please, go ahead.
     >> AUDIENCE: Thanks, Sebastien.  There are different countries and different regions who discuss and debate national on regional positions.  To what extent have they brought important differences to the global IGF and successful in aligning and harmonizing national positions to global positions for example and national journal issues being aligned to -- aligned as journal issue and global journal issue.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Raquel, can I give you the floor and then I will come back to the panelists, please.
     >> RAQUEL: Thank you very much, Sebastien.  And I would first reacted to the question that Angela and the comment made in the chat and go with the one comment to the panelists.  Regard, the question about connective and why it is important and I think Angela frame Anja framed in the sense that people would be forced to connect.  In my view I think it is important to get the connection able or given people the options to connect about if they are willing to.  And that is the very important nuance that needs to be considered in this case.  And then making them available is the entrance point for universal access and really we just see this especially in Latin America, but also in other parts of the world where this digital gap and the digital divide it really having a new meaning in terms of how you are included in the society or not and it is not only about forcing people to communicate but it is about being fully as citizens or not.  I don't want to extend too much but I felt compelled to make comments around it.  But my question would be on the topic of the panel more to the digital transformation and impact on the economy in a very pragmatic way also.  In your experience, how do you see connected to where we are discussing in terms of the improvements for the IGF in having this outcomes more clearly targeted and do you see that through your experience with the national end in some cases the original, this really happening and how this comes together in terms of some of the best practices or lessons that we can -- thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  It is a very important but long question and I will just give them one minute to answer.  I'm not sure that they are able to answer all of the question that were raised and specifically the last one because it is a very long discussion.  But thank you for your question.
     I will for each one of you one minute and then we will be going to the next section.  Who wants to start?  The one who didn't talk.  Did you want to now say something?
     >> IF I WOULD LIKE TO SAY SOMETHING ABOUT WHAT IS THE LAST PROGRESS PART OF DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION IN ALBANIA FOR THE TIME BEING what I mentioned is the digital transformation and public services.  We have created the government portal as a unit portal and we have invested in this digitalization of public systems and development and digitization of public services and it was a very good example during the pandemic situation that through regional agency of information society a lot of services helping citizens during the pandemic was developed and provided.  And I agree with what is discussed about the digital connectivity and how it is important in order to have digital Xi links and digitalization of the economy.  And it is a precondition.  Since digital connectivity has great impact for all actors.  But I think that we can go in parallel and hand in hand with all kind of developments from digital skills we can advance or preparing new generation but not only new generation, we need to adopt the labor force, the digital technology and to be able to use this kind of new possibilities, the platforms and applications and to be ready for digital economy.  And in parallel as policy makers since I came from minutery we need to prepare the relevant angle and regulatory framework in order to promote technology.  This is what I can say based on discussion from (?).
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Irena.  Anyone else?  If not, we move to the next section and you will have the opportunity to talk again.  But short.  But if you want to say something.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think it is very difficult for us as a lat in country for companies like Facebook, Uber and Netflix and Microsoft so a is a good practice we have with the community making (?) the framework I suggest that maybe our small countries in western Europe and Latin America it is very good idea to group together to gather and try to develop some frameworks like the European nations did.  So I think it is very important to face this new (?) alongside with the American companies we need to get together our force to make a better framework.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Olga, please?
     >> OLGA: The last question.  I think for the things we are discussing to actually become decisions and to actually make ooh difference, we need to have the decision makers around the table and we need to have them around the table not only once per year when we are having the annual IGF regional national level or whatever but we node to continuously during the year communicate with those stakeholders and actors and this is something that we started doing SEEdig, not only the annual meeting but now trying to launch various intersessional projects.  For example the project dedicated to COVID-19 tracking data protection in the region as a result of which we prepared a set of representations for for policy makers and then we tried to communicate and react on that and I think this is important.  Because if we just keep the cycle closed and we don't bring new people in and don't get our results out to the right people, then basically we will just stay at the level of discussing the issues.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  We are late already.  I need to -- did you want to say a few words before we move or we can move to the next section.
     >> JOSUE: Here in Chad our country what is important during the period of the pandemic of code is also the digital transformation of COVID the (?) to call and be in touch with the doctor to this is a good practice in our country.  But the real effort is we need to have a good internet connection and new policies to promote again ICT in our country.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And we are late already and therefore you will have to be very short in the next section.  The question is digital transformation of our economies, what is needed to be done in eastern Europe and Chad and Albania and Bolivia and you have less than one minute please.  Olga, very short speech, please.
     >> OLGA: So this is easy because after every SEEDIG meeting we have the message with the stakeholders and we had the digital economy session and this is what the community has decided is the most important to create the enabling the environment which means to bridge the digital divide in terms of infrastructure and in terms of education and then you need to ensure multistakeholder cooperation between all of the actors involved in digital economy.  You also need to harmonize the cross border and make sure that everyone has to follow the same set of standards and need to incentivize innovation and to create the environment where there is a healthy competition included by promoting the public private partnership.  So this will be is the key points.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  The next is Irena, please, very short, please.
     >> IRENA: I will say what is important for the region to go ahead in the economy is to advance for cross border services interoperaability of the system and services in order to facilitate citizen movement or (?) business environment.  And in addition, what Olga mentioned, to invest for the digital divide in order to have all inclusive digital transformation.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Irena.  Nayreth.  Very, shoot.  Too.
     >> We must continue to enhance the technology innovation for support investment in national broadband for future.  Scientific research and pollty and legislative frameworks on the competitive cyber security industry.  It is necessary to address certain weakness to accelerate the country's digital leave for the above all interested party we must continue holding working meetings with the various actor www.the environment in order to monitor and promote the digital economy win the country.  We must not Rule out seeking the support of the international community in commercial financial and fiscal cooperation necessary to place the digital economy in the world on a more sustainable path.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And Javier, please.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think that there digital economy is not only the communication infrastructure but also other stakeholders and other economic sectors like the local universities and local governments or a type of ministries for economic issues and planning issues because it is very important to foster the capacity building for the digital literacy and also for new technologies for the digital content, a lot of local digital content and new technologies like cloud computing and 5G and IoT and so on.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And last, but not least, very short.
     >> THANK YOU, DO YOU GET ME?
     >> MODERATOR: YES, GO AHEAD.  PLEASE.
     >> HELLO.  SO WE THINK THAT OUR -- OKAY.
     >> JOSUE WHAT WE NEED IN THE TRANSFORMATIONAL we ask the government to accelerate under the fiber optic of Chad and Niger and Nigeria.  And also in the sector of education it is very important to continue to train, to train a new -- to train young people, to train teachers and in the domain of learning and ICT also.  So we need also a lot of (?) and that domain also.  And then we need also new policies as -- the same thing here in Chad also.  We need the new policies to -- for the question between the country and between the countries of CESE which is called in (?) this community is linked and the state, the members are linked so we need to increase the cooperation between those countries also.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And I know that I didn't give the floor and he is upset so I will give them the floor for 30 seconds and then we will conclude the meeting with a few words from Anja.  Do you want to take the floor?  Yes?  No?  Okay.  I tried my best.  Thank you very much.  I wanted to before to give the last word to Anja, I wanted to thank you all.  It is a very difficult exercise, very short time and very important questions and ting all in English and I know that your language is not English and your first language is not English and that is very kind and very well done.  Thank you very much.  Anja, you prepared this round table fabulously.  I will give you the last word.  Thank you very much.
     >> Anja, congratulating you on impressive time management.  I know in superexperience around I know my colleagues will join me.  It is extremely difficult because there is so much to hear and everything somehow different and many challenges are present in so many countries and regions it is definitely worth of hearing.
     So really impress I.  Congratulations this was very punctual.  I expected a good session because I know you worked on it hard.  I hope in IGF 2021 we could build on the good results of this session and expand further and hopefully when we meet in concern to exchange on the improvements that were made in this next year on digital economies in many countries and regions.
     On the (?) there is the call for commitments in case come of your NRIs would like to share plans or projects you plan to focus on to advance the goals of Internet Governance Forum or the goals objectives that were set in the road map for the digital cooperation recently issued by the secretary general.  You can access that form on the website.  You can also reach out to me and I will try to respond as quick as I can.  But with that, thank you very much.  And it was excellent, such a difficult day and sad day but I think you brought actually the purpose why we need to continue doing what we or doing in the way we are doing.  Thank you so much.  Thank you, Sebastien.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  The meeting is auned and have a good follow-up on IGF and thank you for participating.  Bye bye, all.  Take care.
     >> Thank you so much.
     >> Great session.
     >> Thank you, everyone.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-4-equitable-access-to-digital-content-lessons-from-covid-19-raw^^

>> MODERATOR: Good afternoon, good morning, good evening, everybody.  Welcome to the IGF session on equitable access to digital content, lessons from COVID-19 brought to you by the Dynamic Coalition on public access in libraries.  You are welcome to join us for the session.  I'm Stuart Hamilton and I'm the current president of the national authorities on public libraries in Europe.  And I'm also very happy to be part of the Dynamic Coalition of public access in libraries and have attended many IGFs in this capacity.  I'm going to chair the session today.
     And we are here to focus on access.  The Dynamic Coalition on public access in libraries has got a long history now as being one of the key places within the IGF where public access to information is discussed alongside public access to broad band infrastructure.  At Dynamic Coalition believes that the world's 406,000 public libraries offer an amazing and already existing resource to help policy goals in the digital and development context.
     Now specifically today we want to talk about access during the COVID-19 pandemic.  The last six months have highlighted crucial questions around access to key digital resources and services when crisis hits us.  And I know this because of the situation we face the here in Ireland on March 12, overnight we had to close the country's 330 public libraries and we instantly saw massive shifts of our users online.  We have seen triple digit percentage increases in new users of our e books and online services for e magazines and newspapers.  We had hundreds of thousands of views or four online storytimes and crucial questions posed by policy makers how we continue to provide access to wi-fi and PCs while our buildings are closed.  Not just Ireland, all over the world we have seen educational institutions and their libraries undertaking novel and new ways to ensure students access to educational materials and publishers and other vendors launch to extend or offer easy account is toes online resources and a lot of conversations around the tension of open access particularly resources that support research on COVID-19 and related areas.  Or that ensure the continuity of education during lockdown.
     However, this has been far from uniform.  Across countries and even within countries.  And this, of course, has deepened existing digital divides and created new inequalities.  Under lockdown conditions, lower income remote and otherwise disadvantaged communities could have limited access or be entirely cut off from work, education, healthcare, or other dimensions of participation in society.  We are facing big questions about the money and resources and skills that we need to meet the public huge demand for our services during the pandemic.
     And these discussions and their outcomes are going to change the library sector in years to come.  We think we have to have some fundamental discussion, investigation into the nature of digital inclusion in this new environment.
     And the policies that we need to address it and the IGF offers that space to have the discussions.
     So we are going to try and do in the session is take stock of what we know and look at the emergency responses of libraries of governments and publishers and other key stakeholders to the COVID-19 crisis and to look at some of these responses and the impacts they have had on digital inclusion and access to information and content.
     We will particularly look at the current policy context and the lessons learned during the pandemic and then look at those -- how the policy questions moving forward into the future, hopefully not but maybe similar emergencies similar to this one.
     The format is three parts.  Establish the baseline first and look at where we are with policies around public access to broadband and access to libraries and looking at challenges we faced ensuring access in the pandemic.  And focus on open discussion where we want to hear from you about your own contexts.  We have a great lineup of speakers.  This can gives you the opportunity to comment and use the chat functions for your observations.  You can request questions which I will round up or bring into play when we have an intervention finish or get into the end on open discussion.
     I'm encouraging you to get involved in the chat function of this.
     Let's kick off and move on.
     In the first part here as I said I want to establish the baseline for the session by looking at public access solutions and broadband policies and I will call on Valensiya.  Valensiya's background in public administration but focuses on internet governance so it is perfect to hear about digital matters and she will set the scene for us and talk about how public access is an important tool for response and recovery.  Some of you may recall from last year's Dynamic Coalition meeting that our report looked at the role of libraries in broadband plans and this year we had the chance to look at several case studies to see how this is being implemented on the ground.  This initial intervention before we get on to COVID-19 will give us kind of insights into the impact of public access and what good practices can ensure maximum results.  Valensiya, over to you.
     >> VALENSIYA DRESVYANNIKOVA: Thank you so much, Stuart.  Thank you, everyone, for joining us today.
     Hello, everyone.  As Stuart mentioned I'm Valensiya, one of the founding members of DC pal.  So as Stuart as highlighted, the past few months have among many other challenges underlined the urgency of taking more action to address the digital divide.  What does this mean for public access strategies and solutions?  On one hand, it has shown us how publicking a session conditions have adapted to continue to support throughout the pandemic.  We saw libraries and similar facilities taking on a wide range of initiatives ranging from expanding wi-fi coverage to hot spot laptop and many other solutions and we'll have a chance to look at these in more detail short shortly thanks to one of our key speakers, Don means and we have seen how questions remained relevant around public access throughout the different stages of lockdown and Sherman Oaks distancing of tentative reopening and second waves in different countries.  Public access was seen as important in the UK and Belgium where libraries adjust and offer public access services with strict safety measures through different stages of lockdowns and reopenings.
     This has been done for example by appointment or reserve computer use for essential tasks for prioritizing for people who do not have individual internet access at home.  And also worth noting where this was made available the public facilities were often used for particularly essential tasks.  Access to government services online.  Benefits applications and job applications and shows the important role that public access can play during the peaks of the pandemic and the recovery that is yet to come.  So when we look at lessons learned and the the policy policy changes that support digital inclusion and access to content and services in the normal and during recovery and for the possible future crisis we can look at the control and it is work looking a the role and potential of public access with the urgent need to bring more people online and start by taking a closer look, indeed, at what policy tools at our disposal and within what policy frameworks we are working at the moment.
     So, as Stuart mentioned in 2019, DC has launched a report that EXAMINES (?) WE HAVE SEEN THAT the roles are different -- the different roles to support the inclusion varied substantially.  Affordable access to the internet and digital skills training and also local content creation and more.  Similarly, we have seen that the different policy tools and mechanisms that can support and deliver on this -- on these roles so building up public connectivity infrastructure and equipping with ICTs and using mechanisms such as universal service access funds or public private partnerships and many other approaches.  So having charge of these policy options this year we have built a (?) have been implemented in practice in several different countries.  Through the past months and with the wonderful help of our colleagues in different countries we were able to prepare several in depth case studies that look at how library connectivity and public access policies and initiatives implemented in Colombia and Kenya and Lithuania and in what the impacts have been.  So to bring (?) in Colombia, several projects with the national plan, in 2014-2018 have contributed to wide connectivity and public access through the national fiber optic project hundreds of libraries and public institutions connected to the (?) and looked at a particular case of the (?) where local fake holders worked to ensure a best possible fit to local circumstances and local needs and expanded on the project with more initiatives.  And finally, Colombia, the project used an appropriation of ICT in the public libraries was developed by the minister of culture and national library and supported by the bill and Melinda gates foundation and focused on public access and ICT enabled services.  In second set case study in Kenya, the national library service and the communications authority of Kenya have looked closely together to set up public access points in libraries across the country and equipped so with ICT with connectivity and training for the library staff and soon after this was scaled up to 46 across the country.  This project is an example of how universal service funds can leverage to support the inclusion through public access in existing facilities.  In Lithuania, several projects implemented some with the government.  Some through the European union or with the support of the bill and Melinda gates foundation global libraries program and the air various projects in Lithuaniaia focused on access points for the government (?) in particular.
     As a part of the (?) the minister of culture and national library are implementing a project that has upgraded internet collection and delivered various advanced technology facts for library uses for example (?) and more.  And finally Ren (reading quickly) funded by the bill and Melinda gates foundation is a good 80% of the libraries with the internet (?) and skills training for librarians and this connective infrastructure and capacity building has then helped libraries to introduce many digital inclusion services which were later referenced in the countries digital agenda.  These are just a few case studies and we are working to add more examples and further insights and while all of these cases have employed different mechanisms and they follow different formulas and what we did notice is there were several recurring themes and common findings that can offer us some more insights on good practices regarding public access projects and what works and what can did he achieved.  A first set of shared themes has to do with the impact to public access across all of the case studies, some recurring themes helped us highlight that, one, intervention supporting public access in libraries often help users from more marginalized groups and more vulnerable groups or for example in Lithuania later studies suggested that public access facilities in libraries are supporting digital inclusion of older community members and residents of rural areas and People with Disabilities and lower income or less form am qualifications.  In Romania, the infrastructure and capacity building intervention allowed libraries to introduce targeted services for youth.  For children.  As well as older community members.
     In Kenya libraries, public access facilities are particularly popular with youth and students.
     A second lesson was that setting up public facilities in libraries made it possible tainted deuce more services to help meet the needs of communities.
     In almost -- well, it almost goes without saying that many, many, many libraries that have been benefiting from these projects have introduced digital skills training.
     Whether in the form of formal training, courses, whether in terms of informal support or help advice, this was a key element of their work to support digital inclusion.
     Public access facilities themselves contributed to broader societal development goals for example, whether it is educational goals or employment goals or access to health information or E government services of their users.  But what was also striking is that once these facilities and libraries have been set up, this paved the way for offering more services that help meet the needs of their communities.
     More different programs.  Or offerings that are tailored for local needs.
     For example, in Romania, the rollout of services from different libraries ranged from entertainment to culture and heritage and skills building.  Avalanche Colombia, libraries are able to contribute to local content generation and actually one of the reports summing up the results of the intervention highlighted that libraries are able to introduce 300 new unique service projects for their communities.
     And in both Colombia and Lithuania, public access facilities started offering access to advanced technologies and helping people get familiar and develop engineering to robotics to artificial intelligence and graphic design.  The widespread adoption of various accompanying services alongside the fundamental public access facilities means that even when people have home connections they continue to use the public access facilities.  They essentially are about more than just connectivity.
     Also, once established, these services offered an excellent platform for further growth and expansion in Colombia, in Lithuania, in many other countries where we have seen is that having set up this infrastructure libraries are able to partner with national, local authorities and agencies and commercial partners and NGOs to further develop services and deliver on information and services in areas like agriculture, life long education, literacy or administrative matters.  What this shows is that what this helps show is that public access is an excellent stepping stone for many other interventions.  With the potential in mind, the other set of lessons was about what works and what can help maximize interinvestigations that surveillance public access.  Lesson one, taking stock of the infrastructure of community needs is very useful when preparing the rollout of such post interventions.  In general a common formula for setting up public libraries appears to be ICT quit plus connectivity and training for the library staff and these are crucial limits but also good to check if the other fund inmental infrastructure needs are met and are 234 place.
     For example, talking about conditions of premises.  Or even things like furniture and equipment.
     For example in Kenya, (?) that was undertaken at the beginning of the intervention showed that local area network infrastructure would need to be set up for several libraries.  And for some, it was also important to secure an electricity source.  That is why the project has included building up local area networks and introducing solar panels as needed.
     The second lesson shared was that skills building for the library staff is integral.  This was introduced in many (?) and this enables the variance to deliver equitable additional skills learning opportunities with new ICT based services and playify the impact and value that public acts infrastructure offers.
     Finally, there is across all of these case studies, a diversity of possible funding sources that can enable and support a rollout of public libraries facilities.  So is can come from a combination of sources.  (Reading fast) and so on and so forth.  It is also vital to ensure continued sustainability of public access facilities as the case studies have shown.  In entails planning for long-term expenses and maintenance of the facilities.  This has been had for example in both Colombia and the Kenya case studies.
     And if you have also seen is that leadership is critical and coordination and partnerships can help ensure maximum impact for the rollout.  For example, between a know Low cal (?) in Colombia the specific case study mentioned earlier this helped establish a successful model tailored for local needs.  In Kenya, the national library service has continued facilitating the rollout of the project once the infrastructure was set up.  They have helped coordinate the introduction of ICT-based services in libraries across the country on a trial basis and this means that they can replicate scaleups and most successful and in demand products across different libraries in the country.  In romaine.  The national association once the infrastructure was set up helped build and launch many different projects either in partnerships with organizations with individual libraries, or by itself.  And individual libraries themselves were able to continue building on this and taking the impact further.
     And final lesson was that impact (?) are critical.  For example, at one place in Kenya has showed that the -- one case in Kenya -- has included building -- a system for reporting on the use of public facilities on often feedback and one of the findings was for example pertaining to the speed of the connective and the number of computers.  The initial plan, that was the second half and the end of the (?) intervention all of this has been scaled up to so megabytes per second again based on the feedback and based on the (?) community needs.  These studies showed that both the potential public access in ensuring meaningful inclusion as well as the policy tools that can help implement this.  And as we have continuously seen access is, of course, meaningful access comprises many dimension and this ranges from inclusion to skills to affordability to access to content and services.
     And this shows both how pub public access can help contribute and what practices are replicating or learning from and helps us move on to the broader discussion on -- on both access to meaningful access to content to services and how public access can continue to (?) during and after the pandemic.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Valensiya.  There is a lot of information to impact there and the Dynamic Coalition is going to be releasing the updated report which we will talk about later as well.  What I think the intervention from Valensiya does is give us background information that we need to understand really the impact that public access can are have with the four case studies with bits and pieces around, you know, what can be provided and the impact it can have really particularly as you pointed out, Valensiya, the marginalized communities and in many cases exactly who policy makers want to reach in the context of digital inclusion.  A couple of things that I'm sure we will come back to from the start of your presentation around access to government services online and benefit applications which I think are relevant in the COVID discussions.
     That is where I want to go now.  We will move into the second part which is really about the new challenges we are facing.  How can we continue to provide equitable access to content and services during the pandemic.  So what have the impacts been of the responses to the emergency and what further questions do they raise?
     So I'm going to start by calling on Nkim Osuibwe, you mentioned your connectivity there so I hope that you are with us.  I know that you are opening up knowledge and equitable access to information for the development of Africa and I understand you will talk about how the African libraries responded to the crisis and then how to take action on some of the gaps that emerged with the challenges and possibilities.  Over to you.
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: Thank you very much.  Can you hear me?  Can you all hear me, please?
     >> MODERATOR: I can hear you.  I'm guessing other people can, too.  Although I can no longer hear you now.  Nkem, can you hear us?  Someone was remarking to me the other day that a lot of these online meetings are like seances.  Nkem, we can always come back to you.  Can you hear us now?
     Okay.  Well, I think it shows that often we do have connectivity problems and a new environment is no different here with online meetings.  I'm going to pause, Nkem and Don, I will come to you if that is okay.  I can see you online there.  Don was going to be the second speaker and moved up in priority now.  The founding chairman of the school's health and libraries broadband broadband coalition a DC based advocacy organization promoting public programs to get gigabit fiber to libraries and other institutions.  He is here representing a global tech savvy innovation focused libraries and also in the capacity as the principal investigator for an IMLS grant.
     So Don, I think we will hear from you on how libraries are supporting response and recovery in the COVID situation and you will bring in examples from what must be one of the longest running shows of the COVID-19 period.
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: Hello?
     >> MODERATOR: Hi, Nkem.  Has the connection -- I was going to bring in Don.  Are you able to hear us?
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: I can hear you.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  Let's take Nkem while we have the connection.  Don, we will come back to you.
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: I will try not to rush too much but I have to now that I have the --
     >> MODERATOR: Take your time.
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: All right.  So I want to talk about access to information how an African libraries coped and what we did and challenges we were facing and possibilities.
     And then actions we have taken and what we hope to do.  So during the COVID-19 pandemic, in Africa, it is we did shut down immediately and then I don't know why it is still here in (break in audio) but when we started African libraries started disseminating information about preventive measures even before the general lockdown across the entire continent.
     And then during the lockdown a few African libraries providing services but mainly through the social media.  Translation of COVID-19 information into different languages and then supporting remote teaching, learning and then research.
     I think to find out what was really happening then and from that we found out that there are key areas that we need to deal with or that need to be dealt with as the COVID-19 has a new normal.  We found out that African librarians need functional emergency plans that will integrate how libraries can provide access to information even when the libraries are closed down.  Not just the plans of in the event of fire, you go to the exit.  What if the library does a shut for a long time.  What happens?
     So we are working on plans with libraries that -- (break in audio) these are the things we can do even when we are not inside the library building.
     Then we also found out that there is need to improve the ICT internet infrastructure in African libraries so ensure that there are facilities for information access, even as everything goes online.
     Because we notice that the infrastructure for carrying out digital or online services is quite poor.  So we are working on that.  Then again, another thing that we found out in the survey is that we need to skill the competencies of African librarians to provide access to information onlines.
     And then we also notice that the advocacy skills that we need to show off that so librarians can understand the issues at stake.  Internet and how to advocate for maybe better internet access and then how to advocate for revision of the library rule, digital inclusion and we also notice there is need for libraries to advocate for policies that encourage open nets so there will be resources that they can access.
     Even if the library doors are closed.  Resources that -- e resources that can he can access.  Those are really the highlights of the next steps after our survey.
     And then I wanted to talk about taking action.  What are the realities?  The challenges and possibilities.  Reality one, Africa is a continent, not a country.
     Why this is coming up is that we found out that you know, you want to do something with a group of people but because Africa is made up of different countries, there are different types of government in part, there are different policies and you find out that you cannot now have a blanket solution because we are a continent, not a country.
     The challenge that we saw is the government access that enable access to libraries differ from country to country.  We found out that what are things in like a place like Cameroon and let's say Nigeria, they are all different.  And because of that, we now scheduled training for international library associations to understand what feeds to be done and how to do it and the standard with them to achieve.  Of course, with fingers crossed.  Maybe it works, maybe it doesn't work.
     And for the action taken, and with EFLA we have been able to original nice the first (?) which is more about internet governance and how to approach it.  How to advocate for it.  Who to talk to.  And the issues at take, so to speak.  And then the second reality, reality two is the cost of data is high in Africa.
     The average price of one gigabyte of data is 7.2% of the average monthly salary of Africans in different countries give or take.  And this is way higher than many people can afford.  And that is the reason, you know, this challenge is there in Africa.  How do we get libraries to be favored in quotes in the provisional internet service providers.  Lou do we influence policy makers to recognize why does the subscription of libraries need to be subsidized?  And then again, how do we advocate for alterative routes for internet provision in African countries.  Possibilities again that we are looking at again, more training for national library associations to advocate nationally because it is not something that we can do on the continent-wide level.  It has to be brought down to the different countries so that they know what they are facing, you know, knowing the people in charge can now advocate for.  And then a position outlining the physical standards and codes for provision of internet in African libraries and then seeking websites or platforms to offer offline possibilities to African libraries.  On the actions we are taking is that the next webinar will address the training aspects of this.  And we have started work on standards for the entire continent and reached an agreement with the wiki fund to provide the African libraries the opportunity at least to access Wikipedia even when offline.  But it has been tied to a lot of activity to consider activity where the libraries will compete, you know depending on how they perform, go home with the software and the program that is the wiki funned so they can be able to account Wikipedia offwhen offline.  And digital infrastructure in African libraries is minimal.  Again, you know, did it is easier for somebody let's say this south Africa or libraries in south Africa that you can't compare the libraries with the south Africa with the libraries in Chad.  That is whew I I started with the thought that Africa is a continent and not a country and these differences are there but generally the digital infrastructure is minimal.  So the challenge there is how do we influence the policy makers to recognize why this is important in African libraries.  For African libraries.  For access to information, for access to education.  Why, why, why we need it.  So that is the number one challenge.  How do we convince them.  And then again, and how do we reach out to internet service providers to see what they can do because we have seen what NTN and has done in south Africa and Etel in Uganda and we are wondering, you know, we are working towards can you expand the scope of operations with this since there are libraries all over Africa that can use your services that you can help with this or that.  It is not easy now, but it is a possibility that we are looking at.  Then right now, the action we are taking on this is that we are running the African libraries to find out what is it that you really, really have?  What do you need?  Do you think your community can cope with this or that?  You know, because if you leave it open, general, you find out that you might be advocating for infrastructure that is not really needful in a community but that could serve another group of people better.
     So that is the point we are now to find out what is existing in your libraries.  That thing that is existing, how many people does this serve in terms of access?  Can you cope with all that?  Would you need more?  What could you need to to do?  How many people do you think it will serve better?  That is the point we are at and that is what we are working on now.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Nkem, that is helpful to have the view from Africa, a continent and not a country as you say.  And with libraries getting out in front of situations before lockdown and getting information out there, we know we can play a role.  I'm sure we will come back to the points raised in the discussion.  I will go now to Don.  Don, I have pretty much introduced you.  And in the interest of time we will go straight in and let's see your view points on how libraries have responded to the crisis.
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: 
     >> DONE MEANS it is great to be back with the DC that does work in raising awareness.  There is no one that does it better.  It is part of their cha are ther in the first place.  So as Stuart said, we are the libraries network.  It is about a 15-year-old open consortium.  And we are active in policy and also on project level where we have raised funds to then support various projects.
     I also have an understable internet connection like Nkem, so I hope it is holding up.  I just upgraded my service, soits unstable.  We started fiber to the library in 2007 with the basic idea that the fastest least expensive most equitable way to deliver next generation broadband in every community was to run gigabit fiber to the 17,000 public libraries in the U.S.  We are still working on that.  Stuart mentioned the school (?) these are priority end points and public service points and also by connecting them you have extended the infrastructure deeper into communities and to markets.  Which allow last mile interconnections.
     So that we can reach every home and business.  It is a double win and it is a -- we would say it is a primary role for universal service funds is to connect libraries, schools and clinics and so forth.
     The roles that we saw, we came to libraries from that infrastructure perspective.  We have been working kind of community network since the 1980's actually.  But we saw three important roles.  We saw for libraries in that record.
     Kind of emerging digital roles over 10 years ago.  One was as early adopter.  People don't think of libraries as early technology adopters but in fact in the context of the wider is population they are.  Many people had the first experience of broadband at a library.  We were doing dialup and they said you need the broadband stuff.  They went to a library and experienced streaming media threw the internet and that is cool, whatever that is I want it at home.  The role of libraries playing the role of demo site and showcase for really what are consumer products and services helped drive demand for those.  Now this is a point I'm trying to make that libraries foster expansion of services and commercial services and that the provider should understand that important role about libraries.  It is true since books themselves 100 years ago.  The other couple roles.  One touched on relates to access to public information services.
     So-called eGov.  And as more agencies in the U.S. are under budget constraints they are pointing over to the library.  Want to fill out a form for the vehicle department?  Go to the library and they will help you.  Well, it is a natural that libraries can be the lieu man face of e government which is faceless by definition.  We are sort of talking face to face here.  And the third role is disaster and crisis response and we thought about it then in terms of normal disasters like floods and fires and so forth.
     You know, libraries playing a role of shelters and distribution points and information hubs.
     We didn't anticipate the pandemic, but here it is.  It is a crisis, indeed.  And so that led us to early this year in March with the declaration of the pandemic to launch what Stuart referred to as libraries in response or we set that up with the basic question of what is a library if the building is closed?
     It was just, you know, that okay, what do we do now?  And it also touched on the demand for digital services has gone way up.  And at the same time, the availability of physical materials has dropped to nothing or just slightly.
     And so we ask this question and started having week sessions which are ongoing.  I will put that in the chat.  26 sessions so far around the basic question of what is a library if the building is close N we had everybody, architects and librarians and advanced thinkers, the founder of the internet, the father of the internet Vince surf, the head of the federal libraries agency in the U.S., librarians from Europe and Africa and the Americas talking about their various circumstances.  It is amazing how similar they are.  And the first point that we have covered in this is access.
     We divided nearly four topic er.  Internet access, digital services, physical materials, and social infrastructure.  Which was not something -- it is obvious, but you have to think of it and we didn't think of it in the beginning until we had a presentation from a librarian in Denmark who reminded us the role that libraries played in social cohesion and community identity even.  The first is internet access which relates to the second one, digital services.
     So in the U.S. before the pandemic, roughly one in three adults access the internet at a library in a public library.  That it like people 14 and over.  That is 80 million people.  A stunning number.  And most of them had some other source of internet access but many did not.  It was their sole source.
     But there are all kinds of reasons.  More comfortable.  The internet connection is stable and faster.  It's quiet.  All of the kinds of reasons that people go to the libraries for help for scamsome a really important one touched on today.  Not just access and connectivity but the enabling part and support and the the training and the kind of thing you get at libraries which librarians do.
     But internet access or access to digital services is kind of missed here in a lot of cases that the library demand for digital services ha gone up but so has the demand for internet access because you can't get to the library digital services without some kind of access.  We have been developing projects using wireless technologies, open frequencies like (?) which is emerging around the world (break in audio) around the walls of the building.  I may have dropped there for a second but it looks like I'm back.  Talking about how libraries can build community scale networks using open source or spectrum frequencies wi-fi and TV white space.  This is important both to extend access.  I gave the example 80 million people have to go to one of the 17,000 facilities.  Every neighborhood should have a library outlet.  It doesn't have to be a full-time library and books and everything but some point of presence for the library to be accessible and proximate to eastbound.  Everybody in the world should be close to some kind of digital services and information like that and rather than depend on a third-party or carrier libraries can create these themselves if they acquire a little more skills and technologies get cheaper and easier to do.
     So we have done these series, these sessions every week, nearly every week since March and another one coming up tomorrow and I put the link there and you are welcome to check it out.  IFLA is hosting and recording the sessions.  They are posted on the pandemic response page there at gig libraries.net.  You are welcome to come.  It is no charge.  Talking with various universities and library schools about incorporating these into professional development programs.  There is just a lot of interesting stuff that has come up.  It is very wide ranging and not just from the librarian perspective but from as broad as possible perspective.
     We are also in the process of translating and transcribing the sessions to be searchable and indexable and more accessible to more people.  The libraries are leading in response which was what we started with but now we are talking about recovery.  It may be a little early but we don't think it is too early to be thinking through the pandemic to beyond the pandemic and what it is people are going to be needing besides expanded access.  But that is absolutely what people are going to need.  They needed it before.  They need it now and they will need it after.  If there is an after to the pandemic.
     So I think I will stop there.  And thank you again for having me on.  And check this out and join up.  It is open.  And good luck, IGF.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, Don.  Thanks.  And I like the simple sort of triple conception of access to connective and wi-fi and sometimes on the buildings and access to digital services and then that social cohesion piece and if those are things that you are interested in the archives of Don's recordings are well worth checking out.  Different perspectives on that.  Moving on quickly and on the west coast of the U.S. mark Graham is the director of the way back machine, the internet archive.  I would imagine that is a machine that everybody participating at the IGF has had occasion to use at some point.  Mark will give us an overview of the work during Kodes.  It has had a high profile and a good one and great work there.  So he will talk about the work with books and the way back machine a little bit on the turn all references blue project with Wikipedia and then I think a very interesting piece we hope on controlled digital lending which are very high profile during the pandemic.  Mark, over to you.
     >>
     >> MARK GRAHAM: It is good to be here.  I'm relatively new to IGF.  I went to an IGF forum many year Asia go in Brazil.  I was the cofounder for APC which is a frequent IGF participant.  And Don also remembering 25 years ago crawling around in a school in San Francisco with John gage of Sun Microsystems on the net day project to get co-ax in the schools.  I'm the director of the way back ma seen, the internet archive.  A 23-year-old nonprofit based in San Francisco with the mission of universal access to all knowledge.  The organization was founded and is still run Brewster kale and we work in a variety of medium.  We work if books, music, software, movies, and the web.
     And other medium as well.
       78 records and et cetera.  I the focus today on the work around books and also the web.  We take analog information like a book and digitize and preseven and make it available.  We take digital information like web pages and preserve them and we make them available.
     We do these activities at scale.  So today that is millions of books.
     And today we archive about 1.5 billion URLs every single day into the way back machine.
     We make our books available through archive.org and also through the open library.org website.
     We make books available if they are publicly accessible, anyone can take them and download them.  If it is a modern book we make them available through a controlled digital lending.  The controlled digital lending is a process by which libraries are able to make books available in a digital format.
     We have been practicing controlled digital lending at archive for more than nine years and there are now more than 80 libraries that participate with us that use controlled digital lending of making books available.  In a nut shell, it is about a library taking a book, a physical book that it owns, digitizing the book and then lending a digital copies of that book to people with two primary controls to patrons with two primary controls.
     The first is that they can only make one book available at a time based upon the number that they physically own.  So if I own two physical copies of a book then I'm a library, I can lend out two digital versions at given time.  The second control is digital rights management.  The books are encrypted with DRM, the same kind used by the standard E-book publishers.  Controlled digital lepping has been followed by digital archive for more than nine years and more than 80 different libraries participate in the controlled digital lending.  If you want to learn more about that controlled digital lending.org is the white paper and many other documents about that.
     Earlier this year on March 24 the internet archive launched the national emergency library which was a relaxation of the wait list of books available through controlled digital lending.
     And we did this to meet the needs of people at home with libraries closing all over the world in the face of COVID-19.  We saw the participation of people accessing books dramatically increase and worked to meet their need and got hundreds if not thousands of responses back from teachers and students and medical professionals and others thanking us for the efforts.  During the process we were sued by publishers.
     This the lawsuit will -- is currently scheduled to go to trial in November of next year.  And in the course of that, on June 16 we ended our national emergency library.  I should note the national emergency library we announced it would be a temporary measure and during the time of the pandemic.  And so it was always our intention for the national emergency library to be a temporary thing.
     However, while we stopped the national emergency library we continue to make books available for lending through controlled digital lending.
     And we also continue to acquire and digitize books.  To accelerate the effort we purchased one of the world's largest used book stores last year called Better World Books and it is now wholly owned by a nonprofit so it is a nonprofit used book store.  We currently are taking books from the conveyor belts at Better World Books and shipping them to the Philippine where we have a factory setting where we digitize the books.  It references earlier to other folks here about Wikipedia and we currently are digitizing several thousands of books every day.  The shipments of books going from the U.S. to the Philippines.  We bring them back to the U.S. and store them in the physical archives so that we can then lend out copy, digital versions of them that we have physical copies safety tucked away in our physical archives.
     So I have now mentioned this idea that a book can be referenced by Wikipedia and wouldn't it be great if it was accessible via a click.  So that is the vision behind turn all references blue.  That anything, I will blow it up a little bit, anything anywhere online that references some other thing that could be available online we think should be available and should be available via a click.  You shouldn't have to go search for it and then go to some other system and apply for a registration or something.
     If you are reading a Wikipedia article and you see a reference to a journal article or reference to a book, you see a reference to some other medium, maybe a news article, television news or radio for example, we think all of those resources should be a click away.
     So we are working hard to do that for the last many years we have been archiving every single link that is added to each of the articles and all of the 300 Wikipedia sites worldwide.  That is millions and millions of URLs every single day.  And if you count the links that are referenced from all of the links.
     Because of this, we have been able to identify more than 12 million links that have gone bad that now return a 404 on the Wikipedia site and fixed them by editing them and pointing them to the way back machine where people can get the web page that had been there before the link went bad.
     We are now also adding links to books and added more than 600,000 links to books this year.  More than 200,000 books right now and the queue right now of books to link up is 100,000 additional books that are waiting for our software to link up.  We are doing this right now in 46 different Wikipedia language editions and the vision is to pursue this on every single Wikipedia language edition in the world.  We are doing this in partnership with many other entities around the world and I welcome the participation of more, especially national libraries and other organizations that can help us acquire books in multiple languages, so that we can digitize them and connect them up to Wikipedia articles worldwide.
     Every year we host a library leaders forum.  We just finished three 2-hour sessions of that the last few weeks.  And the videos for those will be available via a link as soon as I figure out how to copy and paste my links into the chat thing here which I will do after I finish talking and I will also add links to videos.  The recent video of our founder Brewster kale talking about the lawsuit and Chris freeland who is the head of our open libraries program.  The open libraries program is the program of libraries that participate in controlled digital lending.
     And you know, I think we may be going a little over.  So I'm going to stop there and maybe leave more time during the open session for questions and answers.
     Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, mark.  And good luck as you explore the chat on the right-hand side and try to get the links in there because they are quite interesting.  What I think we are getting to now is some things really concrete things that have come out during the pandemic response and the work of the internet archive and the response it made with the emergency library really is one of those things.
     And I think why Mark's presentation is valuable is not only to draw our attention to that but also to the corresponding response it received and the environment in which it went into with the lawsuit against it.  And some of this sort of tension tricky areas between trying to make more digital information available and then finding, you know, the restrictions there from the current policy and legal environments.  The final intervention will touch on these as well.  Teresa Hackett is the program manager at IFEL.  Another cofounder.  A tireless advocate for an international copfy right law reform and developed wide lie used esources for the libraries in the area and has done work on building the Christmasity of librarians so tackle what can be tricky copyright issues.  Teresa is going to look at access to knowledge as a public health issue in the pandemic and issues that have emerged for libraries and talk about the library and publisher responses to COVID-19 and get us closer to the concrete measures taken by governments in the area and then finish with a look at options under intellectual property framework rules.  I will hand it over to you.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Thanks very much and I will try and do all that in 10 minutes.  I have some slides so I will share my screen if that is okay.
     >> MODERATOR: Go for it.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Yep.
     >> MODERATOR: I hope you are allowed.  If not, we will work it out.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Can you see my screen?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Okay.  Great.  So, thanks very much, Stuart, for the invitation to speak sat this event.  It has been really interesting so far to hear all of the practical aspects and now I think mark's presentation has led us neatly into some of the policy areas and particularly the area of copyright and access to knowledge and I would like to acknowledge two of my copyright colleagues, Lewis and (?) who have given me ideas for putting this presentation together.  I will talk about access to knowledge in the pandemic.  Looking at access to knowledge as a public health issue.
     And I guess until now, we have thought about access to knowledge for education and research.  And the life long learning.  And employment and health information and engaging citizen engagement.  But in the pandemic, what we have found is that access to knowledge has actually become a public health issue.
     Because if you are visiting your physical library or working in the library or handling library books, then this is a public health issue.  We know for example that there are some problems where you have books that are in quarantine.  Those that should be in quarantine for a certain number of days or hours.  And there is a lot of pressure on those books especially textbooks when students need those books to do their exams.
     And so we know that there is some, you know, issues around quarantine.  So copyright law and exceptions can facilitate social distancing.  So if, for example, your copyright law allows the library to make a copy of the book or the article or are the journal that the user or the student wants to access and then they can send that, they can scan it, digitize and send an electronic copy to the person so they don't have to come to the physical library to get that information, then copyright exceptions are facilitating social distancing and facilitating public health guidance by our public health officials to stop the spread of coronavirus.
     Some issues that emerged for libraries in terms of copyright are the issue of lending print books during the lockdown and that is usually done by what we know as controlled digital lending that Mark has just been talking about.  The other issue that has emerged is textbooks in electronic format sys.  There are very often no purchasing options for libraries to purchase E-textbooks.
     So the library has the physical textbook.  The university library has the book in the library.  The students can't get it because the library building is closed.  But at the same time, the library cannot purchase that electronic version of the textbook from the publisher because they want to sell those books directly to the students or to the lecturers rather than the libraries.
     Connected with that, there are problems with the pricing models for E-books which can be very expensive.  And then more generally issues with the provision of online education and learning and copyright use terms and licenses for E-resources and then the use of using the ability to use research tools like text and data mining that is very important in a pandemic.
     So, looking now at some of the responses from the different stakeholder groups, there have been a number of responses from the library community and I of give here a couple of examples of different approaches.  One of the first responses was from ICOLC, the international coalition of library con sortia that issued a statement back in march asking publishers for temporary relief in the licenses to help with the closure of libraries.  For example, waiving the limits on the number of simultaneous users that can access the E-resources and lifting restrictions on the fought toy copying and allowing the use of the copyrighted sections even if they are restricted in the license.
     LIGER, the association of research libraries in Europe called on the European commission and member states to are public interest defense that would support libraries and research in times of crisis.  Another European Connunia argued that the basic rights should be applied as a break on the exclusive rights, exclusive copyrights in exceptional situations like COVID.  And.  And in the U.S., library copyright specialists were ring the role of fair use in supporting teaching and reterm.  It has been helpful to library in the U.S. in a adapting to the COVID situation.
     In addition,  this have been a number of responses from Civil Society of which libraries are part of the coalition.  So there was an open letter in April calling on PIPO to take a stand so IP is system are supported and encouraging member states to use flexibilities in copfy right law to support account Tess to education and research in these times.
     And then there have been a number of pledges, open COVID pledges.  One led by creative comments and another by the association for learning technology.  Asking rights holders to make their content freely available during the pandemic times.
     And then publishers have been responding in a variety of different ways.  So for example for home schooling, some publishers have made access to digital learning materials free of charge during the pandemic.  For other publishers have given permission for read aloud sessions from public libraries where this is not already permitted under copyright law, of course.
     In other cases, publishers have agreed with libraries to make certain library books available for research on a stream basis.  And then other publishers have sent reminders that copyright law does still apply during the pandemic and thatlicenses are needed for certain activities.  Especially working from home or in companies where p cans are sharing materials.  And then in terms of higher education a lot of activity.  Many publishers have responded to they reduced the digital licensing fees or they provided content -- COVID opinion related content, access to COVID-related content for free or in some cases making the whole portfolio available.  They lifted restriction on the concurrent users or remote access.  So ICOLC have been keeping a tracker of responses by publishers in the area of higher education.  There is a 112 publishers in the tracker.  What is interesting, already 50% of those concessions have expired.  So I put ooh screen shot on the screen there.  And it is just from one of the pages.
     So you can see that the publishers that are listed in dark color in black where the concessions are still applying.  Or the other publishers in these instances the concessions have expired.  Of the 50% that have not expired some will expire at particular dates maybe in December of this year but most are to be determined.  I think it is a sign of the changing times and the developing situation with regard to lock downs and access to digital resources.
     Government is supposed to be responding, of course.  In march we had 15 major countries wrote a letter to scholarly publishers asking for COVID publication and data to be immediately accessible to support public health.  Ms. Ms. Encouraging them to promote science and cooperation at this time.  The World Health Organization issued a resolution and one was asking for the removal of obstacles to universal equitable access to health technologies consistent with the WTO TRIPS agreements and the world health organization veried the COVID-19 technology access tool which is a voluntary asking rights holders to voluntarily share knowledge and IP to advance science and technologies for COVID.  I think what is interesting about that is that inial now there have been no commitments made into the C-TAP by the pharmaceutical industry.
     And then WIPO, has launched a policy tracker where they are keeping a track of all of these legislative and regulatory measures as well as voluntary actions by rights holders.  Then I thought it would be maybe also good to look at what binding government measures have happened and taken place.  We look at copyright.  The first company out of the blocks was Hungary in API and the government issued a new decree easing copyright rules for the online use of education in an emergency.  I believe some of the measures are being made more permanent and they are doing a fast implement on Article 5, the article to do with online distance learning.
     And then also the government of Japan brought forward provisions for the use of material in online classes by one year.  So they were due to come into play next year and they have been brought forward.  And they have also covered to pay the copfy right fee Foss are the first academic year.  Austral is moving ahead with amendments to exceptions for education and library services and draft legislation is expected by the end of this year.  And the motivation in the case of Japan and Australia was that the need for change was highlighted by COVID.
     But I think that we can see from the three examples and they are the only that we have been able to find, is that in most cases they nor the initiating new developments, they are fast tracking developments that were already happening so bringing that forward.
     To then maybe it could be useful then look at the patent side.  Another aspect of intellectual property rights.  Governments are moving forward into vaccines and so on.  Here, we have seven governments made resolutions or taken action specifically on patents during for doff.  It as mix of resolutions or government use authorization or compulsory licenses.  And I think what was interesting by this group is half of the countries are from the developed world.  And I think what we can key from both examples on the copyright and patent side while there has been declarations and high resolutions and great rhetoric, it has not been matched about by any concrete action or not a lot of concrete action at the national scale.  And so we have these aspirations but then it comes to the actual country, not that much has happen sod far.
     That is what makes this initiative this recent initiative interesting.  So at the WTO TRIPS council meeting India and south Africa made a joint proposal cosponsored by Eswatina and Kenya and it was a waiver to certain TRIPs provisions for the prevention, containment and treatment of COVID-19.  The provisions from provisions include copyright and relate the rights, patented, industrial designs and trade secrets.  Important that copyright is part of that proposal.  And the proposal is that it should be in place until widespread vaccination is in place globally and the majority of the world's population have developed immunity.  This has been discussed in the TR IPs council and they will recon Venice vine and make a decision and that will go to the ministerial conference for decision.  The motivation from south Africa presenting the proposal at the TRIPs council, nine months into the pandemic voluntary approaches have prove ton be insufficient and in a global pandemic we need concrete action and a global solution.
     So another options available for governments in the pandemic is there is a very interesting provision in the TRIPs agreements called security can exception, Article 73.  And this states that nothing in the TRIPs agreement should prevent member states from taking any actions that it considers necessary for its security interest if times of war and also in times of other emergency in international relations.  And so symptom of the examples that governments might want to measure is or that governments might want to take are a waiver from the implementation approaches play cake and enforcement of copyrights which is similar to what the south Africa India are proPoing in the TRIPs council.  And take an endim knit against protect from -- against infringement claims during times of COVID and to take up measures dealing with competition for example to alleviate the problem of the E-book pricing that I mentioned at the begin.  And importantly or just a note to mention here that least developed countries can already do these things without having to avail of the security exception because least developed countries have their own general waiver of TRIPs which is until July 2021 next year.  And in fact right now an extension to that waiver is being discussed and negotiated at the WTO.  So they already have -- LDCs already have the space to do these things and other countries can invoke the Article 73.
     Finally what is interesting is to look at this in the context of everything else going on in COVID.  We had unprecedented government interventions in all areas of our lives that we never would have emergencied until recently.  Interventions in real property law.  In rent crane ESIs and moratoriums on evisions.  And supermarkets are allowed to collectively discuss supply chains to keep food on the shelves and deep interventions in the area of civil rights with travel restrictions and business closures.
     So I guess the question is it now time for us as a library community to safeguard our essential library services?  And to put this on the map as well.
     So thank you, Stuart.  That is -- a very quick run-through and I'm happy to supply the slides.
     >> MODERATOR: Definitely some interesting slides in the chat.  I draw the to the chat if you are not looking at it.  You raised a few questions there.  I have a lot myself.  We have 15 minutes left and I think it is important that we tackle questions that have come up from some of our participants.  And we do have one from Mustafa.  I think it came in when Mark was speaking, I can't be sure.  But Mark, I will let you take it and see if you can pick it up.  A question saying he wants to know the quality of projects that you are funding, is it related to online education?
     You can interpret that how you will but maybe what are the online education elements of the stuff that you are working on?
     >> MARK GRAHAM: And my life runs OER commons.org which is one of the leading libraries for metadata about open educational rears so.  So OER and education is really core to the mission of the and practice of the internet archive.  In particular, one initiative between internet archive and the parent organization (?) is the universal school library recognizing the unique needs for students in America K-12, the definition of school library which are being either shut down or destaffed at quite a rapid clip.  So yeah, I would say, you know, we make millions of books available.  If you go to open library.org right now, you can see we have got them categorized by grade level, by subject matter.  Et cetera.  So absolutely.  Education and learning life long learning for students in school but thought people's lives is a core part of the mission of the united archive.  And I noted we recently have launched an alpha version of scholar so scholar/qu.archive.org and we have more than 30 million open access journal articles, there.  I don't mean just pointers to them.  We archived more than 30 million journal articles and PDFs available through the way back machine.  And just this morning in response to an article, a research paper million of you may have read a couple of months ago about the disappearing online journals, there was an announcement by the directory of online of open access journals and DO -- of a consortium of organizations including the internal archive that have come together to specifically preserve journals from small publishers.  I could go on and on.  In thester of time I will stop here and note there are many links that I put in the chat and I'm available mark @ archive.org for any questions from anyone.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Again, drawing people's attention to the chat.
     And also a great example inth from Russia from a Maria, see if you can capture that because there is really good stuff in there about the Russian library response.  Teresa will share the slides.  We will work out how to do that.  But a question that you might want to about out to Teresa from Avis in Cameroon going about the revisions of law, policy and regulation that -- I might narrow that.  I think maybe you could say something about the work that IFLE R and IFLA and the other library organizations have done to find a standard on copfy right exceptions and limitations.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Yeah, sure.  So thanks, Stuart.  So I think it is very important to have policies in place and also to have laws in place.  And one of the areas that we have been working on globally is to ensure that every country has a copyright law that enables libraries to undertake basic activities and there is a kind of level playing field for libraries all around the world.
     And I think one thing that we have seen from the pandemic is that this -- the librarians all around the world in many different countries have been frantically reading the copyright laws and delving deeply into the laws, are we allow to do this, can we do this, do we need permission.  It high heighted the importance of having a legal framework that supports the activities.  And some of the activities are really quite basic activities and just that they have become critical in COVID times like the governments in Japan and in Hungary and in Australia have realized because digital is normal and why should I not be able to be prevented from using digital technologies.  We are working together to -- with IFLA at the world intellectual property organization to have basic rules that will apply to libraries everywhere and there there be particularly recording cross border so that libraries can share resources when needed.  Especially research resources.
     And unique resources that are not available locally.
     So that is something we are working on.  I'm not sure Stuart, if that answers your question.
     >> MODERATOR: That is good.  And if you have links, throw them into the chat.  We have only a short period of time left and I want to finish with Valensiya in a second.  I want to see if the panelists can do something very important and very quick for me.  If there was one policy change that you would want that could safeguard digital inclusion through access to information, as in this COVID-19 context, what would it be?  And you need to do it in one sentence.  I would like to see this.  This is a function of us not having much time left.  So Nkem, I don't know if you can hear us.  Can you go on that one?
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: I can hear you, thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: What one --
     >> NKEM OSUIGWE: More access to information through libraries and libraries have the infrastructure for people to access information even if the doors are closed.
     >> MODERATOR: And Don, to you next.
     >> Don means: I think you asked for a single action.
     >> MODERATOR: Single policy change you would like to see to secure digital inclusion in the COVID period.
     >> DON MEANS: Universal service.  Adopting the core value that everybody should have some type of basic level of access and that is public access in our view that is the cheapest way to provide that.  Not the best but it is something to get you started or in a backup.  And so using funds from the huge telecom market the tiny portion of that to provide access to everybody is a single best use of that and thing that can be done, I think.
     >> MODERATOR: Good stuff.  Thank you very much.  Mark?
     >> MARK GRAM: I would like to see the governments around the world uphold the practices of controlled digital lending extending the role of libraries in the digital age and also as noted by Teresa, address issues of E h-books in particular the general trend in which E-books cannot be purchased but only licensed.
     Which is part of an overall movement that the lawsuit against controlled digital lending is really about which is whether or not any of us, especially libraries will be able to own books and jumps and other materials or weather forever we will only be able to license them under strict conditions by select publishers in which the availability to the patrons can be severely limited or Blocked completely.
     >> MODERATOR: And while I was going to basically use my one for that.  I couldn't agree with you more as somebody who is working very much with national purchasing of E-books for public libraries to see the prices three times the price of a print book.  It is not sustainable and we need to take action.
     >> MARK GRAHAM: And only for a year.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for the snap reactions.  Valensiya, what is next.  Teresa, I didn't give you.
     >> THERESA HACKETT: Can I have a snap reaction.  Support south Africa in the proposal the a the WTO TRIPS council and that would be a great help in the pandemic and also the E-book issue.  And I put a link in the chat there, there is a -- I will put it again because the UK librarian is are organizing campaign on the E textbook he issue and it has good interesting information there.
     >> MODERATOR: We supportd that as well.  What is next for the DC?
     >> VALENSIYA DRESVYANNIKOVA: The next steps would be, of course, to take stock of everything discussed here and feed that into the following decision-making process and, of course, also look forward to finding out more about different countries experiences with supporting inclusion in different countries and drawing lessons from that.  And just as a way of wrapping up the session, one of the outcomes would be to, indeed, summarize the policy advice that has been given and offered so far so this is the moment to sort of bring it all together and see if I got your opinions correctly.  If general, if, the key policy changes to support up inclusion access to content and access to services through the pandemic what you would need is impro provements to the infrastructure, including public access and libraries.  Universal service supporting the principles of universal service potentially drawing on where possible funds from, universal access of funds Bethel Coe et cetera.  And then we have the point regarding the need to build up sustainable models of access to digital content and that includes addressing the questions around controlled digital lending and getting engaged and available international and national processes such Arizona the WIPO process aster reis a pointed out to stand for sustainable access to additional content.
     >> MODERATOR: That is a pretty good.  And we look forward to seeing that codified and written down and taken forward and we will feed into the Dynamic Coalition meeting next week in the immediate short term.  A fantastic interesting piece of information from Russia in the chat there if you haven't seen that.  Thanks, everybody, for joining us.  There has been a lot of information here and we really (garbled audio).  Goodbye.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-4-future-unclear-data-and-bodies-in-the-post-pandemic-times^^

    >> MODERATOR: Hello, everybody and welcome to the session of the Dynamic Coalition on Internet Governance.  The first online DC session and we are pleased to have the full session looking at one of the key themes in IGF 2020 which is the question of data.  And what we try and do at the Dynamic Coalition on Gender and Internet Governance is really ensure that the issues that we are discussing related to internet governance are looked at through the lens of gender.  So that is what we will try and do in this session.  
And before I introduce our panel, there is a tradition that we follow at each and every DC-GIG as our short form is called for the Dynamic Coalition on Gender and Internet Governance at each meeting we have a small presentation which looks at a phenomenon called the gender report card, a tool used in at least the last nine IGFs or so, to really look at the gender composition of the IGF and critically think about gender composition as a critical tool in internet governance as well.  Before we move to the future, I'm pleased to invite Debarati Das to share the gender report card from IGF 2019.  
     >> DEBARATI DAS: Thank you.  Hi, everybody.  I'm Debarati.  I will just share my screen.  So, every year at IGF as part of our work in the Dynamic Coalition on Gender and Internet Governance, we do analysis and summary of the gender report cards the sessions at IGF fill out after they have completed.
     I will take you through the observations from the IGF 2019.  So here you can see the gender distribution of online and offline site participants and last year at IGF only 39% of participants were women.
     And it was a 2% dip from IGF 2018 which was a previous year when we had 41% women's participation.
     Here you can see the gender diversity and percentage of female participants in presentation brackets 86 sessions filled out the field and most sessions had female presence in the bracket of 25 to 50%.  In 2018 most were in the greater than 50% bracket followed by 50%.  Even here there was sort of a dip.
     We also all look at how many sessions fill out the gender report cards and how many do not.  Last year at IGF, gender report cards were filled out for 94 sessions out of 118.  This was quite a positive finding because this showed an increase in the number of reporting sessions by about 40% compared to IGF 2018.
     We also look at how sessions engaged with gender.  So 93 sessions at IGF 2019 provided information on this.  And 24 sessions did not fill out this field.  And as you can see here, 41 sessions which is the highest number of sessions had partial focus on gender or topics that intersect with gender closely followed by sessions which did not engage with gender at all which are 38 and only 14 sessions directly engaged with gender as a topic.  That's what I had.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks so much, Debarati.  I put a message in chat saying that if anybody has any questions on the gender report cards they can either be added on chat or on the Q&A tab at the bottom of the screen.  And I will keep a watch on it.  Nothing so far.
     So let's move on then to Future Unclear: Data, Bodies, Gender, and Sexuality.  And I'm pleased to introduce the three fantastic panelists, all of whom are leaders of their organizations.  So alphabetically, Anja Kovacs is the director of the Internet Democracy Project and is based in New Delhi, India.  And the Internet Democracy Project does really amazing research and advocacy through a feminist lens on a number of issues.  Last couple of years really focusing on bodies and data that.  And then Joana Varon, the Executive Director of Coding Rights based in Brazil and works at the intersection of technology and other social justice constituencies and I think is known for really strategic and creative communication.  And ways to really engage audiences around the issues among many other things.  Welcome, Joana.  And our other speaker is Sadaf Khan from Media Matters for Democracy based in Pakistan.  And Sadaf is one of the leaders of Media Matters for Democracy which is again known for a lot of policy work around media freedoms and internet freedoms and rights in Pakistan.
     So thanks all three of you.  And the reason we invited all three of these speakers is because all three of them actually wrote really powerful essays looking at the intersection of bodies, data, gender, and sexuality.
     And I'm going to put the link to the essays in the chat.  But I would like to actually start by asking each of our speakers if they could briefly summarize the key ideas that they raised in those essays and if any of you would like to read out a little, you know, excerpt please feel free to do that as well.  We allocated 10 minutes roughly per speaker.  And Anja, may I ask you to actually begin.  And I also wanted to say that the name of the essay that Anja has written that we are referring to is When Our Bodies Become Data Where Does That Leave Us and I'm putting a direct link to that actually in the chat.  Okay.  Over to you, Anja.
     >> ANJA KOVACS: Thanks so much and also for the invitation.  It is nice to be with feminist friends and talk about data governance after a long time.  Excited to be here.
    As you mentioned already in the last two years quite a lot of work that we have been doing at the Internet Democracy Project has been focusing on data governance.  What we tried to bring in the essay was one specific aspect.  We know that with datafication of society this is something that all of us are affected by, but what we really wanted to bring out is that for people at the margins, the consequences of losing control over our data are particularly devastating.  And particularly we want to highlight the concept of privacy as boundary management to really being central to how we understand those new dangers and what is really happening here.
     Boundary management is something to complicate but something that we are all doing in our everyday lives all the time, right?  It is really about the decisions about what to share, what to reveal or not about ourselves to others.  And you do that when you go to the supermarket and they ask for your phone number, you do that when you consider whether or not to share your sexual orientation with your family.  All of these are decisions in which boundary management is taking place.
     Some of these decisions might seem trivial in themselves but what is important is that collectively they really affect our ability or our capacity for self-determination.  And in that way also to live a life of dignity.  Especially for those whose identity is already marginalized it is important to have the space to step back from the social environment and develop a critical perspective on that environment, validate your own experiences and beliefs and desires even if they are the not aligned with what society values.
     That is really important if the social is not to overwhelm our own sense of identity if we are fully to become ourselves, so to say, right.  And boundary management, the thing we engage in every day is what allows us to create that room for ourselves.
     So that understanding that this is really important even though we don't see it reflected very much in traditional debates around privacy that talk about privacy in the home where it is something you either have or don't and it is static as well.
     Even though a lot of the traditional perceptions of privacy are of that kind.  Privacy boundary management is a concept understood by people who think about the lives of marginalized people for many years and I wanted to read a brief part of the essay quoting Dr. Ambedkar.  In the 20th century before the internet came into being one of India's foremost intellectuals was already sharply aware of the importance of being able to dynamically control what information about ourselves we share with who and when.
     While Gandhi called upon followers to relocate to the India’s villages; Ambedkar recommended that the country's those who were in the pervasive Caste system move to cities instead.
     The anonymity of the city would give them a better chance to escape the rigid requirements to build better lives for themselves.  In villages, your Caste will already always be known.  In the cities you still retain some measure of control over whether or not to reveal this information.  Recognized that boundary management is not only important because it allows us to control what we share with others, he also understood that this control is crucial to living a life of dignity.
     And that is the end of the quote.  The challenge today that we face and that all of us face to some extent is really that in their quest to make us more and more legible, transparent, predictable, governments and companies are fundamentally undermining our capacity to engage in that kind of boundary management to autonomously manage our bodies, ourselves and our lives as we see fit.
     How did we get there?  First of all, a challenge, a big challenge is that in most dominant discourses data is treated as a resource, as this thing that is out there, up for grabs that sits on everything but is somehow independent from the medium that generates it and that is why you can just take it if you get access to it.
     At the same time, data is also increasingly seen as telling the ultimate truth.  Your body's data and only the data will tell us who you really are and you see this, for example, in the growing number of countries relying on digital IDs based around biometrics.  If the biometrics, if a machine has to verify the biometrics is failing to verify you, you are not who you say you are even if you are standing there and making that claim.
     So what we see is that increasingly our bodies, the data about our bodies is actually privileged over our living and breathing bodies and telling others who we are.  We can no longer represent ourselves.  This is really in many ways the end of agency.
     There are many examples in the essay, but here I thought I will briefly touch on one.  There were two researchers who trained an algorithm to actually tell whether outcome or straight, gay, or lesbian.  So basically to read people's sexual orientation.  That study was highly criticized, very controversial.  First of all, because it has the potential to out people on a massive scale, right?  And since in so many countries not being heterosexual is still a crime, this has really, really potentially deadly consequences for people.
     The algorithm wasn't always accurate in its categorizations either.  But because of that aura of truth that is there around data, people often tend to believe this in any case over what a person tells you and again seeing that sexual orientation is criminalized in many countries, this is really, really risky.  This example also really shows how increasingly the expectation we do still have and what was referred that at least in urban spaces our faces are in some ways also private.  We have spaces of privacy even when we are out in public.
     What algorithm searches these do are also undermining that.  When you go out in public space now increasingly you do not have that anonymity anymore that was considered so empowering.
     These are really important harms to do with anonymity and privacy but there is a second set that the example brings out and that raises the broader question of dignity also.  That is about biometrics showing who we really are, right?  In a way what the two researchers were doing was really reminiscent of the pseudo sciences that were popular in the 18th and 19th century which claimed it was possible to determine somebody's personality or even their moral character from their faces or their skulls.
     Many of these the most horrible aspects of these theories were debunked especially in the 1960's but some of their impact actually remains.  So, for example, if you look at the genocide in Rwanda in 1994, one of the origins of the genocide has been traced to Belgium and German colonizers who divided the population based on the measurements of people's faces.  What is scary is that the basic premise of the colonizers at that time has been brought again in research.  This might sound like an extreme example but actually facial recognition technologies at least in the country like India already affect in many different ways how freely we can live.  Just one example, it is increasingly used by police to identify habitual protesters.  Even though protesting habitually is not a crime under any law in India.  This is just one other example how that space is really shrinking.
     There are many more in the essay and some of those examples also built on the points I just made, but really the overall point that I then wanted to bring out here and that the essay is trying to make is really that that capacity for boundary management is really crucial to living a life of dignity in the digital age and if we want to continue to live or have that capacity to live a life of dignity going forward as well, it is really crucial that we reclaim this.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Anja, for opening up the conversation with really a very thought-provoking concept and sort of, you know, the boundary management concept, right?  Really taking the whole question of data, privacy, dignity, agency into a whole other realm.  Thanks very much.  
I will invite Sadaf to go next.  And again, as was the past, I'm just going to -- give me a moment.  The name of the essay that Sadaf wrote is Data Bleeding Everywhere: A Story of Period Trackers.  And I'm just going to post that link and invite Sadaf to start as well.
     >> SADAF KHAN: Thank you.  I think when we were writing and working on this essay last year we had no clue that basic concept of privacy versus healthcare would become so important in just a year.
     When I started working on the essay and I'm sure I hope people are participating will read it later, the premise deals with how women are using period trackers, what kind of information are these period tracking apps collecting, sharing, caring and how is -- how the users are engaging with the premise itself and whether they are conscious of it or not.
     I will start with today because it is called post pandemic, it seems like a futuristic thing especially in countries like Pakistan where internet penetration is only 17% and the subjects and people I reached out to interview for this essay hadn't really thought about what they are doing and whether -- and they didn't see their data as something that invades into the privacy.  I found it fascinating, Anja, when you talked about that because in the mind of various users period tracking apps which are interlinked the boundary doesn't exist and they had not thought about the fact that the data that they are entering that is so personal that they don't even talk to their doctors about it usually is actually being shared as part of a big data app.  And not just one third party that they give consent to but everybody else that the parties are connected to.
     The question is paramount in a lot of people's minds.  Especially because we have seen the same thing being carried out and exploited in a way much more invasive than this.  In Pakistan created a COVID tracking app and took over tracking app like various other governments and ours is linked to the GPS signals of the users diagnosed with COVID and allows other users to enter data that they think or know have been positive or are displaying symptoms of the virus.  
So the main question that I title in the essay has become kind of paramount and has come to the forefront as well.  I will read a bit from the essay before going into key questions that came up when I was working on this.  I keep saying questions because I left a lot of questions in there as well.  That was one of the key things when I engaged with other people and I come from a journalistic background so my essay includes a lot of journalistic investigation into the users.
     And so what I found paramount was that the questions I was asking them was bringing forth their questions in their minds and I think that is a good thing as well.  But nobody had really explored the answers before the questions were posed to them.  I will read a bit just the beginning to say why I was interested in writing this article and why somebody who works in the field that really connects with the data and really explores this area still uses these apps because convenience becomes at times paramount for us.
     So my own initiation into the menstrual apps was an emotional one.  Having just gone through an early term miscarriage, I switched from Glow Nurture, a pregnancy tracker, to Glow Eve, a period tracker.  The miscarriage had triggered an irregularity in my cycle that had not been there before, and Eve helped me track the change and maintain a detailed health log. It also helped me connect with other women going through the same thing and facing similar emotional and physical fallouts.  In other words, Eve offered a space that helped me heal.  
It was months later that I actually started thinking about the details of the health log that I was maintaining on Eve which ranged from my height and weight and moods but it was also clear to me that much of what I was noting down would never ever make it to my gynecologist.  However, in the vulnerable state that I was in, it was helpful to just click on options that helped me label my own emotions as anything but grief.
     Eve's how are you feeling prompt asks users to choose from a variety of emotions. You can be happy, emotional, stressed, calm, tired, in love, angry, sad, energetic, confident, motivated, excited. And once you tell Eve which emotional state fits your current mood, Eve will ask you to de-construct your emotions even further.  Why are you feeling this way?  User can choose from options including love life, family, schoolwork, PMS and others.  Every time I completed a health log on Eve, the applications and algorithms were able to add more detail to my health records based on the app made better and more predictive positions and post relevant articles and posts to me.
     As long as I gave Eve regular updates, every bit of information I received from the gems that Eve selected to the community posts that made to the top of my timeline were completely customized to my own needs at that moment.  No wonder I felt that Eve was a friend, a therapist and a gynecologist all rolled into one free, convenient bottle.
     And I chose to -- this was not really the beginning that I had planned when I started thinking about the essay.  I chose to go with this because this vulnerability and the fact that a number of users who were using this app were so emotionally involved and connected whether they were trying to conceive, whether they were using the app as a contraceptive method, whether it was just a way to track their periods, the vulnerability that came in, they were not in the best of their health at that time and the best of their moods at that time and needed some kind of support and some kind of community.
     And it made me wonder whether if this was not the very nature of period tracking apps and the nature of pregnancy tracking apps.  If we would as users be offering this data so freely and openly to the applications.
     And I want to highlight two or three things that came up in the essay.  One was the fact when I talked to the users about how they felt in control of their own data, the main premise that came was the use of anonymous digital identities.
     So people were simply putting in an anonymous name and feeling secure about the information they were putting in.  This becomes very important because while a lot of people feel that the kind of information period tracking apps ask for and are of no use and even if they are leaked they will be anonymized, what I found out in the terms and conditions is that a number of the apps see the user as data as well.  And when you think about the fact that stories shared by the community and comments left on the app which are much more personal and much more identifiable and much more intimate than what just clicking an option would be, you are all feeling towards offering that kind of transparency to the data to the app changes.
     However, regardless of the fact that everybody seemed to be using the apps on their own mobiles meaning they were connected to the real phone numbers and often connected to their Google accounts, they are often signing in through Facebook, they still felt secure in the fact that simply anonymizing their names or using a different name on the app somehow made them anonymous and somehow made their identity a secret to the app in that way.
     The other thing that I probed and found out was that people had not been thinking about, you know, the period tracking app is seen as a community where everybody is doing the same thing.  So there was -- as a community where everybody is doing the same thing.  A bit of comfort I'm talking about my sex life but a dozen other women talking about their sex lives, too.  And this is a big deal for women coming from a conservative society from Pakistan where it is not okay to talk about things and go in detail and it is considered a sin, but the fact in that community being that so many people are doing it makes them okay.  If I asked about the participants they were getting and when I looked at my own experience when I started tracking the pregnancy on the apps immediately on Google and Facebook and every other thing I was using on my mobile, all the ads were changed to pregnancy related stuff and baby things.  People had not thought about how third-party data sharing works and that is something coming to the forefront again with the COVID-related apps.
     The third thing that I think was really prominent to me is the fact when people think about the consent they are giving to applications they haven't really thought through it is not informed consent.  When I asked if they knew that their content was being shared or the apps had the permissions to share their stories and permission to share their comments on articles and whatnot, nobody really knew about it.  And they did look uncomfortable even though they did try to kind of cover but they looked kind of uncomfortable with the fact that this could be happening. And that is where the questions I was mentioning earlier came from, came in and they were like, you know, what would the application really do with this data?  Why should I be concerned even if they are doing that, my name is not there?  Why should I be concerned if somebody knows the volume or the consistency of my period?
     And it doesn't really do anything to me.  And yet if you start looking at how these apps are progressing, we are still in that part of the world where internet penetration is not high.  But telemedicine has made a huge, you know, I don't want to say comeback, but triggered in a way that nobody is prepared for yet.  At least Pakistan.  I'm sure in India as well.  What I found out in the U.S. and different European countries where most of the apps are registered, companies can buy premium accounts for all of the employees.  It is one thing to think about Google and Facebook where Google looks larger than life and not consider what they have.  But the employer is a small entity.  If that is the way things going somewhere in the world that is the way it will be everywhere.  Technology progresses in similar ways in different countries.
     The idea of employers asking access to it and that is something that has not been thought of and something that is becoming increasingly the limit now I feel because even right now we have the telemedicine health service for our team because of COVID, the health insurance is there and a lot of people are switching to it.  A few telemedicine services that we connected to, told us that their business had increased 500 times just during this one year.
     So because of the fact that this -- I don't know in contradiction, this conflict between being able to have access to great health services versus what are you offering and on what conditions you are offering the data information that is something that has not been thought through by the general users, there needs to be more information and more engagement.  And even if people choose to still offer the data without having the protections that we necessarily need or the kind of protections we as advocates advocate for, they should at least know what they are doing and at least have a clear picture of the costly conditions, the possible implications, the vulnerabilities in the systems that is being offered.  That kind of marks the data that they are offering to the applications.
     I think I will end there.  If there are any questions, please feel free to put in Q&A and inject.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks so much, Sadaf.  What was really interesting is how the issues that you raised actually speak to the issues that are around boundary management and how do we see boundary management vis-a-vis humans and software and also the implications given the number of health apps and telemedicine, et cetera, right, for privacy boundary management, et cetera.  So thanks very much for contributing and building that conversation.
     And our final speaker is Joana Varon, and the title of the essay is The Future is Trans Feminist From Imagination to Action.  So as Joana starts to talk about some of the major issues that came up in this essay, I'm just going to paste the link here.  Over to you.
     >> JOANA VARON: Okay.  As the article is also kind of visual, I will share my screen and go through it with you showing some of the pictures.
     Can you see my screen?  Okay.  So, this article for me in the beginning was meant to be an interview with the Katarina Nolte who wrote “That Feminist.”  But then it was right when the book was going to be launched and the pandemic happened and my head was upside down with the changes that was going to happen from then onwards.
     And I was starting to think about future, about alternatives and how do we bring back our imaginations about technology and feminism into practice, into action.
     So that is why the title and it was a mix of personal narratives and experiences with technologies.  So I will read some parts of it.  The departures from the question, what would the future look like if algorithms that command our daily interactions were developed based on feminist values?
     What if the technologies that we cherish were developed to crash instead of maintain the metrics of domination?  Composed by capitalism, patriarchy and white supremacy and settler colonization.  I have been playing with that question together with other colleagues such as Sasha Costanza-Chock, Clara Juliano with whom we are developing the oracle for what we called The Oracle for Transfeminist Futures which is a card game that have several decks that we use for codesign workshops to envision and change the manners of technologies that we have now and to enable also that anyone can -- even people who are excluded from the process of developing technology to get together and think, for instance, what a transfeminist period tracker would look like.
     And so it opens the space for imagination.  And for me, technology was very connected to my imaginaries since before the internet when I was playing video games.  And I will read you a part of the article in which I was describing my experiences with video game before the internet.  And that I said that still those imaginaries were playing and being amazed of being able to live in other scenarios in life. Those imaginaries are still continue to feel very gender normative into which I was misfitted.  I was asking questions like why did it always need to be Mario or Luigi?  Why did we need to save the princess?  Why was the princess not using her own strengths and tools to unblock her own path?  Why was it always a blonde white pretty dressed princess who needed to be saved?  Why couldn't a princess save another princess?  Why couldn't I save the turtles instead of Mario?
     And then the internet came, and for me it was finally a feeling of autonomy, of mentality in which we were transforming from media consumers to media creators, finally able to queer genders, to let our imagination fly loose with those new tools.  It did sound like a tool for revolutions.
     But then we had monopolies, Facebook, Google, Apple, Microsoft, Amazon, all the white male dominated big five in the Silicon Valley who started to monopolize most of the platforms and also our imaginaries.  Now they use the terms community while they are actually turning us into addicted users with our desires becoming the product and the targets exactly of those running that matrix of domination.
     And I think that is where we stand now.  So how do we break this?  This matrix of domination is in more hands trying to manipulate us with our data.  But also with algorithms censoring our production with an example of a gift that we shared during the day of lesbian visibility in Brazil, lesbians call themselves sapatelle.  It is like a word that is like Dyke that has been reappropriated by the movement and sapatelle also goes for frog so we posted the dancing frog and it was censored on Instagram because of the word sapatelle.  So those monopolies and the imaginary -- the monopolies of our imaginaries are taking away our rights to express ourselves with our own words.
     And the emergence of what social narratives above call surveillance capitalism has also opened the space for practices of gender surveillance.  So threats – and I will read here this part either by threats by partners who spy on devices, a web full of ads that widely reinforce gender roles, policemen infiltrating dating apps, period trackers that turn our blood into money for others or are even funded by the anti-abortion movement to spread misinformation that prevents access to sexual and reproductive rights.
     So all of these trends on the internet are getting even more complicated because there is also these trains in which our bodies, as Anja was saying, are becoming data sources from data recognition to the collection of DNA.
     And in the next hours we will launch this web series at Coding Rights that’s called From Devices to Body, the first part of which is exactly about the DNA data collection.
     And one of the key questions here is that if my cousin or my sisters or my sister do DNA ancestry test, people can use her DNA to figure out what is my DNA.  So as Anja was talking about, boundary management, if we don't discuss DNA data collection, the issue of considering the privacy is a collective matter we can see more evident because it is not about my -- only my consent anymore.
     So watch out for the series to come soon.  And I think I need to wrap.  But what I'm focused now is on this.  Okay.  Let's problematize and talk about DNA and AI and how the strains and monopolies that have conquered a lot of our imaginaries about technology over the internet, they are moving to other kinds of our digital interactions through AI systems bringing, again, this matrix of dominations.
     So I think in one hand, we should map, expose this problem, but on the other hand also recover the imaginaries and think -- recover and rethink imaginaries to have and trace our own path.  And I will end with this quote from Ursula Le Guin because I think imagination is a tool for revolution that we can not change if we do not envision alternatives.  Ursula Le Guin said “The thing about science fiction is it isn't about the future, it's about the present. But the future give us great freedom of imagination.  It's like a mirror.  You can see the back of our own head.”  
So I will finish here.  Also, an invitation for us to keep problematizing and watching and pointing and exposing how this matrix of domination is pertaining technologies in many of our digital interactions but also imagine alternatives so from this imagination we can later prototype and live them.  Thanks.  Stop sharing.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks so much, Joana.  Again, so sort of taking the conversation, you know, back to values and how do we sort of get out of this movement that we find ourselves stuck in, right?  And what kind of values can we use to sort of build towards the future and really I think putting back the imagination.  Not as fantasy but as actually as a political tool, right?  That we can use to kind of build our futures.
     So I think now -- and it is interesting that the whole concept of surveillance capitalism also I think has come up in many of these discussions and is clearly something that is very on our minds.  So I wanted to actually ask all three of you, and again, we can go in whatever order is comfortable.
     You laid the ground out for us really well.  And these are all aspects of the whole sort of big mosaic, right?
     So looking forward, trying to imagine a future which is not as bleak as it seems at this moment.  You know, what is the change that you -- each of you would like to see based on what you have presented.  And, you know, it would be great if you could go a little bit into that and then actually if we have time for another round, then I would like to ask you all sort of the policy implication of that.  But if for now if we could just talk a little about the change moving forward.
     And I also want to invite participants if they would -- thank you very much some of you for sharing comments and if you have any particular questions for specific panelists or thoughts, or any general questions, please do use the Q&A function at the bottom or the chat.
     Yeah. Okay.  So should we sort of do the same order because I kind of -- now my head is stuck in to following that.  And I think it is nice because Anja lays out the big broad conceptual, you know, sort of gives us a glimpse into one aspect which is clearly gendered.
     And then Joana talks about the future so should we do one more round in the same order and then we can mix it up.  Anja, are you good to go?
     >> ANJA KOVACS: Sure, yes.  Thanks, Bishakha.  I realize that you cannot approach your question in two ways, right?  One is like what is at the end of that imagination in your head at the moment.
     But I approached it or I want to approach in a more practical way.  Because I do think we also really need to think about how do we -- how do we make sure that we have ways to collectively imagine, right?  And that is also really about finding a language to document.  And at the Internet Democracy Project what we are arguing, it is important to put bodies back into the debate.  And actually it is for two reasons.
     One is it is not just about the datafication of our bodies as such, but really all of the data that is being geared about us goes through the instrument of our body in some way, right?  Even our emotions, nobody gets access to until we type them out.  Which places we visit.  People don't get access to unless we walk there, et cetera.
     So all of that data is still generated through this very material locust no matter how disembodied a way we talk about it.  But it is also about the reverse.  The way the data is used, the ultimate goal of that at the end of the day is really to affect our behavior, what we do, right?  We strictly speaking still think whatever we want.  As long as we fall in line in terms of our behavior.
     And so recognizing that entanglement between bodies and data and no longer talking about data as a resource and that becomes sort of really I think empowering mechanism to kind of try and start to really imagine some of these things.  And the argument is not that we need to go back to more bounded imaginations of what a body is. In any case, that kind of imagination comes from the dual thinking between body and mind that was so popular in enlightenment thinking and has always been criticized by feminism.  Feminism or intersectional feminism has at least that bodies are always relationally constituted.  And what we see really then is that the data, our bodies are being relationally constituted in new ways.
     So feminist thinking around bodies and the constitution of bodies becomes a really useful tool to think with and develop both a language and a vision that can address some of these harms that we are seeing in a more clear way.  Can talk about it and name them.  But also can talk about the alternative imaginaries.
     And maybe I will briefly mention some of the work I did with my colleague Tripti Jean around consent.  We have a paper coming out at the end of the month and set up so many of the things that you were saying that the people you spoke to like weren't aware of et cetera.
     This is really a big part of the problem, right?  So our starting point for thinking about consent was well, if we actually see the entanglement with bodies perhaps we should look at debates around consent and feminism and we looked specifically at sexual consent and how it is dealt with.
     What is the difference between data governance where consent is failing, it is not doing enough and not working well enough et cetera and with feminism?  The crucial difference is really that feminism has always argued that to be able to consent at all if that is a possibility at all you have to be free from oppression and violence.
     And so what it means is that feminism always puts the power of relationships in which consent is structured on the table.  That brings up a whole bunch of questions.  Do we have influence on the terms of the agreement we are supposedly entering into this?  Can we negotiate before, during, after entering into it?  Can we walk away?
     In strong sexual consent the answer to all of these questions are yes, right?  Negotiation during an agreement means it is not because you agreed to kiss somebody that you have agreed to have intercourse with them.
And data governance, though, strangely all of this is erased and there is a very black and white, are you consenting or not without really looking at these underlying power structures in more depth.  And what you then get is that consent which is supposedly -- I mean it is still talked about if you look at data governance laws, consent is put forward as a way to enable autonomy.  What consent is doing is cementing power relationships that are already existing by saying to people, right, but you consented, did you not?  You checked that box. 
So the rather than questioning the underlying power relations that structure this, what data governance does is really look just at that top level.  And asking the questions from this perspective makes it possible to develop.  So what we can in the paper and I saw Joana post their work also which we reference as well, we tried to build on it by develop a list of feminism principles of consent against which we then also came up with concrete suggestions for changes that need to be made in policy and that we are now applying against good law and technological initiatives in India, for example.  It becomes a way to from a different perspective rooted in history and bodies of knowledge that we already developed actually make a case to change certain things concrete.  Let me stop here.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, that's really helpful, Anja.  And actually, you know, since Joana did post the link to the article that she has done, Joana, would you be able to also sort of pitch into this and talk about some of the principles of the way you all approached it?  Consent, I mean.
     >> JOANA VARON: Sure, sure.  The article is called Consent to Our Data Bodies License From Feminism to Enforce That Protection.
     And on this, one part of the article was exactly to list what are the qualifiers of consent of feminism theories regarding to our bodies.  And what are the qualifiers of consent in data protection legislations.
     So and tried to make the equivalences, no, consent needs to be active, clear, informed, specific, freely giving, reversible, ongoing as a continuous process.  Mutual, comfortable.  Sincere.  Based on equal power.  Considers historical, sociological structures.  Needs to be adapted to contextual situations.  Those were all of the qualifiers from feminist theories when feminists talk about consent.
     When we look at the GDPR, but also at the Brazilian data protection legislation, the list felt quite shorter than this.  And mostly it doesn't, as Anja has mentioned, there is no consideration regarding power relations and all of those qualifiers are expressed just by the act of clicking an agree button agreeing to terms of services or a privacy policy that no one read.
     So our assessment is that consent as it is in the data protection framework is a very individualistic and now liberal approach to consent.  And what we need, as I said before, we need to consider privacy as a collective matter.  And if you put the burden on an individual in an unequal power relation to say yes or no, when actually they don't have the -- or we, we don't have the ability to say no if saying no means some sort of digital exclusion.
     So let me quote Sadahar Ahmed, and she says about the intersection approach towards an impossibility of saying no.  It says, “The experience of being subordinate deemed lower or of a lower rank could be understood as being deprived of no.  To be deprived of no is to be determined by another's will.”
     That is the kind of consent that we give today with those terms of services and that is the consent that is written in data protection legislation.
     And as I mentioned, is going to get worse because as we are moving also from the devices to bodies, the data collection is moving from devices to bodies, we don't even have that button to click and agree.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, Joana.  Okay.  Sadaf, sort of bringing us back to the bigger question of which we sort of made this little side part but an important part nevertheless is that what are the changes you would like to see?  And you are welcome to answer more broadly or if you would like to talk about consent, it is all up to you, yeah.
     >> SADAF KHAN: So I would like to connect back to what Anja was saying about data governance.  And I think one of the elements that is at least in this part of the world I think not discussed enough is the economy of it all.  There is a lot of talk of policies and multi-stakeholders and policies, but the fact of the matter is that the economies within the capitalist society are created in a certain way.  And it is the nature of that very capitalist economy itself that comes to have an impact on how these technologies are designed and then marketed at men and women.
     And the power dynamics and power relations we kind of keep talking about I think capitalism itself and the economy itself becomes a part of that power dynamic.  So one element that in terms of change that I would like to think about is how do we start to have an influence on these economic structures of big data, of corporate, of the roles that States play in the role that third-party applications play.
     So that is one thing.  I do feel that there is a lot of discussions especially in context about universal access and we have seen both countries focusing on infrastructure access.  What I find lacking in these discussions is again the issue of power dynamics that exist.  If the next billion are connected and the same disparities and same are replicated and enhanced as more and more people connect we are looking at the situation where the vulnerable both in terms of just access and actual harm and vulnerability but also vulnerability in terms of consent of giving the data and giving data and the boundaries that Dr. Anja talked about that will be exacerbated.
     Another thing is where I look at policies and we just started working extensively on the digital media information literacy of it which has become a buzz word and there is talk about the information disorder and whatnot.  But the focus of most of these interventions is like literacy is focused on the technicalities of using the internet.
     The media information in programs in schools and colleges, they talk about the technical aspects of it and red flags of it but they don't talk about the metadata and what goes on beyond the screens we see, what is outside of the user interface.
     And a lot of questions that we are discussing now, the AI, the biometrics and facial recognition technologies all connect with things that don't really -- that are not technically qualified as a part of the digital media information literacy interventions that we are seeing being designed.
     Now I understand that this is a technical field and I understand that it is difficult to understand these things.  But it is not that difficult to simplify it and break it down and de-construct on a level especially if there is already work at the school level, at the primary school level.
     I think in terms of what policy interventions I would like to see and what changes I would like to see, these two areas come most supreme to me the discussion on the economy of the technology, that eventually affects the design of technology as well and the governance obviously.  And a broadening of the digital media information literacy focus to include the questions that we are raising.
     I also think that one thing that we -- that I would like to see happening is a collective reimagining of privacy in the digital age.  Now we live in a very strange environment and I'm sure there is similarities in India and South America as well.  On one hand, we talk about privacy as something that is inherently there, women don't talk a lot about, you know, what they are going through, things that are inside the home are kept inside the home, the domestic matters.
     But if you look at home units and family units, there is a lot of invasion of privacy.  Children are told not to lock doors, wives are surveilled, mothers are surveilled.  There are key questions that should be private to an individual that are probed upon.
     And so when this contradiction exists on the what you correspondent to people of being a private safe kind of society and yet when you look at -- if you de-construct what happens within the home units you see a completely different picture technology and the data we are sharing online adds a complexity that people are not really equipped to deal with.
     So even if you look at case laws and if you look at how legal instruments have been used to look at privacy -- and I'm not talking about just data protection laws but privacy laws that exist already -- I think there is lack of understanding within the Court and within the public discourse on what digital privacy looks like and what should it be for an individual, what should it be for the home collective because there is so many more involved.  Your ISP provider, your work, internet data you are using and then go to big corporate.  So the different layers I think they are not well understood, and I think they have to be well understood for us to collectively reimagine what privacy in the digital age looks like.  Those three are the things.
     I want to go back to something that Joana was mentioning earlier about talking about the science fiction is for today and not for the future.  And this is something that strikes me every time -- I'm a big Star Trek buff and there is a future for all kinds of alien species but if you look at the composition of the actual Star Trek teams and the captaion, it is the white male leading everything and making the decision and whatnot and it is obvious that the minority and the women and Black men they are just there to add to the diversity of it but the franchise itself, that was the future we imagined.
     So somehow like within ourselves the imagination is still so limited.  And yet everywhere every alien in the world is welcome and considered equal.  So yeah, it really speaks to me what you said that we need to the imagination I think it does come to speak to the world that we are creating today.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, Sadar, for raising a bunch of important questions and policy questions and what you said about Star Trek, right, you really pointed out a bias that in terms of sort of who is the sort of technology subject in a sense, right?  And who sort of the diversity but yet other species are sort of all welcome kind of thing.
     You know, I think a couple of things that I wanted to raise as part of this and we'll then move to the last part of it.  I think one of the points you were making, Sadaf, about digital and media literacy being very technical.
     I think that is a very valid point and also a struggle like honestly as we are sitting here doing the first workshop tomorrow with domestic workers in India and doing it, you know, online, right?
     And so I think the struggle for us how to use digital media like how to use Google Meet, et cetera, I think it is how to understand the concept of data.  We use metaphors and things like that, right?  But often you know, it comes -- it is like when grassroots communities they are thinking about telephone data and mobile data and recharges et cetera, et cetera.
     What I would at some point love to actually really sit down and brainstorm further how can we find ways and means actually to talk about the very critical questions with communities that are still sort of at the early adoption stage or just getting into digital technologies but super valid point.
     So the other thing I wanted to say is there is a very interesting discussion going on around consent in the chat and I wanted to actually draw the panelists' attention to one of the comments.  You know, who talks about sort of the relationship between individual consent being overwritten by public interest during the pandemic, which I think we have all seen now.
     Recently, and notes that it is not necessarily that the support for this is because of capitalism but can be from a perspective or discourse of healthcare, right?  I'm curious if any of you would have any comments around this?  Because I think it is a question that we have all faced in the last few months.
     And you know, yeah.  If any of you would like to sort of just comment on that, I thought I would just share it with you.
     >> SADAF KHAN: Slightly unrelated to what we have been talking about we studied in the last year of the perceptions of the internet.  We were looking at how men and women perceive the internet and what comes to their mind, a gendered study.  And I was fascinated by the idea of giving consent to be monitored by male members of the team of the families and women we when were working with a largely working-class group of women, early users and adopters and they termed this like it was culture.  And as Anja was talking about how we disembody the concept of data and the body but it was very physical.
     And women talked about how if they are living in proximity with their husbands and if they consent to being physical with them.  The consent automatically translates to the things they own.  So the idea of being possessed simply because you are having sex with somebody and somehow that concept automatically extending to what you are saying online, what you are doing online, and that being okay and that being not questionable or something that has to be thought through or separately dealt with.  That is something that we I think need at least on my team in our privileged kind of bubbles we had not thought of it that way, that it is not -- we always see that subjugation.  Not that they are invading but that they consented to let them have this access and that was also related to the protectionist mentality.  He is my protector and if he says something then it is okay for him to say this.
     So I think it is interesting to see how cultural norms that have been very physical are getting so much more prominent as more and more people switch to digital.
     And I think during COVID I see this being, you know, more and more problem.  We do get a lot of calls from people who have just acquired their devices because now they need to for their livelihood and whatnot.  And often rather than asking questions how to use it they will direct them to their husbands or sons or the male in the families.  And the question of consent doesn't arise because they are seeing them as facilitators.
     So just in terms of the terminologies and we are talking about how we engage with people.  I keep wondering whether the concept is there but it is packaged in a different way.  And then we also need to kind of understand the legality that people who are just adapting to technology are using and then use that legality to de-construct the concept that we are talking about.  I don't know how to do it, frankly.
     There is a huge language thing as well.  Technology is predominantly English and we are privileged enough to have that language but just the technicality of it.  I think there is a lot of work to be done in data and how else do we talk about consent.
     And it is such a sacred word that I think we don't want to shy away from engaging materiality that people see it in a different manner.  But I think we need to start questioning kind of our own protection of that word as well.  I don't know if that made sense.
     >> MODERATOR: Actually, super helpful, Sadaf. And I was thinking while you are talking that you surfaced something that we don't think about that much, which is that is there a universal sort of understanding within a culture of something like consent.
     Or does it also correlate with, you know, income, class, and other sorts of things, right?  Like just through the example you shared.  That was what was going on in my head because I think in the feminist movement we sort of assumed a universal kind of understanding of consent, right?  So I think this is extremely helpful.  I think if anybody would like to comment on this, that is fine.  If not, we can move to the last sort of piece of this, because we have about 10 minutes left.
     And the last piece of this, you know, as always, at the IGF is to try and leave to governance and policy but I want to frame in a particular way.
     Last year I spoke about bodies and data.  And everybody found it very interesting.  But there was somebody who turned to the moderator and said like you know, without like genuinely said that look, this is all really interesting, but does this have legs?
     Okay.  And I think what she was trying to say is that conceptually this is really interesting, the notion of us thinking about the body rather than data as a resource, et cetera.  But is there something we can really do about it in terms of policies and laws.  Even if we take something like GDPR, would we reframe?  So I'm curious if we can have a little bit of a conversation about how do we bring this extremely useful theoretical construct, right, into policy?  Like how do we give it legs?  Anja, I turn to you again first.  I think I'm stuck in this pattern rut.
     >> ANJA KOVACS: So I'm also still thinking about the question.  Let me maybe go back to that paper on consent that I wrote with Tripti.
     The one of the things that we started with was actually we went back to a feminist analysis by Carol Peyton in particular.  She analyzed a lot of the social contract and the social contract is really what modern nation state is based only and most of our law is based on, right?
     And so the idea of that and liberal theory is that we are all free and equal human beings.
     And if we enter into a contract we do that as free and equal beings.  And a contract is only valid if we have consented to it as free and equal beings.  Now, what Beeban did in her work is call attention to a particular set of contracts which are about property in and the person and that is a recognized concept.  It has been written about and central to the whole notion of consent.  So the idea is that you can sign away your property and your person as long as you consent.  Relations today are based on that.
     We are acting as if we can sign a contract in which we commit that our employer can use our skills or talents or whatever as if we can somehow send those talents to work without us actually having to go to work as well.  So we make something subject to contract in a piecemeal way without recognizing that actually the whole person is being made subject to this contract.
     Beeban highlighted is that the notion of consent is that the fundamental difference between slavery and modern employment contracts because actually in both cases the entire person has to be there but in labor contracts we have consented to doing this and somehow it becomes okay.  If you live somewhere where labor laws are really strong the impact of this is becoming less and less and you do have a sense of autonomy, agency at your place of work if all goes well, right?  But in India, for example, many people and thinking of people like coal miners still don't have that really the line between labor and slavery sometimes there is really, really small.
     So I think those questions around the concept of property in the person as being relevant to data as well because when we sent the data, the point about it not being disembodied is that this is not just something you are going to manipulate without an effect on me.  When you manipulate the data you want to also manipulate me.  On the internet data project we don't think about the internet bodies.  This is me you are manipulating.  That connection is that close, right?  And so if you don't come back to that -- if you then come back to the question of consent, if you look at it like that, if you see that even employment contracts today establish relationships of subordination which is what we keep coming back to in the examples.
     We don't know certain actress will become rich and powerful on the basis of what they get from us and we don't even know how they manipulate us through it.  It is called nudging when advertising speak.  When does nudging become not manipulation, right?  There are the relationships are subordination being established through consent.  If we actually so believe in human dignity going forward what are the measures we should take to make sure that the deep inequalities that are generated through the new relationships cannot continue to materialize.
     And so that is why that question about broader -- the broader context is important because if you bring that into the picture, what you start to do is you start actually to be able to say there are certain things we should not be allowed to do.  There are certain things that should never be asked from us.  For example, that what Sadaf talked about the third-party data sharing.  If third-party data sharing so fundamentally undermines the control we have over how we exist in the digital world then this should just go.
     And for many people this seems like outlandish, but let's remember at some point in sometime slavery was legal and yet in no self-respecting democracy today you can sign yourself into bonded labor.  Even if you argue if I wanted to do that and consent to that as a free and equal human being why should I not be allowed to do it?  We have recognized there is something about human dignity so fundamentally underlined by these conditions that we cannot allow it as a society.  Exactly the same thing we need to move to in digital policy as well.
     So the examples, the concrete suggestions Tripti and I make on consent in our paper are at three levels.  One is at the moment when the data is collected because as Joana also pointed out if you look for an example that consent has to be specific almost every data governance law says that but how is concept specific if the actor is going to send your data to 150 third parties whose consent agreements you have to go and read separately?  This is just ridiculous.  How can we even call this specific consent?  How can this be legal under that language and under any law, right?
     The second set of changes are what can be done with data after it is collected?  And so the behaviors surface and the book talks about as well in surveillance capitalism all of the things that they collect from us but don't need to improve a service.  Why should we agree to that being collected and by default agree to it being collective?  Maybe there are some actors I share this it because I started to trust them.  How is it possible that undermines our control by default should be allowed?
     And the third set of changes are really about the changes that need to be made for people who are already vulnerable.  And this can be focused on specific protected characteristics like sexual orientation, for example.  But it can also be focused on specific situations or relationships.  So again somebody gave the example already of what happens in many places of employment, the kind of data that employers can take.  At the moment we have job data protection law in India that basically your employer can collect any data that they see important about my performance on the job.  
So if they want to collect data on my mental health that is okay?  How could this possibly be legal?  They could argue this would lead to or affect our performance on the job, right?  So I think really it is partly about making these statements again and again and asking the questions again and again.  Saying it should not be legal.  It is not because we are doing it now that we have to go along with this, no?  Big companies like Google and Facebook have presented to us in India as in some other countries, the government is working very hard to reproduce the same dynamics of collecting as much data as possible from citizens as well.
     Often to support the growth of a local economic ecosystem.  But it is not because we are going like this right now that we have to accept it.  So I think really yes, there is value, this is operationable.  But we need to really make the effort to imagine along these lines and then to continue to say this should not be allowed.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Anja. I think you have definitely showed how this can be given legs.
     And I am also conscious that we have literally two minutes left.  So Joana and Sadaf, may I invite you to make a teeny comment so we can wrap up in time.  30 seconds each, please.  Joana.
     >> JOANA VARON: I just posted in the chat developed through the allied media conference and tried to use design justice principles to think about consent addressed to technologies, the developers.
     It is an interesting resource, but still, I think there are more considerations about power that is to be thought of -- talked out loud as Anja said because also consent is in the core of many of data protection legislations. But when this comes to the relation with governments, there are many exceptions and so things get complicated.  So my last thought would be really to talk about more about the centralization of systems and technical solutions to be able to track our data where it is flowing and then have proper transparency about what is going on.  Thank you so much for the invitations also.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.
     >> JOANA VARON: It was very nice.
     >> MODERATOR: And last words to you but again tight.
     >> SADAF KHAN: I will be quick.  Something I have been thinking about is the validity and legitimacy we keep giving to global standards and global policy standards specifically.
     The more I look at how the same standards are applied differently and have different implications especially in the global south where context we are going relations with the government states with the concept of democracy is applied differently at a different state of development, the more I feel that there needs to be a more broadened discussion about how do we adapt these, yes, there are standards about principles but there are policies about operationalizing those principles in ways that makes the most sense in different context.  That is one area I would like to see improvement in.
     One word that I will leave for everybody because I'm sure there are people who do policy decision, thinking about quoting the actor what is it called actor centered institutionalism approach to policy research which looks at like how different actors essentially come to play their own part when institutions are created.  And it is a developing thing in the political science but I think because we talk so much about multi-stakeholderism I think that is one of those that we need to start looking at and I'm still trying to learn more about it and read a few articles.  That is one that I would like everybody to read about and see if we can apply it to the multi-stakeholder approach that we get there and maybe that would offer solutions in improving policy interventions.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, so much, Sadaf.  I put that in the chat.  A useful way to think about the box of policy itself.  Thanks very, very much Anja, Joana, Sadaf, for this really valuable discussion.  Thank you, Debarati, for sharing the gender report cards of 2019.  Thank you Carolina for your support. And thank you, Sandra, the captioner, for the captions.  Thank you IGF 2020.  See you all at the next session.
     >> JOANA VARON: And thank you, Bishakha.
     >> MODERATOR: This was great.  My mind is reeling with ideas to be honest.  Okay.  Thanks.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-4-of17-building-an-ecosystem-of-media-for-public-good^^

    >> MODERATOR: Hello, good day.  This is Luis.  It seems that there is no analysts here.  Maybe it is you?  Who is running the session?
     >> No, it is not me.
     >> Hi, David.  I'm sorry.  Okay.  Sometimes it happens that they don't show up and they didn't -- let me try to see if I can get them soon or otherwise we will close the session.  Okay, so as not to have people waiting here.
     >> Please stand by.
     >> MODERATOR: For your information, we have the runners of the session and let's see if they come here.
     >> This is Luis again.  I don't think the session will be held.    Mazzone maybe you can explain.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Can you hear me?
     >> Very well.
     >> MODERATOR: Sorry about the -- as you probably know, I left EPU and decide not to continue with the session.  That was canceled.  But there was some mismatch in the chain of information and this information has gotten lost along the way.  I'm sorry for the participants.  But unfortunately, this is beyond my will because I'm not anymore with EBU.
     Sorry for those that are here, and I appreciate for your presence.  So I think that is we have to close here.  I can stay longer just to see if somebody else during the time that was scheduled.  It is unfortunate it has not been canceled on the program.  Anyway, I put in my new contact in case you want to reach me in my new activities right here.
     But I don't think that we can do more than that.  Thank you for being here to all of you.  And if you have any question, please address to me directly or -- and I will -- if there are questions for you, I will put you through to the new people in charge with this topic.  I see in the chat there is discussion so it seems that the topic was in the title was quite appropriate.  That's good.
     And this is the bottom up conversation.  I see asking where would internet companies fit in given the media role.  I have ideas.  Not EBU ideas, but if you want to exchange, we can exchange.  Do you want to take the floor?  Luis, are you with us?  Can we go ahead if this space is needed by somebody else?
     >> Okay.  Can you take the floor and express your question?
     >> GUY BERGER: Hello.  The panel was canceled and greetings to Giacone Mazzone and thank you for the initiative and good luck in your next steps.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.
     >> GUY BERGER: I didn't see the contact details and tell us in the chat when you put the panel together you obviously had ideas.  It would be interesting to hear your ideas.
     >> MODERATOR: I repeat my contact details.  The idea behind the title of the panel today was media can play a very important role in the new situation, the new situation that has been determined by the combination of the globalization and of the digitalization at the same time.  As the presidential campaign in the U.S. proved enormously and I hope that will not prove more in the next days, but let's say how has been proved the media field is not anymore only the media field, there are new actors playing heavily in the field and they don't have the same responsibility that the media had in the past.
     In 200 years of media regulation in the western countries and then all over the world based on this principle that has been developed in the developed countries, the responsibility in the media communication was given to mediators.  All of the laws and rules building where the mediator is responsible if something goes wrong.
     They have to know about if you have insight to hate and as the director of the publication or the editor that are responsible and so according to the different law in the country.  But always the mediator has been responsible for what was happening.
     And since the last five year, let's say, and more and more in the recent times, there is no more mediator or the mediator are not considering themselves mediator because they simply consider themselves as they consult transmission and they don't accept any responsibility because they say we don't create the content, we don't commission the content, this belongs to somebody else.
     The problem was what was missing in this is the concept of the public good in the media.  What the media respected in the contribution of society and in the ideas and the exchange of ideas in society.  In the new situation the carriers they consider as they were simply telecom operators in the past, they don't have any finalization, they don't have any aim simply they are carriers and consider only carriers.
     This I think that if we introduce the concept of the public good and try to apply also to this new cover, this will change the discretion and this is the right approach.
     There are many debates in Europe currently and in other parts of the world about how to do but think this is the real point.
     It would be interesting to listen to the others that are here if they have any view on that.
     >> GUY BERGER: In the absence of other people jumping in at this point, I think that is very interesting what you say.
     One issue I think would be interesting to hear more from you about is what does this for the public good mean is different to public interest?
     And who should advocate this?  Is this a self-regulatory kind of gap in self-regulation or does this require regulation?
     And sorry to ask this other question, how does this impact on the financial issues because we even saw that some media and we still see some media is being captured or it is not living up to what you would say public good anyway.
     And media compromised by the good because they are promoting a particular commercial or political agendas.  And so it's a weaponization I suppose of the space.  And so if you want to keep things in the public good, what is the kind of the model there?  Because you also face the situation today, of course, that even public service media is facing a cash crunch let alone your independent private media apart from the biggest ones.  And internet companies are doing very well financially.
     But, you know, they are not set up to produce public interest content.  So it's really 20th century -- they never struck upon the good orientation, does that mean that some of the money should go into becoming public media companies or support the private media companies.  A bundle of questions for you.  Other people are jumping in.
     >> MODERATOR: I think it is better to open the discussion to others.  I see Daphne in the chat is saying something relevant.  If she wants to take the floor, it would be good.  Luis, can you give the floor to Daphne or only the panelists can talk?
     >> If you are okay with that, Giacone you can make anyone a panelist.
     >> MODERATOR: Why not.
     >> This has been record is like it is not official but in any case it is being recorded for the record if something can be taken out.
     >> MODERATOR: And I can prepare even a report.  I think that free wheeling discussion could be good.  This is really bottom up way to discuss.  So it is now Daphne able to talk?
     >> DAPHNE STEVENS: I should be.  Can you hear me?  Great.  Thanks for still letting this conversation continue because I think it is a very important conversation to have and it is into nice to see the insights from the different participants.  I think it is incredibly important that a code of conduct is created both with regards to media companies but also social media companies because I think that the social media companies have a very big responsibility regarding the public good.
     And, of course, maybe different in the ways that the code of conduct will be implemented because the media companies provide the news and social media companies provide the place where people can express themselves and talk about the news and all that.  It definitely has a different way of acting, I think.
     But I do think it is really important to take steps to have the media be more focused on the public good and ensure that the media companies are actually held responsible in cases when they create polarization and all those kind of situations as we can see right now that is quite harmful for society.  However, it is very important the freedom of expression is taken into account because that is something that definitely should not be forgotten.
     >> MODERATOR: The problem is a different status between the two companies.  The media companies are regulated in a way and the internet companies are regulated in a different way.
     In Europe, the debate is revising the electronic commerce directive under a new name that is critical service act and this is the crucial point of the debate when it comes to communication.  Because when it comes to physical goods like the trade, there are certain set of rules that applies.
     When it -- because then there are the integrity of the product and the transaction, the correspondence between the promised good and the good delivered, post delivered service et cetera, et cetera.
     When it comes to purely communication services, then the traditional tools that we use for the electronic commerce doesn't apply because for instance there is the reputational issue and the polarization issue and the information issue.  Et cetera et cetera that cannot be measured with a traditional ecommerce regulation.  In the past and I come back to the point that was raised in the chat but also by Guy, the commercial and public service media they exist because they don't exist everywhere in world but they are the public interest common notion.  But in certain countries, there was a public good notion.
     For instance, in the U.S., when there was the fairness act that was canceled by Reagan, all of the media, they have to act for the public good and in good faith.  So commercial and private public owned whatever there was the model of financing.
     Then this bill was taken out and you have the phenomena like Fox News where they don't bind to any public good concept.  They simply do it for in the purely commercial way without considering the effects that they produce on society or considering the effects they produce on society.  And they don't consider this as something unacceptable.
     So I think that if we reintroduce the notion of public good for all those that act as media means that put people that create bridges between people or they cut bridges between people for the polarization, this is also something that we need to enter into this consideration.
     Guy raised the question about the media responsibility to media for public good.  Yes, if we look at the last two years, what is happening is that the -- what was called the role of the traditional media new shifted in the platform.  So they act as mediators through the community rules.  They say the community rules -- the community rules are replacing what was the anthology of the journalists or the publishers.  Is this enough?  Is this working?  I think that we are -- the main problem is that there is not a third-party in the game.
     And the third-party in the game is the rule of law.  When there was a conflict between media and citizens about the way that we are treated in the media, if there was no possible composition, at a certain point in the process the law intervene.
     In the scheme that you is proposed now for the internet platform, the internet platform proclaim themselves and judge and party in the game and this I think is the weakness of the exercise because I people don't find an equitable third-party that could act on their interest in the game if a problem arise.
     I would be curious to hear what people that is present here think about that.  If you want to take the floor, please do it, each of you can speak because Luis freed everybody.  This is a free speech session.
     For instance, an interesting thought in the chat about what is the media company.  What she mentioned the fact that there has to be a common benchmark to create public good.
     Yes, I think it will be interesting to develop more if Juliana can take the floor.  But I think that in this regard, if I can say something is that the benchmark in many system was the public service.  So for instance the most classic example is BBC.  BBC was the benchmark for the quality of the media services all over the country in the UK.
     Doesn't exist Fox News in the UK because there exists BBC, I think.  That is where the problem is where the public service don't exist or don't make their proper role for instance where they are under control of the states, this is the case for instance in Hungary where the control of the state are public service are strong so they are not acting in the interest of citizens, they are acting in the interest of government, there the benchmark doesn't exist anymore.
     So it is possible that the demand and offer dialogue that is typical of the free markets is working very badly because the benchmark is very low.
     >> GUY BERGER: I see there is a hand raised in the chat.
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, please.
     >> SIVASUBRAMINIAN.: I don't come from a media company and my knowledge of media is limited.  I still have a question.  You were mentioning benchmarks and existing benchmarks if any are different in different places.  In one country the benchmark is to act like BBC and another country it could be quite free and another country the benchmarks could be extreme.  And so if we suspend just for the process of thinking if we suspend existing bench marks and ignore or not be bound by existing loss and imagine there is a country somewhere in the world, a kingdom, not a small country but a kingdom with about -- the king appoints someone of his favorite nephew or someone to be in charge of coordinating the media or in some way, how would he go about creating media for public good?  How would someone start from scratch the idea of creating media for public good?
     It cannot be counter productive, public good could be if he is an extreme person and his notion of public good cannot be that -- it cannot -- it could end up creating a media that is very pure.  On the other extreme, if he is a free person, he could total up everything for everyone to so that instead of becoming media for public good it becomes media for public harm.
     So what does that system that would decide what does the public good and what is lot?  What is not in public good?  In other words, what is public good and how would that -- the participants go about creating the notion of public good in a fair manner?
     >> MODERATOR: That's very complex.
     And part of the question is for, Guy, that is of UNESCO and UNESCO has among its duties to try to create benchmarking for quality in the media.  And they have created many tools for that.
     So I left this part of the answer to Guy.  My part of the answer to your question is it is true, and what you say is absolutely true.  The problem that exists is that the media are extremely related to the country and the rules of the game are extremely related to the country.  In fact, for instance, if you look at the few examples of trans national regulation, that for instance that exists in Europe, in Europe, European union decided not to intervene in the field of media regulation because this is something that each State member of the European union decide to keep under its own control.  And this is the limit of the exercise as you correctly say even in Europe.
     Now that I don't work anymore for the EBU I can be more free in expressing my opinion.  But this is the problem that for instance in Europe we have with Hungarian situation that the they are responding to the interests of the Hungarian government and is punished by the audience because the audience is not trusting anymore the public service since it is under total control of the politics.
     It could happen in a country where the government in power or the forces in power I think the totalitarian countries or that are formerly Democratic but in reality are autocratic there you don't have the benchmarking anymore because the public service has been delegated to state broadcaster as it was in the past.  So the logical public good, common good doesn't exist anymore.
     But there the only situation, the only force that can counterbalance that are the citizens.  I give you an example simple that is always an example coming from western democracies so I can understand that.  You can tell that in other country doesn't apply.  When Margaret Thatcher tried to impose to BBC about the Ireland, the BBC refused to do so and the only way to -- that was able to stop Mrs. Thatcher to impose to the BBC is two million people called the telephone number of downing street saying they want to have the public service continue to be free and without censorship because they wanted to know the truth of what was the up in the other country.  There is no other way other than the citizens protecting themselves against censorship and lies and those by government.  And in some countries this works and other countries it doesn't work.
     But then I would like very much that Guy could intervene for the parts that concerns what UNESCO is mandated to do by the UN system in this field that is very important, I think.  Guy, can you?  And then there are things in the chat probably we have to go back.  You asked for the floor, but if first, Guy, can you briefly answer that.
     >> GUY BERGER: UNESCO has this system of assessing media called the media development indicators that the many states of UNESCO agreed and may measure into the discussion or three points amongst other points.  The one is it should be a situation of media freedom because otherwise, of course, media or social media whatever it is can be instrumentalized by those in power which is not always the same as the public good.
     So there should be freedom for expression and free doom for media.  Number two, there should be pluralism.  And I think this is important because they are, as was said by the previous speakers, some premium that there are different views of public good so you need pluralism in that as to which immediately will represent what interpretation of public good.
    Across the board, free pluralistic situation should result some kind of choice for the public and some kind of overall contribution to public debate and public good.
     And the third element is independence of the media which means that the media should really and this is where the code of standards or community standards comes in depending enterprise.  Commit to public interest in the case of journalism so verifiable content and ethics of news gathering and what kinds of commitments there are to sort of reply and what kind of ethics in terms of respect for the needs of children and so on and so forth.  And sometimes the independence needs to be regulated in terms of what institutions are giving out licenses or subsidies to companies.  But because those also need to be independent, the regulators as well.
     So those are the elements that are seen as important.  These three elements, the freedom, independence.  And so this has been at UNESCO for more than 10 years this perspective.  And I think it has resonance for internet companies as well.
     I guess what we are speaking about here to what extent the mediators, these companies can exist in conditions of freedom of expression which, of course, isn't unlimited but anyway, you know, there is commercial limits such as copyright to start with, et cetera et cetera, but pluralism many in terms of size of the internet companies.  And what extent they have clear criteria that are actually again to be in the public interest and then enforce them.
     And I will make a final comment you find in some media, of course, they have a journalistic kind of conduct but the business model is such that they have the sensationalism that contradicts their code of conduct.  And some internet companies you have the strange situation where the algorithms are encouraging hate speech and this information at the same time as they try to take action to reduce the presentation of these kinds of content.
     It is a matter of how does each institution involve in terms of aligning its business model and its mission and redo see there are contradictions here.  And you did mention Giacone.  And you say there is no Fox News but there is the tabloid media with content that often doesn't meet the standards of journalism.  It is a question beyond the particular realm is there a good independent public service media in the country?  And the importance of pluralism within and across sectors.  Public service media and in many countries there are different kinds of public service media.  Not one centralized apparatus that can be easily controlled by a particular government.  There can be different such as in the German or Australian model and then the commercial media and community media.
     So the three sectors less fantastic when you talk about internet because you have -- resonant.  You don't have many public service provided internet platforms but in terms of promoting minority languages or for children and stuff, there are gaps that are not provided by the voluntary community sector like Wikipedia and not provided by the commercial sector.  I think there is a new space there.  I think I said enough at this point to I pass back to you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Asked for the floor.  Can you intervene.  You are free to talk.  You have been liberated.  Your word and speech has been liberated by the host.  Can you hear us?
     >> XAVIER BRANDAO: Thank you for the opportunity to talk.  I don't come from the media sector.  I come from the Civil Society sector.  We are media users.  I work or I am here which is an international network of cyber activists’ counter speakers.  So we use social media a lot.  We are on Facebook mostly and on media pages.  So as users, what we see with media is now they have become interactive.  We are not only recipients but also participating to what the media have to offer.
     So there is some thing we don't see often.  We always speak about freedom of speech, but we don't speak about safety of the users on media pages and especially on social media.
     And if freedom of speech is one of the universal human rights, safety and security and dignity of people are also fundamental human rights and this is I think completely overlooked and social media are not and media as well, media pages are not doing their job of protecting their customers and protecting their users.  So people are vulnerable to misinformation, to attacks by Trolls, for example, in comment sections.
     So I think for the public good definition we might take as the lowest common denominator the human rights.  I think everyone can agree that people need to be free to speak and also need to be free from harm.  And so I think that could be a start to start there.  So yeah, that was my take.
     >> MODERATOR: I have a question for you because you say that you are using Facebook as main for your activism.  Have you incurred in any I would not say censorship but infringement of community rules is the way that they say because of what you published or not?  Or you think that you are relatively able to do your job without restriction there?
     >> XAVIER BRANDAO: We don't see a lot of restrictions to the rights of freedom of speech.
     So there is the European way, we are mostly European in the network.  We don't have a group in the U.S.  I guess for the European conception of freedom of speech there is -- it is really respected like we are able to say a lot of things, people who are more I would say a bit extremist or a bit more having extreme views can also pretty much freely express and often what we see and we have a lot of data about that, we see that the standards of community of Facebook and even Twitter are not enforced.  So we see that they have rules, but they don't apply them fully.  And let's not talk about the legalities.
     So yeah, it is -- it is the problem is not so much into -- at least for the European countries, we don't see a problem with freedom of speech but more with safety of the users.  And basically if we have a lot of information which is not factual and misinformation.  So this is a huge problem.  Content not being removed.
     >> MODERATOR: On this, I think that we have in the audience somebody that could say a word on that if he dared to is from the internet reflection team.  Are you with us?  Because some of the questions that has been raised by Xavier is exactly part of what we are trying to discuss with the jurisdiction group.
     >>
     >> I wasn't following the discussion.  I can give you an update on the work that we do in the track.
     >> MODERATOR: The main point for you just to be sure that you react to this that was raised by Xavier is that freedom of expression is one of the human rights that is to be protected for those that is to be protected safety and dignity of people.  What are you doing to achieve in the specific field?
     >> One of the things we are working on with the content jurisdiction tract is to focus on developing a set of shared criteria that can sort of be agreed upon by both by States and by platforms for determining the geographic scope of content restrictions for content determined illegal to be in one particular territory.  This is again these are targeting very exceptional circumstances when a particular piece of content is illegal in one country and has potentially the potential to be restricted in other countries because it is either that its convergence on the legal basis for the restrictions or harm extends beyond.  In that sense one of the focus of ING and the track is to focus on the determination of how the geographic scope of restrictions what are the criteria and the different elements that can go in to determining the geographic scope and to use geographic scope as an additional tool to the proportionality test that needs to be done in the determination of the restrictions.
     >> MODERATOR: This would not answer to the question.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-4-of18-safety-by-design-implementation-and-impact^^

 
    >> MODERATOR: Good morning, good afternoon, good evening.  A welcome to Session 18 at the Internet Governance Forum 2020 focused on the work spearheaded by the Australian eSafety Commissioner Safety by Design.  Before I have the pleasure of introducing you to the panel, I would like to run through logistics and housekeeping points with you all.  Your cameras and your mics should be turned off but just in case, ensure that that is the case.  And to please use the Q&A function at the bottom of your screens to post questions to the panelists that we will collate and post to the panelists at the end of the panel discussion.
     The session is due to last 60 minutes.  But before we start the panel discussion, and before I make the introductions, we have a short video for you from Plan International Youth Advocates which really bring brings to life the youth vision statement developed and generated as part of our consultations with children and young people as part of the Phase 1 Safety by Design initiative which articulates the expectations and visions young people have for the online services that they use.
     (Captioned video)
     >> MODERATOR: On that note, I have the pleasure of introducing you to the panelists today which is chaired by Australia's eSafety Commissioner Julie Inman Grant.  She has spent three decades working in P&A and safety and working in senior public policy and safety in the tech industry at Microsoft, Adobe.  
We have Dieter Carstensen who is Director and Head of Child Safety at Lego and oversees the child safety development and governance and development and innovation of the Lego’s digital experiences. 
And Stephen Collins who is Director of Public Policy at EMEA at Snap, Inc. and has held a variety of policy and regulatory roles and worked in government and academia. And Professor Amanda Third who is at the Institute for Culture and Society and the co-director of the Young and Resilient Research Centre at West Sydney University.  
I have the pleasure of passing over to Julie Inman Grant to provide you with the role and functions of the safety and Safety by Design initiative before chairing the discussions amongst the panelists.  So over to you, Julie, thank you.
     >> JULIE INMAN GRANT: Thank you so much, Julia.  And I want to thank Julia and the team for making this available and pioneering Safety by Design as a world first initiative.
     I thought I would start by explaining a little bit about eSafety and what we are and how we do it because we are a unique organization and we are working close which with neighbors to build capacity and capability.
     But we approach things in three different domains, if you will.  So we start with prevention through research and education and awareness and through some deeper programs.  Some include e-safety women where we know that technology facilitated abuse is an extension of coercion and violence that women experience through domestic violence situations.
     We have a range of other programs and education to make sure that we are aiming towards real behavioral change.  We have to remember that online safety fundamentally is behavioral.  It is the human interaction on the platforms that are going around us.  We need to address the behaviors.  We also need to help parents, carers and grandparents and others, role modeling the right behavior and engaging with children in their online lives.  We know that 81% of Australian 4-year-olds have access to a digital device.  It starts with us the parents and needs to continue throughout a child's educational journey.
     The second phase of what we do is what we referred to as protection.  So the protections are regulatory schemes where we take down seriously harmful content.  And that ranges from everything from abhorrent violent material and new powers received in the wake of the tragic Christ Church shootings as well as child sexual abuse material and we work closely with partners in Hope Network and law enforcement to get those images taken down.
     We have the world's only legislated cyber bullying scheme targeted at children.  So when a child experiences serious cyber bullying and reports to the social media site and that isn't taken down, we can compel the social media site and fine them if they don't take down content that is harassing, intimidating, humiliating, or threatening a child.  And we have the world first scheme around image-based abuse.  We don't call it revenge porn because we don't want it to lead to victim blaming and shaming.  We have a 92% success rate in terms of getting intimate videos and images taken off of hundreds of websites and this applies to everyone.
     And then the area we will focus on today is what we call proactive change.  So how do we minimize the threat surface for the future?  You know, we continue with prevention and try and, you know, prevent the bad things from happening in the first place and protection to take down content and play that game of whack-a-mole or whack-a-troll, if you will, after the damage is done.  Really what we want to do is make the online world a safer place.  We do that in a few ways.  And if you go to eSafety.gov.eu you will see the information and one is through tracking investigative trends and what kind of abuse and threat trends are we seeing?  What kind of new technologies are on the frontier?  How can we harness the technologies for good?  And how might they be misused to cause users harm?  So you will see in the international future section a range of briefs everything from end to end encryption, coaxing, harmful youth-on-youth behavior, a range of issues that may be of interest to you.
     But primarily what we are here to talk about is Safety by Design.  And Safety by Design is something that I tried to bring to those that I worked with in industry more than 10 years ago.  It has been a pleasure to be in the role to understand what makes industry tick and also understand what the limitations are and when they can do more.  And fundamentally we know that if we are going to get companies to change the ethos of how they develop technology, from moving fast and breaking things and profit at all costs to one that places human rights and ethics at the core of the design processes. We need to bring companies along on the journey and has to be meaningful cultural change which starts at the top with leadership and a journey rather than end point.  Constant innovation and constant investment and even creating, you know, competition or cooperating for being the safest platform out there.  We see cars and car manufacturers actually competing on features around product safety.  And I think that the road analogies do hold a lot of promise when we are talking about Safety by Design.
     You know, when we get into the car these days, we expect that the brakes are going to work.  The air bags are going to deploy, and that the seatbelts will be effective.  It has been 50 years now since seatbelts have required to be manufactured in cars.  We wouldn't dream of buying a car without seatbelts today.  And these are guided by international standards.
     Now, we don't have any of those same requirements for the technology companies.  Yet online casualties happen every day because they are not necessarily consistently building in safety protections.  They are rather bolting them on.
     So what Safety by Design says is that you need as companies to assess the risks.  We have known what the harms have been for a long time.  We need to understand how our platforms are being weaponized and engineer out the misuse and build the protections in at the front end.  And really that makes good business sense because it takes -- it can take a very big reputational revenue and even a regulatory hit when companies consistently fail at building in these protections on the front end when they could have been anticipated.
     So what again we were hoping to achieve, we sat down with more than 60 organizations about two years ago.  And this, of course, included young people themselves and in fact the youth vision statement on our website is very, very powerful.  Some of the insights that young people brought to us were I think things that we as adults didn't think about.  The way that they inhabit their online worlds is very different to the way that we conceptualize our online experiences.  So those considerations are really, really important.
     We agreed with industry and others of three major areas of principles that Safety by Design would focus on.  The first what is the service provider responsibility.  The second is user empowerment in technology.  We don't believe we should put the onus for user safety on the users themselves and we want to give them the maximum control to be able to enjoy their online experiences.  And finally, transparency.  I think people would argue it is more selective than it is meaningful or even radical.  Encouraging that to transparency in terms of how safety features are used and what is the uptake and what is their impact and what can we learn from the interventions so we can replicate these and make them more broadly available to others in industry and ultimately users around the globe.
     We went from the principles and in speaking with the companies we decided and they told us it would be very helpful if we could develop an assessment tool for the companies to help them assess where the risks are to surface up best practice and that is where we are today.  We are coding two separate assessment tools.
     We agreed on the five modules with a range of companies.  A number of companies have trialed it as an audit tool.  And this should be available in the coming months.  One for startups themselves and the other for medium tier, medium sized and larger companies.
     We are also working with the VC and investment community to help use their influence and interest in ethical investing.  But also in minimizing investment risk by providing due diligence clauses and using them as a lever to encourage startups who may be thinking about the next round of funding just getting their companies up and running.  And really stimulating user growth.  But we want to help prevent that tech wreck moment that so many companies have experienced and make sure if there is a consciousness about things potentially going wrong and you can build in at the front end it is going to be better for the companies themselves but most importantly the users.  Again, I guess just to underpin that Safety by Design is underpinned by human rights and ethical framework and the youth vision statement.  I would like to stop there and start turning over to some questions.  Because I'm getting tired of hearing myself speak.  You must be, too.
     (Laughter)
     >> MODERATOR: So why don't we open it up to all of our panelists.  And I would like to really start with Amanda here.  Tell me why you think that multistakeholder consultation is so important and why in particular should the voices of young people play such a central role in policy development in the online space?  They are consumers but not in the way that adults are.  So what can we learn from them?  And how should we be engaging them?
     >> AMANDA THIRD: It is a fantastic question.  I think it is important that we come together across government, across technology companies, not NGOs like plan national and bring children along with us because we all bring different perspectives to the question.  I think it is really important when we are thinking about children safety in particular and let's remember that children do have special protection needs.
     They are growing and evolving and far too many children are exposed to risk all around the world.  Think we need to bring children into those conversations because we all do bring different perspectives.  Indeed, my own work around the world has shown that when you talk to children they often have a very different sense of what the risks of harm might be online and what to do about them.
     Often they focus very much on the sort of social risks of engaging with their peers and with family members online.  And they don't necessarily think to the risks that adults normally, you know, that spring to adults' minds.  And I think if we are going to really respond to the conditions of children’s lives obviously we need to pull them in and talk to them about those experiences.
     But I think what we need is a child-centered approach as opposed to a child-led approach.  Obviously, children can't change the world on their own.  We need to work across sectors and we need to pull and draw down on all of the wisdom available to us to really achieve this end of keeping everyone safe online.  What I really love about the Safety by Design initiative is that it bakes safety in at the beginning.  And I would love to see us expand the idea of Safety by Design to lots of other different aspects of digital life.
     Citizenship by design, for example.  Resilience by design and really keen to take the idea of centering design at the heart of everything we do.  Because I really feel like if you work at the front end of the process you work collaborative and across sectors, we can really make an enormous difference in children's lives.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  And do you think we can balance all that -- all of those different imperatives if we are engaging in child-centered design and how do we prioritize?
     >> AMANDA THIRD: It is difficult.  And yes, everyone comes to the table with different kinds of priorities and I think what we have to be careful not to do is to just pretend the differences don't exist.  I think the differences are very productive and if we channel those in our conversations, that actually confronting those differences and grappling with them together, you know, can push conversations in new directions and lead to the sorts of innovations we really, really need to make in the sector.
     So I'm -- I'm considering, you know, I know consensus is wonderful -- I know consensus is wonderful, but I think it is okay to have a little bit of conflict. And we don't need to always smooth out the edges because maybe sometimes the edges are really useful in pushing our thinking.  But obviously if you are going to work in that mode that requires deep levels of trust.  And I think we all have to work hard at building that trust across sectors between adults and young people. And, incidentally, young people say to me all the time they want nothing more than to feel trusted by adults of all kinds in their lives.  But I think, you know, I think we have to build that trust between the adults in this game as well.
     And that takes commitment.  But I think, you know, we have got a common goal and we can get there.
     >> MODERATOR: Great.  That trust does take a long time and certainly you can't develop resilience and grit without some adversity, can you?  
I think I will actually turn over to Dieter now.  So, Lego comes at this from a very different perspective.  You have been child centered, that is the core of your business.
     But clearly there were different considerations at play when your company decided to go digital.  I think the first ever blog that I wrote around Safety by Design was around Lego's approach.  And I would love for you to talk us through sort of your approach and your methodology and how did you bring the company along as this was a big step and what steps did you take to help you get there.
     >> DIETER CARSTENSEN: Thanks, Julia.  The Lego group is a facial recognition manically owned company primarily rooted in the physical Lego brick. And when we developed the digital portfolio, we wanted to replicate the safety and security and high quality we are experiencing from the physical brick because when you look at Lego, regardless of digital, it should be the same proposition and experience you are getting with it.  
When we discuss with the developers, they understood this was a necessity and we went about it to look at the risks.  But I think the starting point from where we came is that really our license to operate needed to be compliance with baseline understanding of what needed to be done to protect children when they are online.  But it did not really address the other part of engaging with them, the opportunity to inspire them to become good digital citizens and leverage technology and the community they are in, to be positive forces for good and for change.
     When we looked at the Safe by Design principles and the discussions we had also with you in the past but also other stakeholders was really how can we on one side create the digital experiences with that in mind that we need to prevent the incidents from occurring and providing the platform for deeper engagement that enriched both our experience delivery but also the experience that children would have on our services but build the trust by parents when they have children downloading a Lego or engaging with the Lego digital experience they feel comfortable with the proposition we are developing and delivering?
     In that sense with all of the aspects inside the discussion room, we clearly looked at what we wanted to develop and what we could develop.  Because there isn't exactly 100% match of what we wanted to develop and deliver.  Because some of it came with high risk.  And there we also needed and always needed to find a balance between what is really the right risk appetite for this specific aspect and how do you mitigate them and empower children to become actually ambassadors and empower them to take action if needed and where needed?
     So it is always a balancing act for us.  And I don't think there is one size that fits every single experience. And that is why I think the Safety by Design principles we have been part in helping to shape some of the wording around is a good tool for us to indicate these are the principles we need to be looking at and questions we need to address.  So when we enter discussions we have the questions at the table.  
The way we then execute and the way we develop at the end that depends on who the audience is, what type of engagement we have.  But it always is and I think some of the children said in the statement in the video it has to be safe but it has to be transparent and we have to be empowered to make the most out of it.  Those are the principles that we go in.  And then, of course, using a tool that we also referred to now, the self-assessment tool is going to be important for us to help the journey go further.
     One point and I think you mentioned in the entry which I think is really critical, it is not a feature.  Safety by Design is not a feature, it is a culture.  If you do this by culture you are two steps ahead of most of everybody.  If you do that right, you do it from the beginning and you always succeed.  It is necessary.  That is the key to open up the right Safe by Design principle base solutions as we go forward.
     >> MODERATOR: How do you build that culture if you don't come from a plan -- that is probably not a fair question for you because you come from a culture that is all about safety.
     But, you know, you may be working with other companies in your field that don't embrace safety the same way.  What is the secret sauce?
     >> DIETER CARSTENSEN: Access to information and children's voices and understand what the end users are wanting from you, not from the regulatory perspective but actually what the consumers expect us to deliver.  
It is a stronger proposition to engage with helping to make the most out of our joint time together in the digital experience.  If we are told by the regulator you need to do A, B, and C, we will do that.  That may be a base requirement but doesn't inspire to innovate great and go further.  Listening more to the end users, bringing that into the dialogue with the partners externally, it is a strong starting point.  If you don't have the Safety by Design principles as the language we can share, we can all agree to, then I think the path is open to you.
     If the culture is not matching at the beginning, well maybe it is the wrong partner you are with.
     >> MODERATOR: That's right.  You mentioned principles versus prescriptiveness, if that is a word.  
So I thought I would move on to Stephen because you know, I have really been impressed with Snap because they have really put a huge focus not just externally but internally they are actually living the values.  Julia and I spent some time there.  Not only Safety by Design, but privacy by design.  
There tends to be a natural and necessary tension that exists between security, privacy, and safety. I would love to hear, Stephen, how you navigate that because you have to provide all of those things for the users, particularly the most vulnerable users.
     >> STEPHEN COLLINS: Thanks.  There is a superficial tension that meets between privacy and safety.  If we see them at opposite ends of the spectrum, one dichotomous of the other.  I'm not sure -- that is the obvious thing to do, but I don't think it is a very helpful approach.  See them instead two sides of the coin.  Pretty much everything by design as Amanda was saying.
     What we have done from the outset and this comes from the founders who still run the company, I mean not unlike Lego really in a way, we have the people that created the product initially are still there driving the product and have an underlying philosophy of how they wanted Snap and Snapchat as a product to be.  That runs through the product design process.  We have product by design and Safety by Design principles alongside one another.
     They are not rigid.  They are principles.  This is what is great by the Australian Safety by Design code, if I could be a bit flattering, Julie, it allows different companies at different stages of development to adhere to those principles.  Also different audiences to be addressed and to be made safe.
     The way that Lego addresses safety will be different than the way that a platform that is primarily geared towards adults, for example, would address safety.  There is a kind of a risk assessment that needs to be done on a constant basis.
     And I think we see this, you know, really well in the principles that you guys have put together in Australia.  And so what we are doing at Snap is first we had the Safety by Design and privacy by design principles overseen by the P2 team.  Privacy and product.  They are part of the legal department and work with privacy and product engineers and sit down at the beginning of any new feature design or new product design and go right through the product life cycle with the engineers.
     With the idea that it is much better to build in safety and privacy from the outset rather than to address it, kind of try to retrofit something while bolting it on when it goes wrong once it is released.  Of course, there is sometimes tensions around the safety privacy piece, but the flexibility afforded by design principles makes that a lot easier.
     One thing I would say, I guess, is I think there is going to be really increasing tension when we see a clash with privacy and safety around knowing your customer and kind of identity verification procedures.
     It is becoming a very, very popular thing to say, both on the kind of government side and in the kind of third sector as well as industry.  And so how we reconcile the fundamental rights of users to safety and security, on the one hand, but also to anonymity and privacy online like they enjoy in the offline world on the other hand is going to be I think one of the big discussions going forward.  One way to achieve that is to go back to Amanda's point of everything by design we are starting to think of ethics by design as a more cultural underpinning for safety and privacy by design.  I'm not able to say that much about it now because we are still thinking about it internally, but that is something that we want to do to create a broader foundation for how we develop other by design principles. I will stop there.
     >> MODERATOR: I think that is really interesting. And I think you're right, we are talking about balancing a range of fundamental rights. And you know, there was a lot of controversy when eSafety was established around the idea of censorship and taking down certain kinds of content because it was seen as potentially undermining freedom of expression.
     Now, that's culturally held.  So many of the platforms are American where, you know, unbridled freedom of expression is a deeply held value.  What I found working for Twitter which was a platform for free expression is the more targeted abuse I saw specifically of women of Aboriginal and people of different ethnicities and religion and people probably at more risk in the real world were at risk in the online world. 
And what was happening with the targeted vitriol it was effectively suppressing their voices.  If you are promoting voices without protecting them, then you are actually undermining that particular value.  And now I think we are, as you say, seeing a balance and seeing a real conflict which I think is a false dichotomy.  I think that privacy and safety can live in harmony.  We need to make sure that the powerful tension is right.  This is certainly what we are seeing with the EECC, the E privacy directive if it goes through without derogation, it will be illegal to scan for child sexual abuse material. And I have seen arguments about this being the slippery slope for mass surveillance when really you are talking about detection tools that are privacy protective.  They are looking for known images of children, you know.
     You will have a much more invasive privacy experience just using a commercial e-mail or social media platform than you will through a scan of these images.
     So we do need to make sure that we are having robust discussions to keep these in balance.  And I think we do see a lot of companies that make quite a virtue of being private, but I think we can't give them a free pass when it comes to safety- because it isn't okay that Apple only has 205 of reports when they have millions of users and Amazon eight compared to Facebook 16 million.  Facebook is being criticized, but they are using technologies in their systems to scan for child sexual abuse material and it is getting picked up and reported.
     So yeah, we really need to surface some of these I guess imbalances to make sure that we get that right.
     >> AMANDA THIRD: I think that is a really interesting point, but I think often what happens is that we feel like we don't have -- the debates we have get stuck in binaries.  It is privacy or safety or this or it is that.
     I think what I really like about rights-based approaches is that -- and coming from a child rights perspective myself -- is that actually children according to the convention have provision, protection, and participation rights.  And actually and no rights are anymore important or given more value than others.
     And so actually the task that the Convention sets out in relation to children is balance the provision protection and participation rights and to actually work through the tensions and the challenges and the difficulties.
     So I really feel like, you know, it is -- you know, obviously there are great reasons to mobilize a rights-based approach that is about fulfilling our obligations, you know, ratified by states to deliver on children's rights but actually it as conceptual tool.  A really important and valuable conceptual tool there we can use to open up the conversations beyond the either/or and think through the complexities and tensions that arise.
     >> MODERATOR: Now relate that, Dieter, if I can go back to you.  You know, Safety by Design is not going to be a silver bullet.  And I often say, not trying to undermine the work that we do, but with the issues we are seeing online we are not going to arrest or regulate our way out of it either.
     So what do you see as both the potential but also the limitations of initiatives like Safety by Design?
     >> DIETER CARSTENSEN: I have been using tools like this in the past. And the more that we get stronger comprehensive end-to-end thinking tools that are really addressing and rooted in the approach of human rights, children’s rights, ethics and safety, I think we are getting much better and much more competent in really nailing the problems at the beginning of the design phases which means it will be quicker for us to develop and publish experiences.  Users will be much more willing to engage, test, learn, but also navigate in different brands that are adhering to these kind of principles.  Navigating the digital environments.
     And even looking at connecting to the legal systems easier if they are talking the same language.  The convergence is not a single brand populating -- it is looking at ecosystems you will only be allowed if you are going through this kind of stuff.  And a strong side is really -- and I like the mentioning of this -- the engagement with the venture capital and investment environment. And that is a strong and intimate place because I know there has been talks of developing new codes around how to combat child sexual abuse materials and how companies are addressing the challenges.
     But again, and I must go back to the point we also and always looking at let's say the harm approach, but we don't look at how also we are building competencies and citizenship and good user technology and how to empower children to become not builders of tomorrow but citizens of today because they are and they shouldn't wait six or 10 years to become fully fledged internet engaging people.  They are people in their own right and have opportunities and we should be delivering this to them.  The balance between protecting but also promoting and providing the provision is, as Amanda said, really important.  Those are great.
     And the culture factor is fantastic.  I think it needs to be there and this tool is the language you can share with our partners to create the culture.  I think the failure or the risk, if I say, is that we are all as a company we witness a lot of initiatives on a global scale trying to address from different angles and the map of what tools are available, which tools would you be using, they cannot be -- they have to be maybe more coordinated linked to each other so we can use the right tools for the right purposes and it is more universally applied instead of having sectors by regions or language or so forth.  A bit more coherence would be great, and this is a strong tool and world-leading project.  So we are supporting it fully and want to take it further, absolutely.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  I mean I -- we are seeing a proliferation of principles and, you know, I think that is a good thing in many ways because there is a ground swell of support for this, you know, not being prescriptive and being principle based.  
I still see a real risk in the stovepiping of specific issues so we have voluntary principles around child sexual abuse material, we have got principles around the initiative around transparency and violent extremism and terrorist content. If you’ve got a set of principles for each of these harms without looking holistically about the range of harm that any given platform can give rise to because, again, it comes down to it is people interacting in a social sphere. So just as things can go wrong in the town square or on a dark street with real life crime that is what is going to happen in the online world. And it struck me when Zoom had the tech cautionary tale or the tech wreck COVID moment where they scaled beautifully from 10 million daily users in December of last year to 300 million by April.  But the Zoom bombing or the meeting interruptions that happened and some were quite egregious, they had to take things offline and they did get some great privacy and security specialists to be working on them.  And I think they are really focused on the problems.
     But to read in the press that the CEO said wow, I really hadn't thought about this online harassment problem until this happened.  I thought really?  How can you build a technology like this?  But taking him at his word and thinking the way a founder thinks about their technology and their ability to change the world, you know, that was, you know, additional justification, you know,  that sometimes the VCs or the investors are the adults in the room thinking holistically about the success of any technology or platform. And this guidance, we can't take it for granted this is what founders are going to be thinking about.  
Maybe I can turn over to you, Stephen, because you know, I don't know in that was the initial, what was the initial inspiration for Snap and when did they have their eureka moment?
     >> STEPHEN COLLINS: Some of the features that were there originally are privacy and Safety by Design.  So things like disappearing messages.  Data minimization.  We only collect the data that we need to provide the service and when we don't need it any longer we get rid of it.  Purpose limitation for data.  Defaults set to off.  Like user location is set to off unless the user wants to share.  Those kinds of things have been there from the start and we have been fortunate that our founders were so kind of farsighted on those things.
     Even there it wasn't like something you sit in a room and think about it.  It was a reaction to what was already in the market and trying to build something better and something that they would like to use.
     So that is where we have got to.  The one thing I would say, though, is it can't just be about design, product design, creating people safe.  We need to get away from a notion that users are essentially passive victims.  What we need to do is provide them with agency so that they, too, can interact, you know, with safer products, of course, but have the media literacy and understanding how to also on their side keep themselves safer.  It is much more difficult for younger children, of course, and differs as people get older and the agency, of course, increases.
     But that kind of we mentioned, you know, a holistic approach.  I think also here we need a holistic approach which isn’t just about designing good products.  It is also about teaching people how to use them in not only a safe way but in a responsible way.  One of the things I think we have forgotten to do in the kind of rush to embrace technology over the last 20 years or so is to teach kids in school digital citizenship.  Everybody is taught how to behave offline and react kindly with fellow citizens.
     Seems to have been lost in the rush to embrace technology.  I would like to see governance in particular and education departments of governments think a bit more deeply about how to instill a form of social contract, digital citizenship into the minds of younger people so we are not always reacting to harms.
     That maybe harms can be lessened for better behavior and great respect for each other.  That sounds simplistic and maybe it is.  But we are not going to succeed just by making things safer and safer and safer.  Go back to the car analogy.  There are still people driving cars unsafely and still having accidents that they don't need to have.  We still have a driving test to get to a certain standard to drive the cars.  But I think it is broadly there. We expect people to obey the rules of the road when -- something equivalent and the more holistic approach to give people more agency than we are currently giving them would be really helpful.
     >> AMANDA THIRD: And that is particularly important for children because we know that children need to experience risk to really develop the skill set to manage the potential harms and maximize the opportunity so yeah, absolutely.
     >> MODERATOR: And we often talk about the four Rs of the digital age, Stephen, teaching respect, responsibility, digital resilience and critical reasoning skills. And think about how it all today disconcerting fact and fiction with disinformation and misinformation and understanding when someone is trying to socially engineer them or that -- even what we see among the young people being bullied through imposter impersonation accounts, we have to give them the tools to understand and learn and make good decisions.
     And that has to happen a little bit at home, but we need to integrate it more fully into the education system throughout the child's educational journey. So I'm 100% in agreement with you there. I have been told we should probably move to some of the questions from the floor. Catherine or Julia, will you be facilitating those?
     >> JULIA FOSSI: Thank you to those posing the questions.  Warren Matthew asking about how important do you think cultural issues are for child safety and can one approach be applied in a global context?  Perhaps to Amanda for that one.
     >> AMANDA THIRD: Can I jump in and thank you for that question.  Cultural difference and cultural diversity is critical to the ways that children make sense of being online and make sense of safety more broadly.
And, in fact, some of the work that my team and I have done has been to really -- working in over 70 countries now to understand actually how do children think about safety?  And what we found is that actually safety means very different things in very different contexts.
     That will come as no surprise to any of us, I don't think.  What this means is there is a real challenge there for Safety by Design.  I think what we need to remember is that when we implement Safety by Design it is not in a sense, you know, it is not a fixed recipe that you just roll out.  It is a process that you go through.  Or a culture, as I think Dieter was saying earlier on.
     That you create around a design initiative.  And so and this is actually really, you know, another reason why multi-stakeholder approach is really critical is to be able to build products in diverse contexts to be -- for the design to actually be informed very directly by diverse contexts in order that we can shore up or, you know, build products that can anticipate the kinds of risks that people might encounter.  But also that the ways we do that really articulate with how people think about safety and diverse contexts.
     So is it critical?  Absolutely.  Can one approach be applied?  You know, as a sort of blanket solution?  No.  But I think we need precisely processes like Safety by Design that can get us to where we need to get.
     >> MODERATOR: I would also add that context and culture matters so much.  I think so much of what we see falling through the cracks through content moderation that we are able to advocate on behalf of users is they are missing the cultural context or they are missing the context of the youth-based cyber bullying.  So a post on its face may not see violative, but if you know what's happening in terms of a conflict in the school yard and how this is an extension, it matters alot.  We see this with image-based abuse.  A woman of Muslim faith if she is in a photo in a bathing suit or without a proper hijab that can be damaging if it is shared non-consensually depending on her culture.  Whether it is intended or not, there is a bias in algorithms and depends on who is programming the algorithm.
     And then the machine learning it is tested on.  So culture, bias, all these things, I think it is part of a safety where because we want everyone to be safe, particularly those that may be most vulnerable or least understood.
>> DIETER CARSTENSEN: Maybe a bit challenging to the two statements here. We don't differentiate between a Danish, Australian, Chinese, African American child user.  We want to protect them equally and give them the right tools to tailor what is right for them and their family and culture and context.
The starting point, and I think that was one of the calls from the youth voices they want to be giving Safe by Design the highest settings on by default.  You can then lower them and make the proactive choice and open up at your will.  That I think is really empowerment in its true sense.  We would provide the tools and the starting point is the soft entry and open up when you feel comfortable and competent to do that.
     It may be an extension of what you are trying to say, but we do treat everybody equal.
>> STEPHEN COLLINS: I will jump in as well.  One thing to note here, I don't think Lego and Snap are typical of the industry, so it is great that we are on the panel.  Look at our public content with design for ages 13 and above.  None of our content is adult or public content is pre-moderated or curated. 
It goes through human moderation before it hits the platform.  That’s not typical, it’s atypical. I would not suggest that is the only business model, just as Dieter wouldn't suggest the Lego is the only business platform which have defaults set to off.  The one size fits all piece isn't going to work for everybody.  
We created something that works, develop for the users which is pre-moderation and curation but it also means then that -- curation.  But also means that free expression and free speech not quite on Snapchat to other forms.  Yours will be different to the likes of the big social media platforms.  How they all then address Safety by Design is for them to decide. And where those defaults are set, for example, is again for them to decide based on, you know, assessing the risk, looking at principles and how they best develop those for the particular audience.  Back to the slightly cliche no one size fits all.  You have, like I would say, two good guys from the industry here and it would be a different conversation I think if we had other platforms in the conversation.
     >> MODERATOR: Well, can you tell me how can we actually get other platforms to buy into this?
     >> STEPHEN COLLINS: From my perception, a bit of carrot and a bit of stick.  This is my personal view, and I don't know whether it as company view but my about personal view that voluntary codes are attractive because they are kind of easy to sign up to and make companies look good.  
Mandatory codes, on the other hand, you know, are there to ensure that the codes are actually adhered to.  There is not much point I think of having a code if there is no enforcement mechanism to back it up.
     And what the Australian government has done well is to have a carrot, which is hey, you guys, this is a really helpful code, Safe by Design code, really helpful code and safer happier users and you will make money and it will be great.  And the stick is if you don't do it.  We have been flexible and non-prescriptive, you decide how you want to commit the principles.  If you don't and fall short and consistently fall short, there is Julie Inman Grant with a big stick and you will be in a lot of trouble and I think that carrot stick approach works. I'm more skeptical of codes, particularly ones that are such a high abstracted level seem to cover everybody and seem to say everything but at the same time say nothing.
     So that is where I would be.  I think it is carrot and stick.
     >> MODERATOR: I agree.  I think a lot become a dirt floor than an aspirational ceiling.  And so, you know, we do see some situations where companies are signing on to things that they are already doing or can achieve rather than having a real stretch goal which I think is better for the user and better for bringing up other companies.
And I actually have my prediction is that the mid-sized companies, the Snaps and Legos and the Zooms and even Match that they will probably end up leap frogging the really big companies in terms of some of the innovations and really embracing safety the way that we believe all companies should because, you know, I mean the mature companies should have done this by now really.  I don't think any one of them can say they have been a paragon of virtue where Safety by Design is concerned.  
Time to wrap it up and thank everybody for tuning in and thank the panelists for an engaging discussion.
     We have taken note of the questions people posed and we will be able to respond to people.  But just to say that if you do have burning questions, please don't hesitate to kind of reach out to us at Safety by Design at eSafety.gov.au and we will respond and direct the questions to the panelists.  Because I know a few have been posed to them. 
Thank you. And I would like to thank the panelists for the engaging discussion this morning.  Thank you to all of you.  And thank you all to the attendees as well for joining in the conversation, and I am sure you got a lot from the conversation and I hope that you will go on to eSafety.gov.au to find out more about Safety by Design.
And we would love to share the journey with you and encourage you to ask questions moving forward.  So thank you very much to the IGF for hosting us and allowing the session. And I would like to thank Plan International and their youth activists in particular who put together the video for us.  We had a few questions about the video and that will be put on the website in the very near future and you will see socials going out from the eSafety account as well.  Thank you so much.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-5-dc-internet-standards-security-and-safety-raw^^

>> MODERATOR: Welcome to the launch of the information internet standard security and safety.  I would like to remind you all that this meeting is being recorded and will be available at IGF YouTube channel.  The discussion is being hosted on the Internet Governance Forum code of conduct and United Nations rules and regular lakes.  Private chat.  Is enabled and raise hands also.  If you would like to have a question or want to have the floor, send your requests using Q&A, raise hands or the chat box.
     So have a nice session.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Joalo and for the secretary for supporting the session in a great way.  I see that one of the panelists is not there yet.  So if you could keep an eye on the signing in then he can be put on because he will be presenting in a few moments.
     Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for being here.  Welcome to the panelists and presenters and thank you attendees for joining in on the session this morning.  We will show you the agenda and also mark who is co-moderating is part of the leadership.  Here is the agenda that you can see that we were going through today.  We had a cancellation.  Are Rachel from Microsoft had a flight rescheduled and is on a flight right now and sends regrets for not being able to participate but she stressed she would be working on the working group on IoT in the future and ensuring Microsoft's participation there.
     We will go through the presentations and we ask you to toe use chat and start a discussion and if you think things should be different share that with us because that is the sort of information we are looking for.  We will have an open discussion after the final presentation of the working group and you will have ample time to share there and raise your hand and use the Q&A and we will make sure that to give you the word where possible and end with final remarks on next steps and funding.  Welcome to the DCI triple S.  I'm part of the leadership of the DCISSS.  The coalition has a clear goal to speed up the deployment of security and safety related internet standards and ICT best practices.  The task will lead to different end goals for example to identify analyze and present best practices, to create and present policy suggestions for diverse stakeholders and connect different stakeholders and interact on work on agreements on next steps beyond the IGF.  To spread messages to and thus involve relevant stakeholders currently not involved in internet governance to provide instructions for training programs at nation level.  Let me take a step back.  Where does this all come from?  And why is this such an important issue?
     The creators of the internet did not have security in mind.  There was no need.  They were working at universities and at the ministry of Edens in the U.S. and knew each other and trusted each other so why put in security.  There were no websites.  There was no external data storage.  There was no cloud computing.  There were no connected services or connected software or IoT devices et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  Only when the internet opened up in the made 1990's to the general public the limited security became apparent and opportunities for abuse and harm clear.  Spam, fraud, phishing, all terms that we had never heard of espionage, of course, but not involving the internet all became possible because of the lack of security in internet standards and standards of what make the internet work.  The public core of the internet so to say.
     Internet technicians went to work and created new standards or additions to existing standards like the DNS securing the naming system and securing the routing and BCP 38, et cetera.  Fixed different sort of problems but they are not unlike band aids for wounds.
     However, there seems to be one common feature to all of them.  Adoption by the internet industry is extremely slow.  And the same goes for making secure websites or creating better software or securing data or manufacturing secure IoT devices.
     Let's look at it from the totally different angle.  The ICT industry is one of the best facilitators of cyber crime.  It is not a nice thing to say, but unfortunately in reality this is something that must change in order to support digital transformation to sustain economic development and to make the internet safer to use for all end users across the globe.
     And the state was not something that I just make right now.  It comes from a study we have in 2019 and early 2020.  Because at the time of the IGF in 2019 the study was undertaken into the reasons behind the slow adoption that also looked at possible solution.
     It was not hard to find common and more or less agreed upon answers as presented in the report of the IGF pilot project on the issue entitled setting the standards for a more secure and trustworthy internet published early March of this year.  There is consensus there is no business case deployment.  There is no standard demand for internet security so there is no offer and no carrot or stick and pressure and nothing where incentives are concerned.  All investments, if you do deploy, but there is no return on it.
     The results in a nonlevel is -- a is nonlevel playing field between industry organizations contemplating deployment and those who do not.  Another strong disincentive.  The deployment is entirely voluntary with hardly any benefits if you do.  Internet standards and ICT best practices are not part of legislation so also there from that side there is no pressure and besides, they are virtually unknown beyond the technical and industry community as some experts participating in the processes of creation.
     And so they are very easy to ignore.  As a result, there is no real societal pressure on industry to deploy these important standards.  When consumers don't ask for and companies do not ask when they buy, there is also no incentive to deploy.
     So let us conclude there collective action problem where serious action is undertaken the raising of security awareness is focused mostly and sometimes only on the end user who has no role in the most important message to be taken, deployment of internet standards and ICT best practices.  They have no role there.  Now let's move forward and see how this all can be changed.
     The IGF pilot project identified six main issues as providing possible solutions to these problems.  The first is procurement and creation of a business case.
     The second, the role of policy makers and regulators.  The third one is security standards by design.  The fourth, human rights and consumer protection.  The fifth education and skills and sixth the creation of a global testing and reporting program.  Identification of issues which we have done is one step.  But translating them into action is another.  And this is what the DC ISSS will work on.  Volunteers worked and selected three of the topics for the new Dynamic Coalition so start work on its first phase of work.  First is security by design and sub group on IoT security and the second on education scales and third procurement, supply chain management and creation of a business case and here you can see the influence working because in the business case supply chain management was added.
     The volunteer experts also added focus to the topic and searched for where value can be added to in particularrives already undertaken on the topics.  The working groups will be presented on shortly and this will include the goals and first steps towards achieving the goals.  First, we have four presentations that underline the importance of a safer internet and the importance of deployment of standards from different angles.
     Following that, we will have presentations in the three working groups and there will be time for your questions and comments.
     And please use the chat room to actively to use the comments and start discussion.  In the final part of our session today, the first step is introduced and the funding requirements to support the group program will be explained.  But first, it is my honor to present the speakers that we stress again, we need your ideas and your expertise.
     The first presenter that I can introduce is the office of the special envoy for cyber security of the federal affairs in Switzerland and the organization that funded us to make the work that we are doing currently possible for which I thank you as well.  The floor is yours, Jonas.  Thank Jonas: Thank you very much for the ability to peek here today.  And thanks also for painting the bleak picture about internet standards dissemination.  I think things are Chaiken and not the least this Dynamic Coalition is a vivid example of how things are changing and we need to this forward together.  I have to apologize for Jon Albert Fanzun who is the special envoy for second baser in the federal department of foreign affairs.  He had to unfortunately cancel his participation at the last minute.  But let me quickly try to outline why we as a government are engaging in this Dynamic Coalition on his behalf.  And why we deem it important to further internet standard safety and security.
     The important of international digital governance for Switzerland has been adopted by our government this week.  The strategy aims for ways to profile of Switzerland in digital governance and even before the strategies traditionally Switzerland has been engaging actively in international discussions that define norms and tools for digital space.  We currently represent with the national expert in the UN group of experts and our ambassador as well to UN in Geneva is sharing the ultimate working groups that discusses norms and responsible behavior and application of international law to cyber space and other things.
     We are also contributing to the OICT work on the working priority of the two products and I'm happy that we will be part of the work on this sec sh un.  I think it can be a key factor to for greater security and the markets.  We are facing a challenge.
     The risk of a fragmentation of global rules and standards and the fragmentation of the internet is real for us.  The strategy therefore holds that we cannot achieve and secure open and free internet in isolation by just working with States but that we have to engage with the private sector and that we need to work with Civil Society and the technical community as well.  Against this background the Geneva dialogue on responsible behavior in cyber space and the Geneva aims at a global dialogue on focusing on best practices and requirements for the security of products and services.  Corporations such as Microsoft, Seimens and Cisco and other global player.
     We will present the first results of the Geneva dialogue next week Wednesday here at the IGF on 11 November at 11:20 UTC.  I look forward to your participation.  Another is working towards an IGF class as also outlined in the UN secretary general.  If our view, the Dynamic Coalition can become a key milestone in strengthening the IGF in a revolutionary way and make in it more outcome focusedy, what concrete outcomes do we expect?  I think what the Dynamic Coalition should aim at is translate best standards and recommendations for the applicable and acceptable and relevant to a broad set of stakeholders.  In our discussions in the Geneva dialogue we came across the notion that existing standards are too complex to implement and stakeholders do not underand it them and therefore they are not really being implemented are.  Of course, the regulatory approach is also necessary but we will speak about this more I guess.  There is need to validate and get is approved by more and more stakeholders.  That would be our view on this Dynamic Coalition and I thank you for granting me the floor.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, for the high words and the high expectations also that come from it that is also what we surely seriously realized that we are embarking on an ambitious program.
     So thank you for your words.  I would like to introduce Olaf Kolkman who is principle at internet technology policy and advocacy at the internet society, ISOC.  So please, Olaf, step in and give your presentations and views on the Dynamic Coalition and the work we embark on.
     >> OLAF KOLKMAN: Thank you.  There are a lot of internet standards.  There is the security of the internet.  And because of the voluntary nature of the adoption of internet standards, some get deployed expedient and some take a long time to find their way into the internet.  Some of these expedient examples of exspeed deployment are account when or let's encrypt which now secures millions of websites.  And the deployment of quick, a new trans port protocol with new security baked in, so to speak, which was deployed to over the internet in very short time scale.
     I have worked on standardization and deployment of DNS security, the improvement of routing security and lately the deployment of security of internet time services.
     And in the two decades that I have done that, it has been sort of a humbling experience.  What I would like to do is share a few shouts and those thoughts are inspired by a 1962 book "The Fusions of Innovations" which is a book by Everett Rogers and he thought about the deployment of innovations whether those were television sets or detergents or whatever, he was a marketing type of guy.
     I believe that the deployment of standards or the building blocks that -- are the building blocks that essentially internet standards are is very much like the deployment of innovations and so you can learn something from this '62 book.
     On the internet deployment is decentralized at voluntary.  An optional innovation decision.  And for an innovation to be deployed, any decision maker and that could be the person who buys detergent or a washing machine or deploys software in a piece of network will go through five stages.
     First the person needs to have knowledge of the innovation.  Knowledge about an innovation spread social networks with shared values and spreads best when the values are shared but there is sort of lack of awareness.
     So in order to create, you know, a drive for standards deployment, you could work on awareness building about certain building blocks or standards.
     And then that individual decision maker will need to per persuaded that the innovation is of use for that person.
     And then there will be some sort of a decision, sometimes that is a decision that is made by the individual.  Sometimes that individual will have to include other people in the decision who then will need to go through the same process of knowledge.  And then there is the implementation and then the confirmation that the innovation actually works and you keep using it.
     Well, during that persuasion, decision phase the deployer of the innovation has five factors that they take into account and this is still from Rogers.  First the relative advantage.  Will I have some advantage from using this innovation.  Or with a lot of security standards there is the case that there is no relevance advantage whatsoever and refer to that.  And in the case of deploying for instance, genetically modified seeds you have a higher yield and that gives you a relative advantage compared to the rest of the market.  In the case of security standards, you're fighting against a network effect.  You don't want to break the rest of the system so that imposes a cost when you have to fix problems.
     And then the complexity argument.  Is this easy to do?  If if is easy, people are more likely to do this.  This is one of the pieces of the let's encrust standard, the acme standard and let's encrypt project.  They reduced it gigantically.  And then compatibility.  Do I need to change a law for the innovation?  Do I need to buy new gear or just a software install of something.  And then try-ability.  Can I try this without breaking my system.  Can I do this in my lab and easily do this in A/B testing in my production environment and those type of things.
     And then there is the observability of the deployed innovation.  And obviously security standards are often not observable.
    So, I would say that in all of those five factors that go into the decision process, security has, you know, an issue against it.  And I'm mentioning this because I believe that the group should be some what aware about what it will try to do.  Where will you put your energy?  Will you put it into the knowledge sharing?  Will you change the decision-making project -- process?  Will you for instance help with observability or triability of a certain standard?  Observability could be, for instance, something like the internet initiative where people can actually see that their innovation and security thing actually works.  Sometimes that is an element of getting further.
     Value creation.  Something that we are trying to do with MANRS create value that people agree to the mutually agreed norms and routing security which is a program in which ISB signs up, take a few actions and there billion by demonstrate that they are a little bit more secure than others and we open hope that that will give them a competitive benefit.
     Think about what will be the effective strategies that fit the distributed nature of the internet where the mutual dependencies and the network is into play.  I actually after two decades of work on deploying security on the internet.  I don't really have an answer and I am really looking forward to this DC to identify some elements of this answer.  And with that, I over to you, Wout.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Olaf.  We are feeling the weight of your words as we speak.  Thank you for the insight because it does exactly show the challenges that the DC faces are.  And the very broad range of experts that will be needed to bring this forward.
     Having said that I will introduce the next speaker as already said, Rachel Azafrani of Microsoft is being held up in the air so can not participate.  I'm going to Ghana to Raymond Onuoha who works for two universities in Africa.  Raymond, please join in and share your views on this Dynamic Coalition from the African perspective.
     >> Thank you.  It is ply sure sew their.  I'm Raymond Onuoha and I focus on some of the institutional polychallenges in the internet economy, of course, Africa working with the regional policy think tanks in the region in Africa.
     >> RAYMOND ONUOHA: And the African foundation conducting some research to facilitate evidence base to inform policy making in the application or adoption of these technologies across Africa.  With respect to internet security standards and safety, like Olaf had already highlighted, I will come to that Level especially speaking to the operator paths.
     But overall the internet society has played a champion role, ironically leading the drive with respect to the development of the standards across Africa.  Which is a bit different if you compare -- if you contrast that to other regions where the governments are taking some of the champion initiatives.  So the ISOC and the African Union commission had around 2017 published some sort of guidelines with respect to infrastructure security for Africa where they noted that especially at the regional level the internet being designed as a collection of networks must therefore with regards to its security be Karied out not in isolation but in the form of a shared responsibility.
     So it is a collective responsibility implementing some of the best practices for internet security even as it affects the African region.  And so that coalition that was formed initiated a structure with the ability of (?) the ACS 3 C which at the continental level will help minimize the duplication of efforts in this regards and so thereby helping to facilitate coordination and information sharing hospitalization the stakeholders especially in key areas that affect the region where resources will actually be needed in order to bridge some of the gaps as well as advise policy makers within the African Union original strategies for bridging the gaps especially in critical areas (?) which this particular area is a key capacity deficit area within the region that is lacking significantly across the region and is mostly to the skills and educational working group of this particular Dynamic Coalition.  So the the launch of this coalition is critical while we drive the initiative at this level in order to align with what is very much critical in need.
     (Break in audio).
     >> MODERATOR: Raymond, we seem to have lost you.
     >> RAYMOND ONUOHA: Without skills if you don't understand the technology there are best practices and that is -- can you hear me?
     >> We lost the last two minutes so if you remember what you said.
     >> RAYMOND ONUOHA: I was talking about the key deficit area with regards to internet security and standards as it relates to Africa which is the capacity building, that relates most to the skills and educational working group of this particular Dynamic Coalition.
     So like the first speaker mentioned if you don't understand the vision you can't really adopt.  And if you can't adopt, you can't develop any standards for application.  And so also beyond the regional and also at the national levels, it will be the imperative of national governments to facilitate information sharing and promote best practices because they are the key legislators within country so beyond guidelines and beyond norms if you are talking about a possibility with respect to the internet infrastructure ecosystems in the region then the national can governments have to champion the accountability as they are the ones that can pass laws on the internet infrastructure security and standards so it is important that the laws adhere to global agreed principles which includes responsibility, cooperation, multi-stakeholderrism and also the fundamental rights of people but a critical deficit with regards to at the national level for Africa is at the single instrument or regional wise on the Africa region, the convention has not had a lot of process with respect to the stratification.  To that will be a strong first step towards creating an African in which the internet ecosystem can develop.  And finally at the operator level piggybacking on what Olaf highlighted in the presentation in respect to the MANRS which seems to be the global initiative it is a defines the critical measures to meet the requirements with respect to the routing and system security and all related issues.  So these are some of the imperatives not at the regional national and also the operator level that are very key.  Especially as it relates to Africa.  So we need to invite some of those players as we go forward and even as we carry out the advocacy work in the Dynamic Coalition so as African region will also carried along especially the specific capacity building areas as it relates to cyber security.  That will my submission.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And I thank you have shown some of the ideas that we could actually start striving for but as the challenges that we will face.  And we will welcome you to join the work and perhaps bring in the experts that you know from the continent so that we can work on this topic.
     The final presentation is an introduction to this Dynamic Coalition is Ghislain de Salins on the digital security policy at OECD and he will tell about his work that he is actually doing at this moment research that he has done on the internet of things security.  So police, Ghislain de Salins, I give the floor to you.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: Thank you, can you hear me?
     >> We can hear you, thank you.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: Good afternoon or good afternoon to the participants of the coalition.  Can you see my presentation as well?
     >> MODERATOR: We do, thank you.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: That's great.  All right.  So thank you, Wout.  I'm Ghislain de Salins.  Today I will give you a brief introduction on the work we have been doing at OECD and I will put the focus on the issue of IT security by design as I understood may be one of the areas of focus for the Dynamic Coalition in the coming months.
     We are and international organization.  We are mostly an intergovernmental organization.  Our work is done through the support and the input of delegates from the 37 member countries and our primary target audience is policy makers.
     We also are a multi-ST organizations, businesses, society and the technical community participate in our work actively.  And in particular, they do within the diversities working party and security in the digital economy which carries out the work.  Of the data security policy.
     It was said before by previous speakers it is true that the data security of products and IoT has become an area in the recent years.  I'm sure you are familiar with the work of the GCAC and with the trust and security.
     There has also been interest by the G7 on the G20 in this topic and even more recently, there was a report a few months guy in the U.S. by the cyber space commission which is attached to the U.S. Congress and they identified products as a key area and they also considered that the status quo was going to get -- and it was time to call by policy makers and stakeholders.  So as a result of this increased awareness of interest, we at OECD launched a work stream on the digital security of products.
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Could I interrupt?  Is it correct that we are still on the first slide?  I believe it may not be showing correctly.  If you could maybe try one more time to see if we can get the presentation current.
     >> JONAS GRTTZ-HOFFMANN: We see the editing mode.  If you click through in the editing mode that should work.  That.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: Is it there now?
     >> Now we see the screen that you see as a presenter?
     >> JONAS GRATZ-HOFFMANN: We can see it like this, it does work.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: 
     >> It is fine.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: Sorry, I don't know how to change it.  Can you see it?
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Yes, we can see it.  You can go on like this.  Not perfect but it is okay to read.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: Which Slide now?  Timeline?
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Yes.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: Are you seeing the timeline now?
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Yes.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: We launched a work stream and as you can see we are almost finished with the process.  We are finalizing two reports.  And they should be published in January and I will make sure to do disseminate them to the Dynamic Coalition as soon as they are available.
     If we look at the substance a little bit.  It is important to understand if you look at IoT security created by design is the prioritized topic and one of the most important area but it is not the only aspect of security.  It is only one aspect.  As you can see on the screen it is by design guidelines and they are focused on device itself and the role the manufacturer can place and then the design phase of the life cycle.  Actually you may have data security gaps that emerge in any other areas that you can see on the screen.  In other parts of the ecosystem and other stages of the value chain.  We have seen recently for instance the impact of the vulnerabilities in the microprocessors that affected a lot of products.  And importantly you also have what we call latent vulnerabilities that are discovered once a product is already on the market and they can only be fixed by security updates so basically they have nothing to do that much with security by design.  And so an IT product that would be secured by design would not be necessarily secured once and for all.  There is a continuous maintenance of security throughout the life cycle of a product.
     And another very important gap is the end of life what we call the OECD the end of life gap.  A gap between the end of use and the end of life which means the end of support of commercial support by the IoT manufacturers.  It is -- it was already a very big gap in other products, you may remember the attack in 2017 that targeted it was efficient on windows products that were out of life and many experts consider that end of life will be even more issue with the IoT leading to what some have called the internet of forgotten things and it is a very big security issue.  That was for the holistic perspective.  Now security about I design itself.  As you can see, it is actually a multiplayered concept.  Most guidelines on the product features, themselves.  So for instance, Iot products should have stronger mechanism like password for instance.  One more the guidelines focus on the processes and policies that are put in place by the supply side actors.  For instance that would mean that the IoT manufacturer should have the vulnerability policy and handling process.  And another important aspect by design the committed role of third-party evaluation.  Many IT manufacturers claim that the product is are secured by design but the only way to evaluate is through third-party evaluation and that includes certification and testing and other mechanism like audits.
     So just this slide was to show you that security by design is not so easy to grasp and expands many areas.  That was for the theoretical aspect.  Now if we look at the data and what can we learn about IoT security.  And security by design guidelines for IoT are available but not widely used and there is strong evidence that they are not designed with enough is security.  You may remember in 2016 the malwear that infected Mirai malwear and they were in a Bot net and launched massive DDos attacks.  In 2018, a study of the UK showed that 90% of the manufacturers lack a vulnerability disclosure policy.  Lay is that the situation?  Well, it was said before by previous speakers that, indeed, the most security standards in particular security by design guidelines are voluntary.
     And actually there are many economic factors that prevent the supply side actors to adopt the guidelines.  Misaligned market incentives.  You would often value time to market, cost-effectiveness or usability of the product over digital security.
     There are also very significant information assem industries without labels it is almost impossible for consumers to assess as a level of digital security of an IT product and they can't compare the products based on at this timal security.  So even if the consumers -- digital security.  Even if the consumers value security there is no way to make an in offed decision on the market.
     Another important aspect is externalities.S DDoS attacks it is not the owners and manufacturers.  Basically there is actually no connection between the IoT value chain and victims of a DDos attack.  And, of course, IoT products are used to create Bot nets to launch attacks.  And that paves the way for more hazard and that means it is very hard to achieve an optimal level of digital security when you have the elements that I mentioned, ternallities, misaligned market incentives and information asymmetries.  The other key challenge that need to be solved.
     And the question is how do we do it?  And so that is my last slide.  At the OECD we designed a policy tool kit and as you can see takes a form of a pyramid.  The idea here is that we need to go beyond the traditional dichotomy between the west side on the other side.  And as you can see, there are many policy tools that can be used to address the issue and incentivize the option of security standards deadlines, of course, racing awareness and developing skills, I think everybody agree are very important.  But increasingly an agreement by experts that it will not be enough.  Raising awareness will not be enough to fix the problem I just mentioned by the externalities and asymmetries et cetera.  There is a clear trend of moving up the ladder or moving up the pyramid and try new tools because the tools that are below are not effective enough basically.
     So just this year, there has been a lot of -- there has been a few standards developed on IoT security by ETSI in Europe and NIST in the U.S. and the charter of trust that are developing standards.  Labels are also getting a lot of traction.  It has been labels that have been discussed and launched in Finland and Japan.  And there is discussion in Germany and the EU.
     And if all of them don't work, or aren't effective enough there is the discussion of drafting regulations that would impose by law some -- that was imposed by law standard but the big question how to do that.  Physically two.  Impose technical but that carries of risk.  And the other way is through what we call principle-based outcome through regulation like the GDPR that would be technology neutral but it is sometimes difficult to implement especially for SMEs and last but not least, I think expose mechanisms important that include insurance liability law, and those tools could be also effective at mainstreaming security standards and incentivizing users to adopt them.  I will stop here but I would be happy to answer any questions you have.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Ghislain.  That was in sightful words on what to expect when the report is presented.  And the question to you in the chat has been answered but you in the final words.
     So thank you for that.
     It is time for me to hand over to my co-moderator Mark Carvell to introduce the presentations on the working group.  So the floor is yours thanks for joining.  A key moment and we are hearing a lot of valuable considerations about.
     >> MARK CARVELL: It as key moment and we are hearing about how the Dynamic Coalition is going to make an impact in global and multi-stakeholder.  I was struck by the alignment from Ghislain's presentation the pyramid of a lot of the issues that came up in the panel project that was led and how we are working through those issues.  And, indeed, I joined Wout on this this initiative just before the Berlin IGF and I helped to run the session in Berlin and I was struck about the multiplicity of interest and we had breakout groups and a lot of thinking going on on how to take forward the recommendations from the pilot project.  And since Berlin we have been doing a lot of work behind the scenes.  We have spent a lot of (?) but sharing a great commitment to take this forward and sustain the momentum and undertake and lot of consultations and individual calls, group calls, virtual meetings with a range of stakeholders and government and private sector interest and so on to help define how do we take this initiative forward under the auspices of the IGF in a constructive and focused way that is going to lead to concrete outcomes that could be an exemplar of what the IGF plus when it starts to bed down can achieve in terms impacts and engagement and recognition by UN member states and governments of the value of the multi-stakeholder engagement in terms of cooperation and meaningful results and impacts.
     So we did a lot of calls and we -- and the pilot project report as Wout recounted at the beginning identified a lot of issues and areas of focus.  And Of course we couldn't go into all of those straight off.  We had to sort of think about prioritizing.  We did a survey of the stakeholders that we had contacted that had expressed interest on what in the first phase, if you like, of the Dynamic Coalition the work should prioritize and set up in terms of working groups and so on.
     We have arrived as a result of the survey and wider consultations we arrived at three working groups on three key issues.  Security by design.  And within that, take note a lot of innovation going on, a lot of impact on networks and different devices, technologies to focus on and internet of things came forward as we are calling it a kind of sub group as a first area for the working group on security by design to start with internet of things and devices.  The second working group on education and skills.
     And a third one on procurement and initially we are thinking government procurement.  But, the discussions we have had as Wout hinted at we should look at wider private sector supply chain issues.  And in fact the pilot project report did flag big corporate entities, how can they be drivers of takeup of standards and so on.  Procurement, supply chain management and the business case, creating the business case.
     I liked Ghislain's phrase about misassignment of markets.  That kind of area.  We have the three working groups.
     The other issues we anticipate will probably surface as additional area of activity or working groups maybe in the second phase.  Issues like consumer protection, global testing, and the role of government in addition to procurement.  Does regulation have a place here in terms of incentivizing deployment of standards?  And no doubt, the three working groups in the first phase will start to feed constructively into thinking about why the government involvement in the whole sphere of activity.
     So the three working groups.  And we have got three speakers to speak on each of them for you today to give short presentations.  Firstly, working group one security by design and the subgroup on internet of things I would like to hand over to Yuri Kargapolov who has kindly volunteered to speak about the aims and scope of this particular sub group of the working group on security by design.  So, Yuri, if you are ready.  Yuri is with the internet sew stity chair of the IoT special interest group.  I hope I got that right, Yuri.  So please, can I invite you now to speak on the security by design working group.  Thank you.
     >> YURI KARGAPOLOV: Thanks, Mark.  I'm Yuri Kargapolov.  And I'm the head of chair of ISOC special interest group with many years of experience on my other positions in the development of DNS, identity management, IoT, mobile portability systems with various functionality as well as internet governance and special topic building are in the sphere of my interests.  Let me introduce the introduction the DC 1 and DCI leader number one on security by design.  The subgroup of internet of things.
     So stakeholder who contributed to the work of the IGF pilot project on the deployment of internet standards recognized the importance of security by design is an important way forward to make services software and products more security in compliance with the relevant standards.
     ICT is everywhere around us and more and more devices connect automatically to internet.  To form home as they call it, let the security that those devices and services contain and we let our security over individual users and the society as a whole.  The experts supporting this new recommendation really that we let our security what is it currently.  These issues are security by design goes way beyond the internet of things, of course.
     I want to stress now the four points, the first is the need for secured website built according to the top 10 best practices of open led application security project.  To called OLASP.  The second more secure and build according to safer software principles.
     Our data becomes more secure then describe it in 26001.  And the trust worthiness of the years of platforms and security.  (?) is impossible to tackle the best issues at the same time.
     The stakeholders who have recently consulted and who have volunteered to become members of this our Dynamic Coalition, this working group on security by design had designed it as a first step to form is subgroup of IoT and they are anxious to avoid the duplication of work o IoT standards and policies being carried out elsewhere.  We agreed with the aim of adding value to other current initiatives and processes.
     The first is the guidelines anded guidelines we have compilation of the current guidelines by the Dynamic Coalition ISSS best practice.  And creation of the best practice or work closely with existing.  And the second is solution to barriers.
     Identification current barriers to deployment.  Creation of solution and implementation of action.  And identification of ways to provide solution.
     The thought is the considerations.  Barriers created by national registration and degradation.  Consumer control or connectivity options.  Promotion through alignment of legislative proposals.
     And fourth is specific IoT issues.  Definition of attack vectors and threats for IoT and creation of best practice for legacy IoT devices.  When I mentioned the sequence of actions which using vulnerability detection tools aimed at gaining unauthorized entry and unauthorized accessory at any point of detected information system and, of course, existing -- in the design of digital entities also discussed the potential end goals and agreed the first sign of success will be participation in diversity.  Users in economic section tores, for example, gas and electricity will be important.
     It will be important to consider the potential roles and other stakeholders such as consumer and trade organizations and organization bodies et cetera who may not be involved in the internet on the regular basis today.
     Invite them to join in some groups.  It is possible disclosure of vulnerabilities in IoT was reported early issue for consideration by the IoT subgroup.  Recommendation by the CISSS that propose options and solutions for possible disclosure of legally dictated (?) working group one is first the virtual meeting shortly after the IGF when the decision will be taken on the plan and timeline and its leadership about will be confirmed.  The details will be posted on the DC ISSSS e-mail listing and, of course, you are invited to join this important work.
     That's all.
     >> MARK CARVELL: Thank you very much for running through the objectives and direction of the working group on security by design and particularly the sub group on IoT and the kind of outcomes and so on.  And so everybody has got something to mark in their calendar in terms of joining the working group.  So thanks very much.
     I was going to invite any questions for clarification after each presentation.  I don't see anything in --
     >> MARTEN PORTE: We have one from Jonas on whether it will focus on IoT or broader security.
     >> WOUT DE NATRIS: I was already typing an answer so I will just clarify this way.  Subgroup one, Jonas and others will focus on IoT.  And in the future, we foresee that perhaps other subgroups will come in focusing for example on security of platforms and security of data or security of websites.
     But that is something for the future.  Where we discuss responsible disclosure, that is one of the six topics that we have identified that could help with the finding solutions for the overall problem of deploying internet standards and ICT best practices.  So if the topic comes forward then perhaps we will start that as working group number four and then it will be broader than just IoT.  But within IoT responsible disclosure was identified as an important topic to address in at first in the subgroup.  So I hope that that clarifies your question.  Thank you.
     >> MARK CARVELL: Okay.  Thank you very much.  Let's move on to working group number two.  Which is education and skills.
     And I would like to introduce Janice Richardson who is a digital literacy expert involved in designing tool kits for children and so on.  Have a look at the -- she is with the European initiative called insight.  Mainly Europe, is that right?  And Janice joins us from France.  So I turn now to Janice to explain further the objectives and focus of the educational skills working group number two.  Thank you, Janice,.
     >> JANICE RICHARDSON: Thank you.  Good morning, everyone.  This is the introduction of the DC ISSSS working group number two as you just heard on education and skills.  I'm -- my background is actually in education technology and law and I have been a long-term university professor or lecturer in the area.  The report of the IGF pilot setting the standards for a more secure and trustworthy internet recommended the inclusion of internet security in education and skill programs as one of the long-term solutions for promoting the deployment of internet standards and ICT best practices.  Participants reported that graduate students ever courses relating to information and communications technology had not covered online security.  Internet --
     (Microphone muted).
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Janice, you are muted.  We just lost the last 20 seconds, I believe.
     >> JANICE RICHARDSON: It was recommended therefore that the current ICT educational curriculum at the vocational polytechnic and university level needed to change in order to meet the requirements of industry and society as a whole as digital technologies increasingly transform many aspects of daily life.  For example, multimedia courses and training programs shouldn't only include how to build websites but also how to build a website that is inherently secure.
     At universities when students take a course on how to execute complex programming projects, security should be an integral part of the course.
     This working group will address this issue with the aim of reviewing current practice in education and training and identifying best practices as a way forward for possible wider policy recommendations that the IGF can promote.  The members of working group two education and skills, have identified the two following issues as priorities for the first phase of the work program: one, a diverse range of programs exists worldwide in the field of ICT education, skills and careers.  Including government initiatives, private sector programs, and government-led programs involving ICT companies.  And two, curricula are often set by the individual school or university and this makes it difficult for them to change in a coordinated approach.  While it is also important to allow for national and regional differences.
     The security of online education platforms has been agreed to be an important issue for educational establishments to understand and make provisions for and this became very apparent during the recent COVID crisis.
     This will be considered as potentially an issue for working group one security by design by subgroup on platforms.
     The goals of WG 2 include identifying and reviewing current practice.  Defining what is best practice.  Creating an observatory of global best practices and or cooperation with existing policy observatories and repositories on digital best practice.
     Examining whether educational curricula should include greater coverage of internet security, safety and governance and architecture depending on the educational or training level.  Bringing together experts with the aim of establishing collaboration.  Afreement of how to disseminate -- agreement how to disseminate and promote the outcomes of the working group taking into account national and regional differences.  Wider adoption for the internet security and skills through their inclusion in national ICT programs and provision of guidance for vocational training programs to include internet standards and ICT best practices.
     It was agreed in our stakeholder consultations held prior to the IGF that this working group should focus not only on the wider public -- should not focus on why the public awareness -- wider public awareness raising for which many diverse programs already exist.  The working group will consider its work successful if global best practices have been collated a and the main outcomes have been communicated to relevant organizations.  Ministries of education, universities and schools through national programs.  In addition, it has been suggestd that this working group should be represented at events where ICT education issues are discussed and that might convene its own session or workshop at a future IGF.
     Thank you and please don't hesitate with your questions.  Or clarifications.
     >> MARK CARVELL: Thank you, Janice.  And if anybody has not any quick points of clarification, I will just check.  I'm not very good at multitasking on the screen here.  But do we have anything?  I'm sure these issues will crop up in the main discussion that is going to involve everybody that is coming up shortly.
     Okay.  If there aren't any quick points of clarification let's move on then to the third working group, it has been decided to establish on procurement and supply chain management.  And the business case.
     And for this working group, we are very privileged to have joining us from Mexico, professor Alejando Pisanty who is at UNAM in Mexico city.  Over to you, Alejandro, to talk through the aims and projected outcomes of this working group.  Over the next year or so.  Thank you.  Alejandro.
     >> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: Thank you.  I am Alejando Pisanty, profession professor of the national university of Mexico.  I would like to say that standards there are so many of them.  A country like mine which has a very strong internet from the United States industry as well as now imports of factories of Japanese and European automobiles, of course, leads to the situation presented in this cartoon which says there are 14 competing standards so we develop one global standard that, of course, everyone else use cases and we have 15 competing stand cards.  And naturally this cartoon has been further developed where now one standard and 15 competing certifications and so forth.  This is one thing we surely suffer.
     And another thing that motivated to come into this is things like this tool kit.  When you try to buy a tool kit for a workshop or for your car in Mexico you make sure that you have both millimeter and imperial measures.  You don't know if you are going to need a 5/16 or 8-millimeter.  You normally will have a Japanese car with millimeter screws over and then the wheels will have an English measure so you need something in inches.  That motivates me to move into the standards and also to be skeptical when you talk about them.
     What we have here is also another set of tools.  And great interest in the last weeks.  And then to find it a great hopper in being in the company of all friends like Wout and Mark Carvell and the leaders in ISOC.  I have been involved in the global partnership for artificial intelligence which is a multinational effort delegated by my government in the economic sector.  And people are trying to establish norms and ethical norms and standards for the ethical use of artificial intelligence to achieve goals like avoiding bias that comes from the algorithm itself, the bias from the data and so forth.  The concern there will lead to written up is how to make sure these things are actually implemented.  You have all these rules and no one is reading them when writing software for your data purchasing systems and putting them in.  It is as good as useless that you have these beautiful standards like you have when you have the mission statement for the company based on the laws that says excel in our methods with integrity and you have a corrupt salesman trying to bribe someone.  I mean it is useless there.
     So the point of our working group is to look at the procurement and supply chain management aspects of establishing and acceptance of standards and compliance.  This working group three was I'm grateful to have been part of it.  One of the major conclusions in the report on the pilot project is that the business case for the development of security related standards is largely absent.  In my understanding also, security related standards are not only directly designated for security but things that increase the security may also be just pure standard come ployance so people know what is going on, like the technical standards.  The report also considered how government procurement of information and communication technologies devices and services can be a driver for deploying these standards.  This is because governments can play a decisive role not only as legislators but also as a very large customer.  The government becomes normative in a market when this is a very large customer and very strict rules and maybe it also puts rules on the suppliers on the things they purchase and install.  And so we have examples like the apply or explain procurement advice in the Dutch formalization.  In effect public sector administrations with purchasing power access to capital in the markets and more secure device and networks and digital services generally and these can have an effect in the market.  The pilot project suggests that the driver of standard deployment also applies at the large corporate level.  Large corporations think of for example ISPs and network operators for ICTs, think cloud suppliers and people providing services on top of that like video streaming or E-government services they can also help by the ripple effect of in fact making it harder for suppliers to be sellingthon compliant equipment because there is less of a market for it.
     And this creates a competitive edge as well for the adopters of the more security enhancing standards.
     Stakeholders who expressed interest in contributing to the work of this Dynamic Coalition makes for the discussion a few months ago, a now days ago, they expressed support for this in particular for this working group program the purchasing and procurement and supply chain management business case.  For also including this wider private sector supply chain management issue.  This is a very important issue in some countries which are acquiring lots of mission or security or national security critical equipment or software or services and they are concerned that there are leaks or gaps in the supply chain.
     What we envision as initial goals will evolve as we start working and increase our membership.  The principle of the work are envisioned to be guidelines.  One be a set of comprehensive practical guidance issues on incorporating relevant and optimal security standards with clear expositions in what is required in terms of security and examples of standards to be referenced in this guidance.
     And there will be a compilation of best practice guidelines supported by a set of recommendations that will enable purchasers to make better decisions.  And we wish to promote a framework approach.
     It is not only a compilation and not ground rules but more fine works that allow for people to establish more detailed guidelines within national environments or large corporate environments that are still meaningful for interaxe with others.  The idea here being is to reTuesday the major practice that where you have to buy two sets of screw drivers or wrenches in each country because you may have to have nuts and bolts and you never know which you have.  Much worse in the ICT case.  The need to address knowledge gaps and inconsistents in procurement practice at the international level is discussed and we discussd that the industry is highly influential particularly in developing countries.  And if you don't have a national standard countries will refuse to adopt it as a mandatory for strongly guideline for purchasing because it will be dependent on a foreign vendor.  We have to get together with the outreach group to make sure that people understand at the most basic level at well as at the detailed standards level.  And it will be important to keep in mind the upper most in mind the interests and immediates of end users.  How all of the supply chain and procurement which takes place in government or large corporations impacts the final user and individual user and here continuing the fact as mentioned that purchasing at the individual level sometimes is completely ignorant of standards and completely oblivious or agnostic by standards.  The IoT case, for example, the surveillance cameras, the facility cameras which are highly insecure o and they come from under the radar of authorities by imported informally through E-commerce.  And also suggested and this will be considered and this is also in the process look at the whether the liabilities can help enforce the adoption of standards whether someone in government is purchasing something that is not compliant with a known standard and therefore weakens the security and doesn't strengthen security as well as it could then it is called neglect and liabilities by public officials in many countries and subsequently prosecuted.  And in the case of a product company it can lead to civil liabilities or commercial liabilities in the sense that they are causing damage by not preventing it enough and the fear of a loss of both as well increase compliance.  There will be here some more extensive work proposed based on the work that has been done on privacy how Germany and the USSR similar standards of privacies by having completely different approaches and because in both cases there is a board liability concern.  In one case because of the law in Germany.  And another case in the U.S. because of a data breach for example can bring down the share value of a company.  So so these approaches will be considered in our Dynamic Coalition.
     It is therefore underlining the need for all types of stakeholders to come together and I'm calling you all to help us achieve these calls to help us be able to diffuse the work and December Sim Nate the need for standards and compliance and realistic standard.  Spread the word.  They will be endowed with documents and with practices that will help them intervene and shape policies in the countries and, of course, to businesses which are either in the selling or the purchasing side to help shape the work coming forward.  The first meeting of this working group three on purchasing and supply chain will be on November 27 and we will have announcements for that.  I hope you all are able to come together here.  Thank you very much.
     >> MARK CARVELL: Thank you for.
     >> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: And thank you for supplying the well shaped document whatever was in it was my reading and not your writing.
     >> MARK CARVELL: Okay.  Well, you embellished the presentation with the Amazing illustrations of a huge heavy tool kit.  I can't imagine doing DIY with that.  Anyway, thanks very much, that was great.  And we are getting -- we are starting to run out of time so we better hand straight over to Wout to moderate some open discussion with all of the participants who are with us today.  So Wout, I will happened it over to you now.
     >> MODERATOR: Yes.  Thank you, Mark.  And we are running out of time.  Only eight minutes left.  As I had feared up front, we had enough to hold three sessions on all three topics and probably would have filled one and a half hour easily.  And there were some questions in the Q&A which have been answered.  And there a also some comments in the chat.  Marten, have you identified that we have time for only one if there is really something sticking out that needs to be discussed.  Otherwise, I suggest that I move into the closing remarks because we are getting very close to our time limit.
     >> MARTEN PORTE: As far as I know, there have not been questions that have not been answered.  Or any comments that would -- now there is one question in the Q&A.  I believe.  Oh, you already answered that.
     >> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: And also expressed interest in the working group and I'm sending her my e-mail to bring her in.  You are very welcome, Lori.
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Great to here.  Wout, we cannot hear you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, marten.  I was on mute.  Lori and all others, if you go to the IGF website for the Dynamic Coalition on internet standards you can see that you can register for an e-mail address and that way you are formally a member or even informally if you just want to observe a member of the DC and that way you can start participating in the working groups.  There is a little overview in the chat when the first meetings are going to be convened that will decide on the way forward.
     I will move into the final section and what is called the closing eE. remarks.  You may ask yourself how does this important multiH. stakeholder initiative continue?  Pointed to the IGF website there is an indication of the program of a time line.  Two, perhaps three year program leading towards policy recommendations and guidelines with the inclusion of internet security in educational curricula and developing training programs and the possible establishment of an observatory or repository of best practices relating to security by design and procurement and supply chain management security.  The next stage are the three meetings.  This is an invitation to join.  Without your expertise and knowledge and without perhaps even the liaison function to introduce us to the right people or perhaps that you are able to introduce us to pivotal people who can make decisions on the way forward or introduce people that have that position is extremely important.  So not only to content is important but also the building of the network is going to be extremely important to have a chance of success.
     This DC is also to chair the in search of a volunteer to chair the working groups.  And that will be decided on the working groups but if you have interest to become a chair of one of the working groups please identify yourself in the working groups so that can be discussed.
     To provide the support of the complex issue like faster deployment of internet standards and ICT best practices this deserves funding.  It is necessary.  Ital ensure the smooth continuation of the Dynamic Coalition and the working groups.  And we do not ask this lightly but what makes it so important?
     What we foresee is that there is going to be some sort of a secretariat function that will provide the support to the working groups and the experts.  And provide that secretariat and make sure that the smooth continuation a guaranteed to do research analysis to help write or cowrite proposals and build and expand the network which is not going to besting do easily and Liase and coordinate and organize meetings, preparations, sessions, to give presentations outside of the DC and make sure that people can give those presentations.  O organize train sessions or assist.  And what else is needed to make this a successful Dynamic Coalition.  We ask some of you present here to consider funding the DC ISSS to ensure that the goals can be made and work starts happening pretty soon.  Let me take a step back and effect where we are now.  How did we get here?
     It is only in last Muarch that the IGF pilot project produced a report that provided the conclusions and recommendations that we are discussing today and we have taken further major strides forward in this issue.
     Once more showing that working under the aegis of the IGF can actually successfully aim for.  We are now at the o point where the work program has been established and a diverse range of stakeholders are engaging in the three working groups presented on and that is a broad section of the internet community.  We have big tech onboard.  We have academia onboard.  Civil Society on board.  Governance on board.  We have regulators on board.  We have the technical community on board.  So in other word, maybe I'm forgetting a few and I apologize but we can see that the interest of on this topic is wide and is going to bring in the right sort of knowledge that an expertise that we need.  So what do we aim for next?  And what do we need to aim for?  The bull lies to talk to the soccer analogy and the rest of the world sometimes called football, but the goal now it in front of us and will you help us kick the ball into the net because that is what we need to do.  Please reach out to us for to discuss the funding options because we have the ability and the possibility to actually aim for these goals.  We are at the end of the eobjection and I thank those participating actively and asking questions and make comments in the workshop.  First I would like to thank you the presenters setting the stage and the three volunteers from the DC ISSSS working groups to present on where we are and the challenges we face are.
     And hanks to the Swiss Federal Ministry of foreign affairs for the support in making the inaugural session and workshop earlier this week of the Dynamic Coalition possible.  A big thank you to the participants in the preparatory workshops that made it possible to present thish erinitial proposals we presented on today.  Without you we would have only have a concept and now we have content.  We wish you a good virtual IGF and I hope to meet on this Dynamic Coalition and on all of the toppings next year because I sincerely hope that we will be able to convene next year and I hope to meet you again.  And in the DC ISSS and work with you on these topics to bring the goal of deployment closer than where we are today because the internet really needs to become more secure.
     So with that, I end the session.  And I wish you all good health and hopefully see you soon.  Bye bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-5-dc-accessibility-closing-the-gap^^

   >> GERRY ELLIS: Let's go then.  Good morning, good evening, good afternoon, good night from wherever you are in the world from Gerry Ellis here in Dublin, Ireland.  Welcome to the DCAD Session at IGF 2020, our strange world of 2020 where everything is virtual.  We're going to jump over to Judith Hellerstein who will quickly tell us who is here and then have a few words to say.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  This is Judith Hellerstein for the record.  Thank you so much, Gerry.  We would love to be in Dublin drinking sider and we would love to be in Poland, but it is not to be.
We have today 27 attendees and then an additional 17 who are panelists, which includes our international sign language interpreters, and then one of our panelists also has their own interpreter.  So welcome, everyone.
We don't have time, because of the large number of attendees to call them all out, but we'll record all the names and they'll be in our records.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Thank you for that.  We'll have that list and we'll post it at a later date.  Today is an important day.  It's the DCAD's 14th Session, 14th IGF as far as I know.  I was at one back as far as 2009 but there was one at least before that, so it's been going on a long time.  We kept that pressure up.  The IGF stands for the Internet Governance Forum.  We all know what the Internet is, but of course we're also talking about the services and applications that are on the Internet, and we're also talking about the tools for building and using the Internet, so it's not just the Internet itself but it's all things about and around the Internet.  Governance is not just about international legislation, it's not just about the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and it is about all issues that give equitable access to the Internet, its products, and its services to everyone, and that's what we are here as a group, the Dynamic Coalition for Accessibility and Disability to promote and push as hard as we can.  
Without any ado, I would like to just get going and get this thing started because we're not here to listen to me, so we're here to -- we're here to hear you talk.  So first, I'm going to hand it over to Gunela in Australia that will tell us about some steps that allowed other people to join who may not have always been able to.  Gunela.
   >> GUNELA ASTBRINK:  Thank you very much, Gerry.  Thank you for taking on the facilitation of this DCAD meeting today.  I'm delighted to be part of it and to be speaking with you, and in particular about the DCAD IGF Participation Support Grants, and this is thank you very much to Vint Cerf and Google who has helped support DCAD to help increase the voice and participation of persons with disabilities at the IGF, and our selection committee has found people from Fiji, Uganda, Kenya, and also a group from Haiti who are here with us participating as a hub, and we are delighted to have you and to participate not only in this session but in many other workshops and sessions at the IGF.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you, Gunela.  Now we get into the drink of the meeting.  We've got a very, very full agenda, and you'll find the people have only four or five minutes to speak.  All speakers are going to hate me by the end of the day because I'm going to have to be tyrannical about the time to ensure that people at the end have a fair amount of time.  So, let's get straight into it without any more ado.  So, what we want to know is about the experience by people with disabilities of online meetings, how have they found it, how have they found the technology, how have they found all the support systems and whatever.  We have three different speakers coming from different approaches.  First is Paulina Lewandowska, so Paulina, straight over to you.
   >> PAULINA LEWANDOWSKA:  Hello, everyone.  I am Paulina from Poland, and actually, I am PhD student in pedagogy.  So, I am a student and have different experiences in online learning because I can see both sides of online learning as positive and negative ones.  First of all, I would like to say that, I can say that we have two kinds of challenges and difficulties.  The first one is a challenge with the difficulties to get full access to the content on the lessons of the classes because when we have online classes, we need to use very fast platforms that were not adjusted to the online classes, so the problem was that sometimes teachers and students, they didn't have a good quality video and possibilities to speak clearly into microphones because we didn't have any good quality devices to attend to these kind of classes, and it was a huge problem because of this situation we had to participate in the classes with our videos.  I had to be in person, so I need to use both a visual and audio session of understanding the classes, so sometimes I use -- sometimes I use really only hearing perception because it was not possible for me to see my teachers or to see students, but I had to discuss with my colleagues, with my teachers how they should communicate with me.  
But I also see the positive image of the online class because it was very wonderful to hear directly into my hearing aids by using my iPhone, so I needed to buy an iPhone to use to understand the classes.  And it is the expenses that it was very, very hard to manage.  
But to conclude, we need to know that there are both sides to distance learning, and also, we need to think that also people without any disabilities have also problems with understanding classes because of their not good quality devices or Internet connections.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Is that it, Paulina?  
   >> PAULINA LEWANDOWSKA:  I think it was four minutes.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Perfect.  Thank you very much for keeping to your time.  I really appreciate that.  We've got our next speaker who will be using a sign language interpreter so we've allocated we're going very generous.  Petra Rezar, maybe could you give us your experience, please.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Petra?
>> I'm not sure what happened to her.  I tried to reach her on WhatsApp also.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Let's skip to Muhammad and when he is finished, maybe we can get Petra back.  Muhammad, would you like to give us input from a visual impaired point of view?  Four minutes.  Can you give us Muhammad?
>> Muhammad needs to unmute if he hasn't unmuted.
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  Am I audible now?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Yes.  Thank you, Muhammad.
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  Yes.  Thank you very much.  For the record this is Muhammad Shabbir Awan, and welcome everybody from Pakistan and greetings everywhere.  Yes, indeed, we are all living in strange times, and these times and the online IGF, this represents our case very well that all online spaces need to be accessible for everyone, regardless of disability or any other conditions that people may have.
Talking about the experience as a visually impaired of all of these 9 or 10 months.  These 9 months have been very crazy, eye opening, as well as an opportunity to learn more things.  Many of the applications and online platforms that I had not used earlier, I got to experience.  For instance, Google Meet and Teams and all of that stuff.
As a visually impaired, there were a number of challenges with different platforms.  On some platforms, as a participant with vision impairment, it was difficult, for instance, with Teams to raise hands.  It was difficult with Google Meet to raise hands, to unmute one's self as well.  And similarly, there were also experiences and not good ones.  The experiences were of different institutions neglecting the needs of the accessibility for persons with disabilities.  For instance, some institutions or organizations would prefer the platforms which were freely available, number one, or they would prefer the tools their people were used to using, the tools in their institutions.  Some institutions were not willing to learn accessible tools to make their online meetings accessible, so this created a sort of negative impression, I should say.
On the other hand, not everything was bad.  Yes, these were challenging times.  These were the times that tested the patience and limits of everyone, but in these times as a person with visual impairment who feels a bit reluctant to move around in the world, it was easier to work from home.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  30 seconds.
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  Yes.  Not always, but yes, it was difficult sometimes.  But at the same time, you cannot have everything and anything at your homes, so at the end of the day, I would say the COVID-19 got the world surprised, it caught us off guard, but I think the experiences that we are getting from these challenges should be enough to motivate the policymakers, the planners to state that accessibility is not just the need of 10 or 15 percent of the population on this earth.  This can be a need of everyone.  Thank you very much.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you, Muhammad.  Have we got Petra back?
>> Damjan will start although he's still not on camera.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  While Petra is getting ready, I'll give you a quick tip from a blind person.  If you're in Zoom and you want to raise your hand, just hold the Alt Key and hit the letter Y so you don't have to hunt around looking for it.  It's so quick and easy.
So, when Petra is finished, we're going to have a general discussion.  So, raise your hand if you want to get in and our online moderators will try to keep tabs on who is trying to get in.  Petra, how are you getting on this?
   >> DAMJAN SEBJAN:  From 14 communities, and I'm now present, and now because of corona time, Deaf couldn't communicate so Zoom was the solution that we started to use worldwide.  I took on the organization to interpret to different countries, certain countries all over the world, and I was sort of a moderator and I was interpreting everything else, and everybody was very happy with it.  They were checking it on Facebook, on YouTube, and everywhere.  So, the question is maybe, why?  For four years we had a conference that I was going there and I managed to contact different presidents, but a lot of Deaf couldn't join because of financial state, so now because of Zoom it was possible.
The minus of the Zoom, so the negative things here are that the videos are very small, so something like that would be interesting that you could select different countries and have interpreter and speaker at the same time on the screen.  That's what I would like to have as a support.  And also, of course, monthly cost is quite a problem, and so some Deaf all over the world have struggled because of that, and because of lack of communication.  So now I think Petra will take over.  Thank you right now.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  3 more minutes, Petra, you've got a bit of extra time.
   >> PETRA REZAR:  Could I please use the screen share?  One moment.  Greet.  Thank you.
>> So, the video will be very short like five seconds or so.
>> You were doing it before.  Oh, now it's back.
   >> PETRA REZAR:  Okay.  So, there are 25,000 viewers with different languages, so we would really like support to have more and more Deaf viewers.  Okay.  Thank you.  That's it.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Thank you, Petra.  Thank you for staying within time.  Now let's jump, with our short time, or we can discuss what we've heard or your own experiences of online use of online tools as well.  So, Judith, have we got any hands up?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  I do not.  I do not see any.  So, if people want to raise their hand, we can actually get them -- allow them to speak or they can post it into the chat or the Q&A Pod.  So, the Q&A Pod is either at the bottom of the screen or at the top of the screen if you're on a mobile.  And so far, we have no questions, but if people want to post any questionings, they can about the speakers.  We'll have after that; we'll have a talk about virtual meetings.  But if anyone wants to do it, you're welcome.
Oh, Peter, yes, you can make a brief comment.  Thank you.
   >> PETER CROSBIE:  Yeah.  I was just going to say in terms of distance learning and accessibility in the disability community that one of the things we have to take into account is, basically, children, so people who are under 18.  Because if you look at the numbers of disabled people who are children, so up to 18, the vast majority of them are people with disabilities, cognitive, I'm Autistic, so I'm born Autistic and in the American figures that I've seen, there are more people with cognitive disabilities as children than all other disabilities combined.  In fact, there is almost double the amount, so we tend to be there from birth and then right through, and then later on of course other disabilities that are more age-related coming to -- come into play.  
But, basically, accessibility in terms of disabilities in children, kids with cognitive disabilities are being disproportionately having difficulties.  That's all I was going to say.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you, Peter.  
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Thank you.  We have a question in the chat.  Oh, good.  Questions are now coming into the Q&A pod.  The question is to Paulina.  In online classes, do Polish students get access to live captioning to support their participation?
   >> PAULINA LEWANDOWSKA:  No.  We don't have because mostly students have to think about the captions and not teachers.  It's mostly, and thus there is a percentage of teachers that are thinking about accessibility for people with hearing loss, but mostly the students need to think.  And I am a member of the Polish organization and I can say that students and their parents are trying to contact us with their questions of how to get access to the online classes because even they don't understand the lessons.  So, we need to prepare a short list of access that are free and access to platforms that can be used during classes, and so unfortunately, we don't have, and because Zoom or maybe Google Meet or maybe Teams, they don't provide with a good quality captions.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  So, I'm sorry for cutting it off.  Again, to give other people a chance, can I ask you, Judith, are there other questions there?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes, there are.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you, Paulina.
   >> PAULINA LEWANDOWSKA:  Thank you.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  So, we have a question.  It's a feedback for Peter.  Andy Heath would like if Peter could clarify what he mentioned.
   >> PETER CROSBIE:  Yeah.  I just read something in the chat.  It's basically kids with cognitive disabilities, around 4.5% of the population, and I haven't written this down, this is what I remember.  Whereas most other disabilities in children, so under 18, is in the range of half a percent, .6 or .7, so cognitive disabilities, also, then that tends to stay more or less stable until much later in life when you start to get a lot more people with dementia and so on, but this 4.5% is more or less stable from childhood right through adulthood, whereas other disabilities, of course, increases through adulthood.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Thank you.  We have another question from Amalia and she wants to know has the take up of speech recognition technology increased with the use -- or during the pandemic?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Who would like to take that on?  I can tell you myself, Gerry here, that speech recognition has always been actually quite good, but one of the things that is quite recent is the automatic production of captions, so instead of having a person captioning, you have artificial intelligence trying to interpret what's being said and producing captions at the same time.  I think it's fair to say that that technology is still in its infancy.  It's probably not good enough, we'll say for Deaf people or people that are hard of hearing, but it is getting better.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Thank you.  We have another question from Sylvia from the MAG member also from the APNIC Foundation and she wants to know if there has been any response from the companies manufacturing these tools to incorporate the features that we have identified?  Who will take that on?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Again, who would like to take that one?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  And if others, if maybe Shadi has an answer to that, we're happy to have him answer as well, he might know more about that than we do.
   >> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:  Hi, Judith and Gerry.  I don't have any hard evidence or specific information on this question, but I do think there has been quite at least awareness raising, subjectively, my own impression is that there has been quite some movement toward accessibility on some of the online teleconference tool providers.  My guess is that because it is being increasingly used in education and business in countries where there are accessibility requirements, and that this is having an international impact and benefit.  But I think it's still very spotty and different tools provide different advantages, but I think more tools now provide some sort of captioning support than it was maybe a year or two ago.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Thank you so much.  We have no more questions.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Well, we are approximately -- how far are we now?  Okay.  So, if we want to move on then, is there anyone else that wants to make a comment?  We have about two or three minutes left if somebody wants to make a last comment?
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  Yes, Gerry.  This is Muhammad.  Just adding to what Shadi has highlighted, there has been a lot of emphasis on online meetings since the pandemic started, so the organizations and institutions have come up with a lot of instructions and guidelines to make the online meetings accessible.  So, in a way, I know it's somewhat selfish, but I would say the pandemic has made human people or humans realize the need and the significance of accessibility of all of these online meetings.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  And I would add one comment that one of the driving themes -- one of the driving articles, if you want to use that word, that's driving accessibility is our international standards and international legislation, not just the UN Convention, but also I'm familiar with Europe where there is now a European Directive on axe access to public websites where there is a new one coming up now which is on accessible transport.  There is one on accessibility of technology.  So that's doing two things.  One, it's setting the standards that people can follow because up until now, you find that people even if they want to do or make themself accessible, maybe they don't know how.  So, a lot of these standards and technical documents behind them are helping companies to do it.  But the other thing is that governments are beginning to adopt these standards and build them into legislation, so if it a government makes -- or demands that a technology is accessible, then the technology is accessible for all.  So, the movement, again, is in the right direction, but again, we still have a long way to go.
Okay.  Enough from me again.  So, can we move on, please?
We always look at accessibility of the IGF itself.  It's always part of the DCAD session, and I think it's a very useful thing to do.  Accessibility, I think has improved, but there are some areas that maybe it hasn't.  So, let's try to look at the accessibility of the IGF itself.  What I want to do here is in chronological order, in a sense, so let's start at registration and the website.  Let's start at accessibility to this meeting, and then talk about accessibility to other meetings that we've been at.  Does anyone want to comment about registration and just the IGF website to start?  We have about 15 minutes on this.
Remember to raise your hand to answer questions or use the chat box, we have all of those options.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  This is Judith.  We do have a question not necessarily about this.  It's not about IGF but about other meetings and Andy Heath talks about the effect on bandwidth when you have so many videos on at the same time.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Can you let Andy in to ask his question?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Sure.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Can you unmute Andy?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Hold on a minute.  I have to get Andy in.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Just talking about standards a minute ago and Andy is a great man for standards, a very, very great advocate.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Hold on a minute.  Oh, someone got him.  That's good.  Andy, are you allowed to talk?
>> ANDY:  Gerry is right.  Hi, Gerry, I work on a number of standards.  I'm also running a number of Zoom calls for various groups, and you know, we've been playing with what we can do.  And also what we can do, you may not know, for the first time in my experience, Microsoft has beaten Apple to the accessibility table on this because in Office 365, PowerPoint, there is live captioning, which you have to be online to generate it, but you know when you're doing a Zoom presentation you can generate it.
Now, it seems to work pretty well.  I kind of suspect it's Otter behind the scenes that's doing it, but of course Microsoft doesn't tell you that.  But I tried it in a large group, and we had 90 plus participants, and they all had had the videos on.  And basically, at that level it didn't work at all.  It was completely, completely hopeless to the point where I've decided a practice to get around that next time, is to ask people to switch their videos off during presentations in order to improve the quality of the live captioning.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Andy, could you bring your experience to this meeting, to the IGF?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Well, I can answer that for you.  So at this meeting in the IGF, if we are in meeting mode and a lot of people have their cameras on, even in Zoom the bandwidth goes up significantly, and this is also another reason why IGF has a YouTube running at the same time because YouTube compresses the videos, and so for people with low bandwidth, they can see it.  YouTube will also lower the quality of the video, so the bandwidth can be seen, so that you have low bandwidth, so that is what YouTube is doing.
And Teams, Teams uses machine captioning for everything.  The higher versions of Zoom do have the Otter Live and also you could buy it, itself, the business version and you could have that too going all the time.  Although as a business version, one of the few companies that has a specific nonprofit rate that is 50% of the regular rate because unlike a lot of companies who don't have nonprofit rates or make you go through a corporation so that you have to join another membership, they don't.  So, there is a lot of other different things going on.
>> ANDY:  Is that Otter?  I do it with other accounts.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes.  Otter has nonprofit rate of the business that is only $120 a year.
>> ANDY:  $120, that's the standard rate, it's kind of a --
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  It's $240.  It's $240.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Can I just say we're going a bit off our track here, so can we try to bring this back to IGF.  So maybe a recommendation or a thought which I wonder what the meeting would agree with here.  Because captions and because sign language interpreters can't be slowed down and can't operate if their bandwidth is being broken up because there are too many people at a meeting, is there a way that IGF can prioritize the access for accessibility services like sign language interpreters or captioners?  Is that something that we can bring to IGF?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  I think we could have Luis, is this something that we could bring?  We have to ask our technical people.  Luis is, is this something that is possible in IGF?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  It's something that we as a group can bring.
>> LUIS:  I'm sorry, I was in two meetings in parallel.  I'm sorry, if you could repeat the last part of the question.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  So, the question is, is there a way of prioritizing bandwidth for the sign language interpreters or the other people that need to speak, or is it -- is there not a way?
>> LUIS:  Yeah.  Actually, we're doing that.  We're protecting the bandwidth for the video of the sign interpreter.  This is also, we have a spotlight now for all the audience, which is like the speaker and the sign interpreter which is, in fact, being streamed to the YouTube signal.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay
>> ANDY:  One last point, Gerry.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Can I just ask, Judith, is there anyone else trying to get in?  Andy, with all respect, can we let someone else in and if we have time at the end, I'll come back to you.  Is that okay?  Okay.
>> ANDY:  That's okay.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  So, Judith.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  We have a question but it's not on this issue, but I do have a couple of things that were brought to my attention prior to this by our DCAD Members, and that is that the Pre-IGF events that used to be on Day 0 and now are during this week do not have captioning, and this was not -- I think it was a communication issue, is that people assume since all the IGF events have captioning that the events during this week that were not the Dynamic Coalition, not the Best Practice, and not one of the other main IGF events, if they were classified of Pre-IGF, they would not have captioning, and I think if we do another virtual one, that needs to be discuss and that any event held at the IGF should not -- should have equal access.  That's one issue I thought.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  So, can we take it that is a recommendation from our group that all of those should get accessibility services.  That's fine.  Okay.  Judith, second one?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  There is a question where he's looking for advice and strategies from employees in order to have fairness and consideration for the integration to discussion spaces, but that will be for Q&A at a different time.  It's not about this topic.  But we will try to get the answers for you after the panel in writing to you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Yeah.  Or if we have time in Q&A at the end we might.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  We do have a question.  We have one more question, Gerry.  Lidia Best asks, is there a way, now that we have human captioning in English, is there also a way to showcase a machine or captioning in a language that is not in English?  So that is her question.
And then I guess the other thought is that there are different sessions at this IGF that are looking at that topic itself on extinct languages, so I would look for that session.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  I think Lidia's question is not necessarily about extinct translations, but maybe just being able to translate captions.  Maybe Petra might know because Petra works in more than one language.  Would Petra be able to comment?  I think we may have difficulty.  I don't know if Petra is still there or not.  The other people that may be able to comment are the ITU who do standards and have various people from around the world.  Is there somebody from ITU that might want to comment about multilingual captions or translation of captions and that sort of stuff?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  I can actually answer about that.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  All right.  Go ahead.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  So, for automated captioning, there are different services that you could use to do that, and that you could actually, there is a company called Streamer Solutions and there are other different chats that have automated captioning that can do it.  What Stream was supposed to be doing is they use the Google translation engine, and if you sign on to their web page and create your account, you could have it -- you could have the captioning or the voice be machine translated for you into whatever language that you set.
Now, what we don't -- what we can't tell you is whether the captioning or the translation will be accurate because it's a machine.  It's not a human.  Shabbir would also like to answer a question.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  I would like to put it to Shabbir as well, but Judith could you put the name of the company into the chat box, please.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Sure.  I will do that.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Shabbir, shoot.
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  Yes, Gerry, actually I have a comment about the accessibility of IGF, the topic we are currently talking about.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Excellent.
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  So, I was looking at the schedule and the interactive schedule that we have online, and the version that we have in HTML where we can use that schedule to add sessions to personal calendar, I found the previous version, the version that was during 2019 IGF, more accessible than the current one.  Why I say so?  Because at that time I could see all of the sessions of the whole IGF on one page and I could jump by day and by session.  Because all the sessions were properly itemized using the heading levels, the different levels of headings.
This year we can see the whole schedule on one page, but I could not find the headings.  Probably this might be my lack of understanding or something, but I feel that there was not the use of headings was not properly used to organize schedule, and had this been used by IGF, the schedule could have been more easier to navigate for persons with screen readers or anyone else as well.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  I would agree with that, Shabbir, and I would say the system that they had for filtering between data and inclusion and so on was quite inaccessible as well.  But in general, the timetable I thought was good.  We have about a minute left.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Gerry we have one question from Joly MacFie.  Hold on a minute.  I have to get him.
>> JOLY MACFIE:  I should be good.  I just wanted to say about translation that StreamText has a function where you can enable Google Translate within StreamText and it just costs money, but if you want to you could office it from Caption First and it just means that you could then go to StreamText to the page and get a drop-down that gives you another language.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Luis, can I ask you are we capturing what's going into the chat box?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes, we are.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Joly, could I ask you to put a comment into the chat box and it will be captured there.  Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to move on because we're behind on schedule, unusual for a meeting like this, and I'm delighted at that so I want to try to keep it on schedule.  So, I'm going to move on and thank you for that discussion because it roamed far and wide and I thought it was very good.
So, Gunela, you want to tell us about a best practice form for accessibility?  What is one of them and how does it work?  Please?
   >> GUNELA ASTBRINK:  Thank you very much, Gerry.  Fantastic that we're right on time.  So, yes, the IGF has a number of best practice forums that are co-sponsored by the MAG, the Multistakeholder Advisory Group.  I'm a member of that, and they have been operating for a number of years.  So, one example is the best practice on gender, and we have Sylvia here as well who is a MAG member as well, and she has been working on a proposal for environmental data governance and a proposal for a best practice forum on that.  She also has a lot of experience having been on the MAG for three years now, and I'm going to ask her to speak in a minute, but the idea is to consider that DCAD could put in a proposal for a best practice forum on accessibility.  And what that means is that we've just heard about all the different issues relating to accessibility of the schedule, the website for IGF, and we want to work proactively with IGF now that there will be the development of a new website to act as a model for how to engage a person with a disability to work together with a team in the web content development, and also to base that on the current UN Disability Inclusion Strategy, so we do have the existing policies, and it's really a matter of how the IGF could be a model for developing accessible online tools for persons with disabilities, and that could be used by other UN agencies.  So, there is a lot of considerations here, and we are interested in comments about that and maybe getting support on how to move forward.
But I will ask I Sylvia to speak about her experiences of best practice forums in the IGF to give us that background.  So, thank you, Sylvia.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Sylvia, six minutes.  Okay.
>> SYLVIA:  Thank you, Gunela.  When I joined the IGF three years ago as a MAG Member, there was a conversation that started about how the best practice forums that are currently happening at the IGF as intersessional activities had a term or how they were approved to continue or were selected, because as you know the BPFs and dynamic coalitions, as they grow, they require support from the IGF Secretariat and especially during the face-to-face meetings, the allocation of time and resources to support their meetings into the agenda.  Right.
So there, you know, to be inclusive of all the topics and other groups that want to bring new issues to the IGF, there was a process that started in to kind of draft some guidelines about how to bring new BPFs into new intersessional work into the IGF, and how that work can be linked to the activities and the outcomes that the IGF is doing.
So, there is at the moment a BPF, own BPF, there is a session happening in the next few days.  I will find the link and send it to you later so that you can join that one where the guidelines in the new process that say it's going to be introduced and gather some input.  And the incoming MAG will be in the process of approving -- reviewing those guidelines and approving them for adoption.  So, taking advantage of those new guidelines to be developed, we started a process to structure a BPF on environmental data governance as Gunela mentioned, in trying to stick to those guidelines as much as possible to make it easy for the MAG to approve it for next year, and hopefully that will happen.  So, we'll see how that one goes.
So my recommendation to this Dynamic Coalition and those interested in working around a BPF in how to link that to the new IGF website is to first start by discusses the initial guidelines that are currently under review that have not been yet adopted by the MAG to see what you see in those guidelines that might prevent your idea to move forward so that those recommendations can be made before the guidelines are approved.  The MAG is incredibly supportive of being more inclusive in finding an opportunity to discuss with the local hosts how to incorporate these technology, and that is why also I asked the question about what companies are doing to respond to the requirements that you have identified, especially during this crazy COVID times where all of the digital transformation process was kind of pushed a lot faster.
So, I guess the discussion that you're having and the clear and concrete recommendations that your group is coming up with, can be you know, discussed by the MAG.  You have a fantastic advocate with Gunela in the MAG dealing with this and highlighting in every single step how important the accessibility is, and also support from the MAG Chair that is absolutely supportive of this effort, and so I think that there is a level of maturity, let's say, both in technology, and also in how these things come together, and hopefully that will be possible.  The funding for the design of the website is in a grant from the UK Government and they do have accessibility requirements in mind so that is also another strategy.
The part that I'm not that sure is if -- is because the BFPs are, you know, looking at best practices and discuss best practices from a variety of organizations during a period of time, let's say, if they approve the two-year term, it's to analyze what's going on in that period and kind of have a picture, let's say, of how that looks in time.  Right.  I don't know if that analysis and that review might be in time for the design of the IGF website.  So maybe one thing that -- one alternative that I'm not sure how it can work, could be to do that BPF in that proposal but complemented by trying to organize a working group as part of the MAG and work more closely with the Secretariat in this design.  Thank you very much for your time and for giving me a minute to share my experiences.  I'm in awe by seeing the interpreters and all the hurdles that you guys have to jump to be able to participate, and I am very humbled by this experience and I promise to do my best to make the work that we do at the APNIC foundation more inclusive as well.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you, Sylvia.  Can I ask you a quick question before you go?  Can we -- can we circulate the draft guidelines freely amongst the DCAD and other people for comments?
>> SYLVIA:  Yes.  The guidelines are on the IGF website so give me a few minutes and I will post them in the chat as soon as I finish talking.  I can't do two things at the same time.  (Laughing).
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  We will circulate those at a later date.  Thank you, Gunela, and thank you, Sylvia, that's really interesting and particularly that the website is going to have a particular emphasis on accessibility.  We've been looking for that for years, so that's wonderful.  Thank you both very, very kindly.
Again, it's time to move on, so now an important part of the IGF are national and regional initiatives, so these are if you like, many IGFs in regional areas of the world or whatever.  So, we're going to hear about experiences from So, Judy Okite and Judith Hellerstein.  So maybe Judy, do you want to So, take the lead here?
   >> JUDY OKITE:  Thank you very much, Gerry.  Judy Okite from Nairobi, Kenya.  We have been working, and we have work plan as DCAD to work together with the national and regional initiatives, and one of our main agenda is to ensure that persons with disabilities are part of their national and regional initiatives.  It's easier to achieve a discussion when we begin from that lower level that these persons with disabilities can be able to address their accessibility needs when it comes to their disability, even to their -- at their local level, and in that way they will be the persons in charge of their local level will be able to understand what it is that is needed.
And so one of DCAD is to reach out to the national and regional initiatives and to be able to share what issues they could be having to ask the questions of what it is that they could be having, how could we be of assistance to them?  In our DCAD website, we have accessibility guidelines that are available for anyone to use, especially when it comes even to the virtual meetings and even to the physical meetings of what it is that we mean when it comes to accessibility.  And as we are right now, we have developed a survey whereby, we are asking for feedback on how accessibility has been to you in this year that most of the meetings have been virtual?  Have you had your national meeting?  Have you had your regional meeting?  What was the accessibility needs?  And we would really appreciate if we could have our feedback from you.  We will collate that feedback and then we plan to have a meeting with the national regional coordinators in December when the IGF is done with, but we can be able to share back the feedback and to be able to just discuss together how is it that we can work better to ensure that the meetings in 2021 IGF are beginning from the local level to the global level to make them all accessible for persons with disabilities.  And I think even that answers one of the questions that was asked from Haiti, that she was asking.  I don't know whether it's a she or a he, but asking how the persons with disabilities can engage into these spaces.  It is simply by beginning to engage at the local level.  Do you have a national IGF?  If you do not have one, then begin building on one.  The IGF website has all the guidelines on how to come up with a national initiative, and so let's invite more persons with disabilities into these discussions.  That is the only way that we can be able to understand the accessibility needs because sometimes we might say that there is no accessibility needs in these meetings, but the persons who do not have that need might not really know what it is that you require, so let's engage, let's have the persons with disabilities being part of this forum.  We welcome you to join the DCAD list where we have different meetings to discuss the accessibility and people share their experiences on what they've done and what they're doing even on regarding the policies that are available at national level at a global level, when it comes to accessibility for persons with disability.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Thanks so much, Judy, for that.  I will also put in that it is one of the other things that groups who are helping to fund the NRIs, we have two organizations.  We have the IGF Support Association who also gives some sponsorship and grant be money to help national and regional initiatives with NRIs to fund and help run their events.  Also, the Internet Society, its chapters are able to get grants for that, and we have been the -- within the Internet Society, there is a special accessibilities special interest group that is around and we are actually the Secretariat for DCAD, but we have been working with the Internet Society Foundation to get on the application form that these chapters apply for funding for these IGFs, for the national and regional IGFs to get some kind of increased awareness so that when the people who are applying for funds, our hope is that we can get some comments on the form that is filled out so that they're aware, oh, we should be looking towards increasing awareness for these people with disabilities, whether it's through captioning, human captioning or through some other type of format.  The idea is just to raise the awareness, and it's only through raising the awareness that people realize that we need to engage with everyone, just like people years ago continue raising the awareness that English is not the only language that they need to have speech interpreted.  Now we have sign language and we want that.  We want captioning.  We just need to raise awareness, and our approach is how do we raise awareness of this.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  The other thing, Judith, is that we can learn from each other because some are further down the line than others, so we can find a way of saying one NRI, one national or region can help support one another and learn from their experience rather than reinventing the wheel.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes.  Exactly.  And a lot of people say well we don't have funding for this, but what we did in the IGF USA is when I took this on, we decided to be creative and we created, and although our sponsorship is very neutral and people do not get their names on specific sessions, it's just as a whole, but since captioning was not included, we created a separate branding so captioning is provided by X, and we sold that idea to different organizations that they for a very reasonable fee could be having their name branded on this, so it would be captions provided by X, and in the IGF USA, it's captioning is provided by one of our other organizations, and then they have a branded idea.  So, it's a really cheap branding idea and a lot of corporations would hike that, but you just have to figure out how do I bring it to them in their language.  How do I get them interested in this?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Judith.  I'm afraid we're going to have to leave it at that and move on if that's okay.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes, I'm done.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Oh, you are now.  (Laughing).  I've made an executive decision, everybody.  I've made an executive decision.  The next piece is called Mainstreaming Accessibility.  Oh, I'm sorry, it's called Dynamic Coalition Liaison and it's Judith again, but to give Judith a breath and to have a change of voice, I've going to just swop that around with the following item.  So Main streaming Accessibility, Shadi and Peter Crosbie, do you mind going now, just jump ahead and do that now and then we'll have a change of voice and then go back to Judith.  Is that okay?  Can we have Shadi and Peter in place?
   >> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:  Hi, Gerry.  This is Shadi.  Yes, that's okay, and I hope that's okay for Peter, too.  So, yeah, I guess this discussion has been going on in the DCAD Group for a while about having accessibility.
(meeting ended).
(message that host has another meeting in progress).
>> LUIS:  So, this is Luis Bobo, United Nations.  I'm sorry for this, Gerry.  Apparently, there has been an accident and someone else stopped this room and started a new one.  This should not have happened.  Please continue here.  I hope that we can recover all the people and they will rejoin.  Okay.  Sign interpretation is fine again, and captioning should be fine again.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  We'll give it just a minute for people to get back in.
>> LUIS:  Very I'm sorry for there.  It should not have happened.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Do we know how many participants we have?
>> Currently 19.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  19.  Okay.  I think we had about 30.  Should we just give it a minute.
>> We had about 47 at one point.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Shadi and Peter, are they here?
>> LUIS:  Yeah, they are here.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Can you give them rights, please.  And Judith and Gunela.  Gunela is there, Judith is there.  Judith is not there.  Gunela, yes.  Sign interpreters are there.  Captioner is there.
   >> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:  Hi, Gerry.  Did I break the Internet?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  I won't comment.  Did you shave this morning?  What do you like?  (Laughing).
>> Sign language interpreters here.  If we could be given multiple permission again, please.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Most people only crack the camera, Shadi.
   >> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:  Yeah.  (Laughing).
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Are we ready to start recording and captioning again?
>> LUIS:  It is started.  Everything is started.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  So Shadi, can you start again, please.  I'm sorry to everyone for the interruption.  Some external force broke our meeting and took over our room, so Luis has sorted it out.  Thanks to Luis.  So, we're going to try to get going again and we'll see we might rob a bit of time at the end.  Shadi, back to yourself and Peter.  Mainstreaming accessibility, please.
   >> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:  Thanks, Gerry.  Thank you for clarifying.  I thought it was something I said and so you kicked me out because I know you're very strict.  (Laughing).  So just to come back to the topic.  We've been discussing in the Dynamic Coalition of Accessibility and Disability in DCAD for quite a while the aspect of not speaking amongst ourselves.  I mean, it is important that we focus on making the IGF accessible and inclusive for everyone.  That is one of our main objectives.  Also, another objective is to promote exchange, knowledge exchange amongst us, amongst people in the field of accessibility and disability, but I think equally as important is to reach out to other -- to other Dynamic Coalitions and other activities across the IGF and make sure that accessibility is included as a horizontal and considered throughout.
I think for many years we haven't been seeing as many accessibility sessions.  But I think I'm really delighted this year that I do see quite some sessions that are not necessarily organized by members of DCAD, and also topics that I haven't seen as much in previous years.  For example, on Monday morning, there is a session that I'm really looking forward to called Open Data for Women and Persons with Disabilities, just as an example.  There are several others in the agenda that do talk more about inclusion and universal design, but here just you know, very often people may not at first think about data as something that is related to accessibility and disability.  Whereas, it is.  It's very relevant, it's very important, especially in our world where we're talking about artificial intelligence bias against people with disabilities or other marginalized groups.  I think there is also a lot that we can learn from gender activities and gender studies and try to promote inclusion or accessibility as the big umbrella of inclusion.
So, yeah.  I think one of the things that we've been trying to do this year is attend more other sessions and try to bring accessibility if they have not already considered accessibility, to try to bring in discussions of accessibility and raise use cases there and alert them that some of the topics that they might be discussing like copyright, like human rights and ethics in digital technology, all of these aspects do relate to people with disabilities just as well, and maybe even disproportionately so.
This year has been particularly difficult.  On the one side, online makes it really easy to switch rooms from one to the other once you've overcome the hurdles of actually getting the links in the inbox, and that's a separate story, but the idea is that with the online you can be in multiple places and switch.
But the issue is really that speaking from the floor and connecting with the panel or even grabbing them for a coffee afterwards and chatting with them does not work as much online.  So, this comes back maybe to a broader issue about the pros and cons of the online aspect of IGF.  On the one side, I think it's great that we can have more access and participation from around the world.  
On the other hand it's a bit more difficult to get this interpersonal and human exchange, and so I guess I'll leave it there because we're tight on time, but the question I guess for the Dynamic Coalitions, beyond trying to attend other Dynamic Coalition meetings and other meetings beyond the quote, you unquote traditional accessibility and disability, what else can we do to get accessibility more in the minds of people?  What can we do to really change the culture towards accessibility across the IGF?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  So, Peter, did you want to jump in?
   >> PETER CROSBIE:  Yes.  I mean, I'll leave my video off because for people that don't know me, I'm Autistic so this level of interaction is right at the limit of what someone like me can handle.  In fact, these kind of platforms like Zoom and so on, in general, are fairly inaccessible for people with cognitive disabilities for a whole lot of reasons.  So, on the one hand, they're great and I'd much prefer to be sitting here doing this than at a live IGF conference which for someone like me is really overwhelming, but on the other hand, even Zoom and so on has not been designed for people with cognitive disabilities in mind.  It's a fairly overwhelming and a fairly intense experience, that as I said is the real limit.
I was just going to make a couple of points about mainstreaming and to pick up on that, and to pick up on something that Shadi just said about data as an accessibility related.  And certainly, from the point of view of cognitive accessibility, everything, basically, is accessibility related.  Design and layout are accessibility issues, user interface is an accessibility issue.  Content itself, so for example even how long or short a sentence is accessibility issues.  One of the big ones, especially, is login, password, privacy, web security, all of that are real not so much even accessibility issues but as much as accessibility barriers for someone like me.
And so, when we're talking about mainstreaming accessibility, what we need to be looking at is that basically every aspect of putting content online is an accessibility issue and it's just at the moment we're not recognizing it as such.  So, we need to reframe some of that.  For example, seeing a good design is also meaning good accessibility, and not seeing them as two separate and often competing considerations.
The other just small second point I would make about mainstreaming is just to look at who we're talking about here because mainstreaming implies bringing people who are outside the mainstream into it.  But certainly when it comes to cognitive disabilities, we're already inside it's just that we're invisible and we're not only invisible to you, but also invisible in most cases to ourselves because, for example, 90% of adults who are Autistic do not have a diagnosis, for people with ADHD that figure is about 80%, and even something as common and well-known as dyslexia, it's around two-thirds of people with dyslexia don't have a diagnosis.  It's not just that they don't have a diagnosis, it's that you don't even know that you have a disability.  So, accessibility has to be mainstreamed because we are the mainstream.  It's not a disability issue, it's not a medical issue.  It's a social issue.  It's about making a choice about who in our society we include and who we exclude.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  You are absolutely right.  It's something I always say.  If it's as normal for a society to include people with disabilities as to include people without disabilities, so you're absolutely dead right.
Judith, you were going to talk about liaisons with other dynamic coalitions.  Can we make this very short and maybe we'll do a one-page document after it and circulate it, so can you give me just one minute or so.  So, we have enough time at the end to see if there is any other business.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes, and I think we can extend by like 5 minutes.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  We'll see in the moment.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes.  So, one of the things that we also wanted to do in raising awareness to people about the DCAD is to also raise our awareness within the different dynamic coalitions.  So, there are a growing number, more than 20 different dynamic coalitions and they each -- they grow every year.  So, what we've tried to do is to create a liaison for most of these and I will just find -- I will share the screen here.  This is the document that we have that has a listing of what the different dynamic coalitions are, and what we've done is to try to get members of DCAD such as myself, such as Gunela, such as Shadi and Dierdre to sign up to be a liaison to one of these dynamic coalitions.  So, that is one of the things that we're trying to do to raise awareness so that when these dynamic coalitions are meeting or on the email lists, that accessibility issues could be raised within them and it's all an effort to get increased awareness.  So, I will just stop sharing this screen and post a link into the chat.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  And hopefully afterwards, we can maybe write to people on here and see who is interested.  Because I think if you look at the last three subjects here, the national/regional initiatives, the Dynamic Coalition liaison, and Shadi and Peter's talk.  They're all about us coalescing and talking and hopefully intersecting and influencing other groups so hopefully we can try to get that moving over the next year.  Okay.  Thanks, Judith.
Before we go on, we're just about at the end of our time, but can I ask the captioners, are we okay to go on for five or six more minutes?  Is that okay?  let's use the five or six minutes for any other business.  So, what do you want to raise, what do you want to bring up with us?  And Andy, I promise to come back to you so I'll give to you -- is Andy back on? 
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes, he is but let me just allow, Andy, you can talk now.  Can we give Andy a shot because I promised him?
>> ANDY:  Well, in fact, my next question was going to be what I'm calling best practices, but I'm told I should call good practices now, and I think that was adequately answered in the subsequent discussion.  I think one of the problems here though is that really right now we need, really, really need good practices for particular platforms and particular context, you know, particular use cases for meetings.  And I think this is very, very difficult to do in any kind of international or national way because, you know, vendors don't like it when you tell people, okay, look, this is wrong with your platform and we're going to get around it like this.  You know, they tend not to like that.  I don't know if anybody has any solutions to that point?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  One of the solutions, Andy, is standards and you're highly involved.  Do you want to say something about standards?
>> ANDY:  Yes.  Absolutely.  Standards don't solve that problem.  You cannot run down vendors in standards.  You can't.  You can't do it.  Okay.  So, it's not a solution to that problem and everybody ends up moving around the real problem and is the devil is in the detail and we all know that AI doesn’t have a solution to do that.  I'm happy to talk about standards at another meeting, Gerry.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Yeah.  Another day.  Judith, anyone else have their h up?  Remember, Alt Y to put up your chat or the chat box or the question and answer box.  We have about 5 minutes.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  No, but oh, yes Sylvia, let me just see if -- yeah, Sylvia, you can say something.
>> SYLVIA:  Thank you, Judith.  I just wanted to say that maybe another option to engage with the manufacturers is you know, they consider standards as part of the interoperability with other platforms and systems, and in many cases that actually takes the edge, let's say, off their marketing advantage.  So one of the things that this group could do is to pitch the incorporation of these features as a marketing advantage so that they can reach out to wider population that is working from home, that is participating in the digital economy, and that is supported by the different regulations to be incorporated into society in an inclusive manner, so I think that if the pitch could be switched to be on the positive side and not the other side, maybe that could have another impact.
The other thing to consider is that a lot of these companies are adopting software methodologies that are working into doing small increments they call it, around short periods of time.  One of those methodologies is agile for software development, but there are several of those and they're actually welcoming these small increments as they call them for improvements of the features that they have, so I encourage you to structure those -- structure that pitch in a way that is a little bit more attractive for those in the private sector and look for Allies in that respect and that might have a different outcome.  Finger's crossed.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Another positive approach that was published on December 3 two years ago was a result of Accenture's research on accessibility that showed the clear economic benefits to business of including a wide variety of potential users of their products and services, so we could maybe circulate that if people are interested.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes.  That would be a great idea.  If you could post that link in the chat.  We have a question from Andy Heath.
>> ANDY:  Again, just to address the standards point.  There are a lot of issues with standards.  One of the biggest ones is they're written necessarily in standard ease which is gobbledygook to most people because they're written for vendors and technical people and most people cannot read standards.  Okay.  And the stage at which you actually publicize them and write them in a form which is useful to ordinary people which is actually what we really need gets skimped or ignored or whatever because it's not funded.  What we need is a lot more is -- there are some good standards out there and I've got my name on some of them, they like you to put your name on them, but what we actually need is a lot of roll out of those standards in terms ordinary people can understand and say, yes, that's a good idea.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Yes.  Standards are voluntary, and we need people to say well standards are a way of achieving what we want to do so we've got to get to do is decide what they want to do is to include us, and then standards are just a way of doing it rather than the stick.  One last speaker before we finish.  One last person?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Judy has one short comment to make.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Judy, last but not least.
   >> JUDY OKITE:  Thank you very much.  Just to say something about the question that was asked about persons with disabilities in the workplace.  Maybe one way that you could approach is if there is a policy regarding persons with disabilities at workplace, if it's not there, please draft it and engage all the stakeholders at the workplace and then draft a way of how to implement it.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you.  With that I'm going to call ladies and gentlemen, 2020 is one really strange year, COVID-19 throughout the world.  It's a strange meeting but a wonderful meeting.  I think we covered so much ground in a short time and we even had a little coffee break in the middle.  An unexpected one.  But I think what it does show is that there are as Shadi said, there benefits to online, disadvantages, benefits to physical meetings, but disadvantages, particularly for many people with disabilities because of physical access problems or whatever, and if we can get a good mixture and make sure that our needs are taken into account in both, we will certainly benefit.  I'm not going to thank anyone by name because if I do, I'll forget names.  So, I'll thank everyone in the DCAD who contributed over the last two or three months, and I'm not going to name names, but you know who you were and you know that you did a wonderful job.  Thanks to the IGF Secretariat and the Technical Staff.  Thanks to Google for the financial support to help people who otherwise could not have been here.  And most of all, thanks to everyone that turned up today.  I think it's been a great meeting.  And I look forward already to Poland in 2021.  Thank you.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  And also, thanks for the sign language interpreters as well as the captioners.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Absolutely.  I should have said that.  Thank you.  Thank you, everyone bye-bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-5-dc-internet-standards-security-and-safety^^

    >> MODERATOR: Welcome to the launch of the information internet standard security and safety.  I would like to remind you all that this meeting is being recorded and will be available at IGF YouTube channel.  
     The discussion is being hosted on the Internet Governance Forum Code of Conduct and United Nations rules and regulations.  Private chat is enabled and raise hands also.  If you would like to have a question or want to have the floor, send your requests using Q&A, raise hands or the chat box.
     So have a nice session.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Joalo, and for the Secretary for supporting the session in a great way.  
     I see that one of the panelists is not there yet.  So if you could keep an eye on the signing in, then he can be put on because he will be presenting in a few moments.
     Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for being here.  Welcome to the panelists and presenters and thank you attendees for joining in on the session this morning.  We will show you the agenda and also Mark who is co-moderating is part of the leadership.  
     Here is the agenda that you can see that we were going through today.  We had a cancellation.  Rachel Azafrani from Microsoft had a flight rescheduled and is on a flight right now and sends regrets for not being able to participate, but she stressed she would be working on the working group on IoT in the future and ensuring Microsoft's participation there.
     We will go through the presentations, and we ask you to use chat actively and to the Q&A that you see at the bottom of your screen to start a discussion.  And if you think things should be different, please share that with us because that is the sort of information that we are looking for.  
     We will have an open discussion after the final presentation of the working group, and you will have ample time to share there.  As said, raise your hand, use the Q&A, and we will make sure that to give you the word where possible and we'll end with some final remarks on next steps and funding.  
     So first, let me welcome you to the official launch of the Dynamic Coalition on Internet Standards, Security & Safety, or the DC-ISSS as we are sometimes called.
     My name is Wout de Natris, and together with Mark Carvell and Marten Porte, I'm part of the leadership of the DCISSS.  
     This coalition has a clear goal:  To speed up the deployment of security and safety-related internet standards and ICT best practices.  
     This task will lead to different end goals.  For example, to identify, analyze, and present best practices.  To create and present policy suggestions for diverse stakeholders.  To connect different stakeholders and make sure they interact on the topic and work towards agreements on next steps beyond the IGF.  To spread messages to and thus involve relevant stakeholders currently not involved in internet governance.  To provide instructions for training programs at the nation level.  
     Let me first take one step back.  Where does this all come from?  And why is this such an important issue?
     When the internet was created, the creators of the internet and the standard that make it work did not have security in mind.  There was no need.  They all knew each other, they were working at universities and at the Ministry of Defense in the U.S. and they knew each other, and they trusted each other so why put in security.  
     There were no websites.  There was no external data storage.  There was no cloud computing.  There were no connected services or connected software or IoT devices, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  
     Only when the internet opened up in the mid 1990's to the general public, slowly but surely the limited security became apparent and opportunities for abuse and harm clear.  
     Spam, fraud, espionage, phishing, all terms that we had never heard -- well, we all heard of espionage, of course, but not involving the internet all became possible because of this lack of security in internet standards.  And standards are what make the internet work.  The public core of the internet, so to say.
     Internet technicians went to work and created new standards or additions to existing standards like the DNS securing the naming system.  RPKI securing the routing.  There's DCP 3, BCP 38, et cetera, et cetera.  
     They fixed different sort of problems, but they are not unlike band-aids for wounds.  However, there seems to be one common feature to all of them.  Adoption by the internet industry is extremely slow.  
     And the same goes for making secure websites or creating better software or securing data or manufacturing secure IoT devices.
     Let's look at it from the totally different angle.  The ICT industry is one of the best facilitators of cybercrime.  It is not a nice thing to say, but unfortunately in reality this is something that must change in order to support digital transformation, to sustain economic development, and to make the internet safer to use for all end users across the globe.
     And this state was not something that I just make right now.  It comes from a study we held in 2019 and early 2020.  Because at the time of the IGF in 2019, the study was undertaken into the reasons behind the slow adoption that also looked at possible solutions.
     It was not hard to find common and more or less agreed upon answers as presented in the report of the IGF pilot project on the this issue entitled, Setting the Standards for a More Secure and Trustworthy Internet that was published early March of this year.  
     There is consensus that there is no business case for deployment.  There is no standard demand for internet standard security so there is no offer.  There's no carrot, there's no stick, and pressure and nothing where incentives are concerned.  All investments, if you do deploy, but there is no return on it.
     The results is a non-level playing field between industry organizations contemplating deployment and those who do not.  So that's another strong disincentive.  
     Deployment is entirely voluntary with hardly any benefits if you do.  Internet standards and ICT best practices are not part of legislation so also there from that side there is no pressure.  And besides, they are virtually unknown beyond the technical and industry community as some experts participating in the processes of creation.
     And so they are very easy to ignore.  As a result, there is no real societal pressure on industry to deploy these important standards.  When consumers don't ask for and companies do not ask when they buy, there is also no incentive to deploy.
     So let us conclude there is a collective action problem.  Where serious action is undertaken, the raising of security awareness is focused mostly and sometimes only on the end user who has no role in the most important message to be taken, deployment of internet standards and ICT best practices.  They have no role there.  
     But now, let's move forward and see how this all can be changed.  The IGF pilot project identified six main issues as providing possible solutions to these problems.  The first is procurement and creation of a business case.
     The second, the role of policy makers and regulators.  The third one is security standards by design.  The fourth, human rights and consumer protection.  The fifth is education and skills.  And the sixth, the creation of a global testing and reporting program.  
     Identification of issues which we have just done is one step.  But translating them into action is another.  And this is what the DC-ISSS will work on.  That volunteers have worked over the past few weeks and selected three of the topics for this new Dynamic Coalition to start work on its first phase of work.  
     The first is Security by Design and subgroup on IoT security.  The second on education and skills.  And the third is procurement, supply chain management, and creation of a business case.  And here you can see the influence of the volunteers working because in the business case supply chain management was added.
     The volunteer experts have also added focus to the topic and searched for where value can be added to initiatives that are already being undertaken on these topics.  
     All three working groups will be presented on shortly.  And this will include their goals and first steps towards achieving the goals.  
     But first, we have four presentations that underline the importance of a safer internet and the importance of deployment of standards from different angles.
     Following that, we will have presentations in the three working groups and there will be time for your questions and comments.
     And please use the chat room to actively to use the comments and start discussion.  In the final part of our session today, the first step is introduced and the funding requirements to support the group program will be explained.  But first, it is my honor to present the speakers that we stress again, we need your ideas and your expertise.
     The first presenter that I can introduce is Jonas Gretz Hoffmann of the Office of the Special Envoy for Cyber, Foreign, and Security Policy of the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs Switzerland.  And I can add, the organization graciously have funded us to make the work that we are doing currently possible, for which I thank you as well.  
     The floor is yours, Jonas.  
     JONAS HOFFMANN: Thank you very much, Wout, for the ability to speak here today at the launch of this Dynamic Coalition. 
     Thanks also for painting the bleak picture about internet standards dissemination.  I think things are changing, and not the least this Dynamic Coalition is a vivid example of how things are changing, and we need to move this forward together.  
     But I have to apologize for Jon Fanzun, my boss who is the Special Envoy for Cyber in the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs.  He had to unfortunately cancel his participation at the last minute.  
     But let me quickly try to outline why we as a government are engaging in this Dynamic Coalition on his behalf and why we deem it important to further internet standard safety and security.
     The importance of international digital governance for Switzerland has been underlined by the digital foreign policy strategy that has been adopted by our government this week.  The strategy aims to ways to profile of Switzerland in digital governance.  And even before the strategies traditionally Switzerland has been engaging actively in international discussions that define norms and tools for secure digital space.  
     We are, for example, currently represent with the national expert in the UN Group of Governmental Experts and our Ambassador as well to the UN in Geneva is sharing the ultimate working groups that discusses norms and responsible behavior and the application of international law to cyberspace, among other things.
     Furthermore, we are also contributing to the OECD's work within the working priority on the security of the two products.  And I'm happy that we Ghislain will be part of the work on this section.  I think common regulatory approaches can be a key factor to achieve greater security while avoiding fragmentation of markets.  
     Yet our new strategy also underlines that we are facing an enormous challenge of ensuring a free, open, and secure cyberspace for everyone. Not the least that States do not often agree on a common cause of action. 
     The risk of a fragmentation of global rules and standards and the fragmentation of the internet is real for us.  The strategy, therefore, holds that we cannot achieve and secure open and free internet in isolation by just working with States but that we have to engage closely with the private sector and that we need to work with Civil Society and the technical community as well.  
     Against this background, Switzerland has launched the Geneva Dialogue on responsible behavior in cyberspace.  The Geneva Dialogue aims at supporting a global dialogue of the business sector focused on developing best practices and requirements for the security of digital products and services.  The partners of the dialogue are corporations such as Microsoft, Siemens, Kaspersky, Cisco and other global players.
     We will present the first results of the Geneva Dialogue next week Wednesday here at the IGF on 11 November at 11:20 UTC.  So I look forward to your participation.  
     Another priority of our strategy is strengthening the IGF by working towards an IGF class as also outlined in the UN secretary General's development for digital cooperation.  
     In our view, this Dynamic Coalition can become a key milestone in strengthening the IGF in a revolutionary way and make it more outcome focused. 
     So what concrete outcomes do we expect, because that was one of the questions.  I think what this Dynamic Coalition should aim at is to translate best practices, standards and recommendations for the applicable and acceptable and relevant to a very broad set of stakeholders.  
     In our discussions in the Geneva Dialogue, we often came across the notion that existing standards are too complex to implement, that stakeholders do not understand them and therefore they are not really being implemented.  
     Of course, the regulatory approach is also necessary, but Ghislain will speak about this in more detail, I guess.  We think also there is no need to duplicate, but there is need to validate this work, make it relevant, and get it approved by more and more stakeholders.  
     So that would be our view on this Dynamic Coalition.  And I thank you for granting me the floor. Thanks, Wout.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Jonas, for these kind words, and the high expectations also that come from it.  That is also what we surely seriously realized that we are embarking on an ambitious program.  So thank you for your words.  
     I would like to introduce Olaf Kolkman, who is principle at Internet Technology Policy and Advocacy at the Internet Society, also ISOC.  
     So please, Olaf, please step in and give your presentations and views on this Dynamic Coalition and the work we embark on.
     >> OLAF KOLKMAN: Thank you, Wout.  There are a lot of internet standards that improve the internet.  There is the security of the internet.  And because of the voluntary nature of the adoption of internet standards, some get deployed expedient, and some take a long time to find their way into the internet.  
     So some of these expedient -- examples of expedient deployment are ACME or systems behind let's encrypt which now secures millions of websites.  And the deployment of Quick, a new transport protocol with new security baked in, so to speak, which was deployed to over the internet in very short time span.
     I have worked on standardization and deployment of DNS security, the improvement of routing security and lately the deployment of security of internet time services.
     And in the two decades that I have done that, it has been sort of a humbling experience.  What I would like to do is share a few thoughts.  
     And those thoughts are inspired by a 1962 book, "The Fusions of Innovations," which is a book by Everett Rogers.  And he thought about the deployment of innovations, whether those were television sets or detergents or whatever.  He was a marketing type of guy.
     I believe that the deployment of standards are the building blocks that -- essentially internet standards are very much like the deployment of innovations.  And so you can learn something from this '62 book.
     On the internet, deployment is decentralized and voluntary.  It's what Everett calls an optional innovation decision.  And for an innovation to be deployed, any decision maker -- and that could be the person who buys detergent or a washing machine or deploys software in a piece of network -- will go through five stages.
     First, the person needs to have knowledge of the innovation.  Knowledge about an innovation spreads in social networks with shared values, and it spreads best when the values are shared but there is sort of lack of awareness.
     So in order to create, you know, a drive for standards deployment, you could work on awareness building about certain building blocks or standards.
     And then that individual decision maker will need to be persuaded that the innovation is of use for that person.  And then there will be some sort of a decision, sometimes that is a decision that is made by the individual.  Sometimes that individual will have to include other people in the decision who then will need to go through the same process of knowledge and persuasion.  And then there is the implementation and then the confirmation that the innovation actually works, and you keep using it.
     Well, during that persuasion/decision phase, the deployer of the innovation has five factors that they take into account.  And this is still from Rogers.  
     First, it's the relative advantage.  Will I have some advantage from using this innovation?  Or with a lot of security standards, there is actually the case that there is no relative advantage whatsoever.  And Wout, you refer to that.  
     In the case of deploying for instance, genetically modified seeds, you have a higher yield and that gives you a relative advantage compared to the rest of the market.  In the case of security standards, you're fighting against a network effect.  You don't want to break the rest of the system so that imposes a cost when you have to fix problems that come from implementing the security innovation.
     And then there is a complexity simplicity argument.  Is this easy to do?  If it is easy, you know, people are more likely to do this.  This is one of the pieces of the let's encrypt standard, the Acme standard and the let's encrypt project.  They reduced the complexity of deploying security on websites gigantically.  And that made them a success.  
     And then there's compatibility.  Do I need to change a law to introduce the innovation?  Do I need to buy new gear or is it just a software install of something.  And then there's try-ability.  
     Can I try this without breaking my system?  Can I do this in my lab?  Can I easily do this in A/B testing in my production environment, those type of things.
     And then there is the observability of the deployed innovation.  And obviously security standards are often not observable.
     So I would say that in all of those five factors that go into the decision process, security has, you know, an issue against it.  And I'm mentioning this because I believe that the group should be somewhat aware about what it will try to do.  
     Where will you put your energy?  Will you put it into, you know, the knowledge sharing?  Will you change the decision-making process?  Will you, for instance, help with observability or try-ability of a certain standard?  
     Observability could be, for instance, something like the internet initiative where people can actually see that their innovation, that their security thing actually works.  Sometimes that is an element of getting further.
     Value creation.  Something that we are trying to do with MANRS is create a little bit of an extra value by people being able to demonstrate that they agree to -- and MANRS is the Mutually Agreed Norms and Routing Security which is a program in which ISP signs up, take a few actions, and thereby demonstrate that they are a little bit more secure than others.  And we open hope that that will give them a competitive benefit.
     So think about what will be the effective strategies that fit the distributed nature of the internet where the mutual dependencies and the network effect is into play.  I actually after two decades of work on deploying security on the internet, I don't really have an answer.  And I am really looking forward to this DC to identify some elements of this answer.  And with that, over to you, Wout.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Olaf.  Yes, we are feeling the weight of your words as we speak.  Thank you for this insight because it does exactly show what the challenges this DC faces are, and the very broad range of experts that will be needed to bring this forward.
     Having said that, I'm going to introduce the next speaker.  As already said, Rachel Azafrani of Microsoft is being held up in the air so she could not participate.  
     I'm going to Ghana to Raymond Onuoha who is an associate member of the Africa ISD Association and works for two universities in Africa.  So, Raymond, please join in and share your views on this Dynamic Coalition from an African perspective.
     >> RAYMOND ONUOHA: Thank you, Wout.  It's a privilege to share my thoughts at the launch of this Dynamic Coalition.  
     My name is Raymond Onuoha, I'm a tech policy fellow at the Lagos Business School here in Nigeria, and I focus on some of the institutional and policy challenges in the internet economy.  Of course, Africa working also with regional policy think tanks in the region, ICT Africa and also the African ICT Foundation conducting some research to facilitate evidence base to inform policy making in the application or adoption of these technologies across Africa.  
     With respect to internet security standards and safety, like Olaf had already highlighted, I will come to that level especially speaking to the operator paths.
     But overall the Internet Society has played a champion role, ironically, leading the drive with respect to the development of the standards across Africa.  Which is a bit different if you compare -- if you contrast that to other regions where the governments are taking some of the champion initiatives.  
     So the ISOC and the African Union Commission had around May 30, 2017, published some sort of guidelines with respect to infrastructure security for Africa where they noted that especially at the regional level the internet being designed as a collection of networks must therefore with regards to its security be carried out not in isolation but in the form of a shared responsibility.
     So it is a collective responsibility implementing some of these best practices for internet security even as it affects the African region.  And so that coalition that was formed initiated a multi-stakeholder condition structure with the Ability of Cybersecurity Collaboration And Coordination Committee, the ACS3C which at the continental level will help minimize the duplication of efforts in this regards and so thereby helping to facilitate coordination and information sharing amongst stakeholders.  
     Especially in key areas that affect the region where resources will actually be needed in order to bridge some of the gaps as well as advise policy makers within the African Union.  Original strategies for bridging these gaps, especially in critical areas which this particular area is a key capacity deficit area within the region that is lacking significantly across the region.  And is most related to the skills and educational working group of this particular Dynamic Coalition.  
     So at the launch of this coalition is very critical to invite some of these thoughts and thinking while we drive the initiative at this level in order to align with what is very much critical in need.
     (Break in audio)
     >> MODERATOR: Raymond, we seem to have lost you.
     >> RAYMOND ONUOHA: Without skills if, you don't understand the technology there are best practices and that is -- can you hear me?
     >> MARK CARVELL: We lost the last two minutes of you, so if you still remember what you said.
     >> RAYMOND ONUOHA: Oh, sorry.  So I was talking about the key deficit area with regards to internet security and standards as it relates to Africa, which is the capacity building that relates most to the skills and educational working group of this particular Dynamic Coalition.
     So like the first speaker has also mentioned, if you don't understand the vision you can't really adopt it.  And if you can't adopt, you can't develop any standards for application.  
     And so also beyond the regional and also at the national levels, it will be the imperative of national governments to facilitate information sharing and promote best practices because they are the key legislators within country.  So beyond guidelines, beyond norms, if you are talking about a possibility with respect to the internet infrastructure ecosystems in the region, then the national governments will have to champion the accountability as they are the ones that can actually pass laws on the internet infrastructure security and standards.  
     So it is important that these laws adhere to global agreed principles which includes responsibility, cooperation, multi-stakeholderism, and also the fundamental rights of people.  
     But a critical deficit with regards to at the national level for Africa is at the single instrument or regional wise on the Africa region, the convention has not had a lot of process with respect to the stratification.  So that will be a strong first step towards creating an African structure in which the internet ecosystem can develop.  
     And finally, at the operator level, just piggybacking on what Olaf had highlighted in his presentation in respect to the MANRS, which seems to be the most visible global initiative that defines the critical measures to meet network desired requirements with respect to routing, the minimum system security and all the related issues.  
     So these are some of the imperatives at the regional, national, and also the operator level that are very key.  Especially as it relates to Africa.  So we need to invite some of those players as we go forward, even as we carry out the advocacy work within this Dynamic Coalition so as African region will also be carried along, especially bridging the specific capacity building areas which is really lacking as it relates to cyber security.  So thank you, that will my submission.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And I think you have shown some of the ideas that we could actually start striving for, but also the challenges that we will face.  And we will welcome you to join the work and perhaps bring in the experts that you know from the continent so that we can work on this topic.
     The final presentation as an introduction to this Dynamic Coalition is from Ghislain de Salins.  He is the Digital Security Policy at OECD, and he will tell something about his work that he is actually doing at this moment, research that he has done on the Internet of Things security.  
     So please, Ghislain, I give the floor to you.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS:  Thank you, can you hear me?
     >> MODERATOR: We can hear you, thank you.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: Okay Good evening or good afternoon to all participants of the coalition.  Can you see my presentation as well?
     >> MODERATOR: We do, thank you.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: All right, that's great.  All right.  So thank you, Wout.  
     As he was saying, I'm Ghislain de Salins.  Today I will give you a brief introduction on the work we have been doing at OECD on the digital security of products.  And I will put the particular focus on the issue of ICT security by design as I understood it may be one of the areas of focus of interest for the Dynamic Coalition in the coming months.
     So first let me introduce the OECD very briefly.  We are an international organization, we focus on economic and social prosperity.  We are mostly an intergovernmental organization.  Our analytical work is done through the support and the input of delegates from our 37 member countries.  And our primary target audience is policy makers.
     We also are a multi-stakeholder.  Organizations, businesses, society, and the technical community participate in our work actively.  And in particular, they do within the OECD's working party on security in the digital economy, SDE, which carries out the work of the data security policy.
     So it was said before by previous speakers it is true that the digital security of products, and of IoT in particular, has become an area focus for policy makers stakeholders more broadly in the recent years.  I'm sure you are familiar with the work of the GCAC and with the Paris call for trust and security.
     There has also been interest by the G7 on the G20 in this topic.  And even more recently, there was a report a few months ago in the U.S. by the Cyberspace Commission which is attached to the U.S. Congress.  And they identified digital products as a key area.  And they also considered that the status quo was going to get -- and it was time to call for more practical developments by policy makers and stakeholders.  
     So as a result of this increased awareness of interest, we at OECD launched a work stream on the digital security of products.
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Could I quickly interrupt?  Sorry.  
     Is it correct that we are still on the first slide?  I believe it might not be showing correctly.  If you could maybe try one more time to see if we can get the presentation current.
     >> JONAS GRTTZ-HOFFMANN: We see the editing mode.  If you click through the slides in the editing mode, that should work.  
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: Is it there now?
     >> JONAS GRITZ-HOFFMANN: Now we see the screen that you see as a presenter.
     >>We can see it like this, it does work.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS:   Sorry, I don't know how to change it.  Can you see it?
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Yes, we can see it.  You can go on like this.  Not perfect, but it is okay to read.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS:  Which slide now?  Timeline?
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Yes.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: Are you seeing the timeline now?
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Yes.
     >> GHISLAIN DE SALINS: We launched a work stream and as you can see we are almost finished with the process.  
     We are finalizing two reports.  And they should be published in January, and I will make sure to disseminate them to the Dynamic Coalition as soon as they are available.
     If we look into the substance a little bit.  It is important to understand if you look at IoT security created by design is the prioritized topic and one of the most important area, but it is not the only aspect of IoT security.  It is only one aspect.  
     As you can see on the screen, it is by usually design guidelines and they are focused on the device itself and the role the manufacturer can play.  And then the design phase of the life cycle.  
     Actually, you may have data security gaps that emerge in any other areas that you can see on the screen.  In other parts of the ecosystem and other stages of the value chain.  We have seen recently, for instance, the impact of the vulnerabilities in the microprocessors that affected a lot of products.  
     And very importantly, you also have what we call latent vulnerabilities that are discovered once a product is already on the market.  And they can only be fixed by security updates.  So basically, they have nothing to do that much with security by design.  
     And so an IT product that would be secured by design would not be necessarily secured once and for all.  There is a need for a continuous maintenance of security throughout the life cycle of a product.
     Another very important gap is the end of -- what we call at the OECD the end of life gap.  It's the gap between the end of use and the end of life, which means the end of support, of commercial support by the IoT manufacturers.  
     It is -- it was already a very big gap in other products.  You may remember the attack in 2017 that targeted -- it was very efficient on Windows products that were out of life, end of life. And many experts consider that end of life will be even more issue with the IoT leading to what some have called the internet of forgotten things.  And it is a very big security issue.  So that was for the holistic perspective.  
     Now if we look at security by design itself.  As you can see, it is actually a multi-layered concept.  So most guidelines focus on the product features themselves.  So, for instance, IoT products should have stronger mechanism like password for instance.  One more the guidelines focus on the processes and policies that are put in place by the supply side actors.  
     So, for instance, that would mean that the IoT manufacturer should have the vulnerability policy and vulnerability handling process.  And another important aspect by design was the committed role of third-party evaluation.  In fact, many IT manufacturers claim that the product is secured by design, but the only way to evaluate that is through third-party evaluation.  And that includes certification and testing and other mechanism like audits.
     So just this slide was to show you that security by design is not so easy to grasp and expands many areas.  So that was for the theoretical aspect.  
     Now if we look a bit at the data we have and what can we learn about IoT security.  And the fact is, actually security by design guidelines for IoT are available but they are not widely used.  And there is strong evidence that IoT products are not designed with enough security.  
     You may remember in 2016 the Mirai malware that infected millions of IoT devices and they were then enrolled into a bot net and used to launch a mass of DDos attacks.  In 2018, a study of the UK showed that 90% of the manufacturers lack or didn't have a vulnerability disclosure policy.  
     Now, why is this the situation?  What is that the situation?  Well, it was said before by previous speakers that, indeed, the most security standards in particular security by design guidelines are voluntary.
     And actually, there are many economic factors that prevent the supply side actors to adopt the guidelines.  These factors include misaligned market incentives.  If you are the manufacturer, you would often value time to market, cost-effectiveness, or usability of the product over digital security.
     There are also very significant information asymmetries.  Without labels, it is almost impossible for consumers to assess as a level of digital security of an IoT product, and they can't compare the products based on digital security either.  
     So even if the consumers value security, there is no way for them to really make an informed decision on the market.
     Another very important aspect is externalities. So if you take a DDOS attack, for instance.  The victims of a DDOS attack are not the owners or the manufacturers.  But the manufacturers and owners are the ones with the financial risk.  So basically there is absolutely no connection between the IoT value chain and victims of a DDos attack.  
     And, of course, IoT products are used to create Bot nets to launch DDos attacks.  And so basically that paves the way for more hazard and that means it is very hard to achieve an optimal level of digital security when you have these elements I just mentioned, externalities, misaligned market incentives, and information asymmetries.  
     There are the key challenge that need to be solved.  And the question is, how do we do it?  And so that is my last slide.  
     At the OECD, we designed a policy tool kit.  And as you can see, takes the form of a pyramid.  The idea here is that we need to go beyond the traditional dichotomy between the west side and the other side.  
     And as you can see actually, there are many, many policy tools that can be used to address this issue and to incentivize that option of security standards deadlines.  Of course, raising awareness and developing skills, I think everybody agree is very important.  
     But there are also increasingly an agreement by experts that it will not be enough.  Raising awareness will not be enough to fix the problem I just mentioned about the externalities and asymmetries, et cetera.  
     So there is a clear trend of moving up the ladder or moving up the pyramid and try new tools because the tools that are below are not effective enough basically.
     So just this year, there has been a lot of -- there has been a few standards developed on IoT security by ETSI in Europe and by NIST in the U.S. and the charter of trust that are developing standards.  
     Labels are also getting a lot of traction.  It has been labels that have been discussed and launched in Finland and Japan.  And there is discussion in Germany and the EU.
     And if all of them don't work or aren't effective enough, there is also the discussion of drafting regulations that would impose by law some -- that was imposed by law standard but the big question how to do that.  
     There is basically two approaches.  You can impose technical specification, but that carries risk of not being tech mutual and not being approved.  And the other way to do that is through what we call principle-based outcome through regulation like the GDPR.  That would be technology neutral, but the risk of that, it is sometimes difficult to implement, especially for SMEs.  
     And last, but not least, I think expose mechanisms are also very important.  They include insurance liability law, and those tools could be also very effective at mainstreaming security standards and incentivizing users to adopt them.  
     I will stop here, but I would be happy to answer any questions you have.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Ghislain.  That was very insightful words on what we can expect when the report is presented.  And the question to you in the chat has been answered by you in the final words.  So thank you for that.
     It is time for me to hand over to my co-moderator, Mark Carvell, to introduce the presentations on the working group.  So Mark, the floor is yours.  
     >> MARK CARVELL: It's a key moment, I think, and we are hearing about how this Dynamic Coalition is going to make an impact in global and multi-stakeholder.  
     I was really struck by the alignment, for example, from Ghislain's presentation, the pyramid.  Alignment of a lot of the issues that came up in the pilot project, the IGF pilot that Wout led and how we are working through those issues.  And, indeed, I joined Wout on this initiative just before the Berlin IGF.  
     And I helped to run the session in Berlin.  And I was really struck there about the multiplicity of interest.  And we had breakout groups and so on, and so a lot of thinking going on on how to take forward the recommendations from the pilot project.  
     And since Berlin we have been doing a lot of work behind the scenes.  We have spent a lot -- all on a voluntary basis but sharing a great commitment to take this forward and sustain the momentum and we have undertaken a lot of consultations.  Individual calls, group calls, virtual meetings with a range of stakeholders and government and private sector interest and so on to help define how do we take this initiative forward under the auspices of the IGF in a constructive and focused way that is going to lead to concrete outcomes that could be an exemplar of what the IGF plus when it starts to bed down can achieve in terms of impacts and engagement and recognition by UN Member States, governments of the value of these multi-stakeholder engagements in terms of cooperation and meaningful results and impacts.
     So we did a lot of calls and we -- and the pilot project report, as Wout recounted at the beginning, identified a lot of issues, a lot of areas of focus.  And, of course, we couldn't go into all of those straight off.  We had to sort of think about prioritizing.  
     We did a survey of the stakeholders that we had contacted that had expressed interest on what in the first phase, if you like, of the Dynamic Coalition the work should prioritize and set up in terms of working groups and so on.
     We have arrived as a result of the survey and wider consultations, we have arrived at establishing three working groups on three key issues.  
     Security by Design.  And within that, a lot of technology, a lot of innovation going on, a lot of impact on networks and different devices, technologies and what should it focus on.  And Internet of Things came forward as we are calling it a kind of subgroup as a first area for the working group on Security by Design to start with Internet of Things and devices.  
     The second working group on education and skills.  And a third one on procurement.  And initially we are thinking government procurement.  But the discussions we have had, as Wout hinted at at the beginning, we should look at the wider private sector supply chain issues.  
     And, in fact, the pilot project report did flag big corporate entities.  How can they be drivers of take up of standards and so on.  So it's procurement, supply chain management, and the business case, creating the business case.
     I liked Ghislain's phrase about misalignment of market incentives.  It's that kind of area.  So we've got these three working groups.
     The other issues we anticipate will probably surface as additional areas of activity or working groups maybe in the second phase.  
     Issues like consumer protection, global testing, and the role of government in addition to procurement.  Does regulation have a place here in terms of incentivizing deployment of standards?  
     And no doubt, the three working groups in the first phase will start to feed constructively into thinking about wider government involvement in the whole sphere of activity.
     So there are three working groups.  And we have got three speakers to speak on each of them for you today to give short presentations.  
     Firstly, working group one, Security by Design and the subgroup on Internet of Things.  I would like to hand over to Yurii Kargapolov who has kindly volunteered to speak about the aims and scope of this particular subgroup of the working group on Security by Design.  
     So, Yurii, if you are ready.  Yurii is with the Internet Society, Chair of the IoT Special Interest Group.  I hope I got your accreditation right, Yurii.  So Yurii, please, can I invite you now to speak on the security by design working group.  Thank you.
     >> YURII KARGAPOLOV Thanks, Mark.  I'm Yurii Kargapolov.  And I'm the head of -- Chair of ISOC, special interest group with many years of experience on my other positions in the development of DNS, identity management, IoT, mobile novel portability systems with various functionality as well as internet governance and special topic, trends building are in the sphere of my interests.  
     Let me introduce the introduction the DC1 and DCI leader number one on Security by Design, the subgroup of Internet of Things.
     So stakeholder expert who contributed to the work of the IGF pilot project on the deployment of internet standards recognized the importance of Security by Design is an important way forward to make services software and products more security in compliance with the relevant standards.
     ICT is everywhere around us.  And more and more devices connect automatically to internet.  To form home, as they call it, let the security that those devices and services contain, and we let our security over individual users and the society as a whole.  
     The experts supporting this new recommendation believe that the level of our security, what is it currently, causes serious concern.  These issues, our Security by Design goes way beyond the Internet of Things, of course.
     I want to stress now the four points.  The first is the need for secured website built according to the top 10 best practices of Open Led Application Security Project.  So-called OLASP.  
     The second is more secure and build according to safer software principles.  The hosting of Our data becomes more secure then described in ISA-26001.  And the trustworthiness of our years of platforms depends on the level of security, softwares and et cetera.  It is impossible to tackle the best issues at the same time.
     The stakeholders who have recently consulted and who have volunteered to become members of this, our Dynamic Coalition working group on Security by Design had designed it as a first step to form a subgroup of IoT.  And they are anxious to avoid the duplication of work on IoT standards and policies being carried out elsewhere.  We agreed with the aim of adding value to other current initiatives and processes.
     The first is the guidelines.  And the guidelines, we have compilation of the current guidelines by the Dynamic Coalition ISSS best practice.  Creation of the best practice or work closely with existing.  And the second is solution to barriers.
     Identification of current barriers to deployment.  Creation of solution and implementation of action.  And identification of ways to provide solution.
     The thought is the considerations.  Barriers created by national registration and degradation.  Consumer control or connectivity options.  Promotion through alignment of legislative proposals.
     And fourth is specific IoT issues.  Definition of attack vectors and threats for IoT and creation of best practice for legacy IoT devices.  
     When I mentioned, I mean the sequence of actions may be persistent sequence of actions which using vulnerability detection tools aimed at gaining unauthorized entry and unauthorized access right to digital entities at any point of detected information system.  
     And, of course, I mean the existing blocks in the design of digital entities.  Also discussed the potential end goals and agreed the first sign of success will be participation and diversity.  Adoption by users in economic sectors, for example, gas and electricity and tech sector will therefore be important.
     It will be important to consider the potential roles and other stakeholders such as consumer and trade organizations and organization bodies, et cetera who may not be involved in the internet on the regular basis today.
     The working group may wish to invite them to join in some groups.  It is possible disclosure of vulnerabilities in IoT was identified as an important early issue for consideration by the IoT subgroup.  
     Recommendation by the DC-ISSS that propose options and solutions for possible disclosure of legally dictated.  Working group one held its first virtual meeting shortly after the IGF when the decision will be taken on the plan and timeline and its leadership will be confirmed.  
     The details will be posted on the DC-ISSS e-mail listing.  And, of course, you are invited to join this important work.  That's all.
     >> MARK CARVELL: Thank you very much, Yurii, for running through the objectives and direction of the working group on Security by Design and particularly the subgroup on IoT and the kind of outcomes and so on.  And so everybody has got something to mark in their calendar in terms of joining the working group.  So thanks very much.
     I was going to invite any questions for clarification after each presentation.  I don't see anything in --
     >> MARTEN PORTE: We have one from Jonas on whether working group one will focus on IoT or broader digital security policies.
     >> WOUT DE NATRIS: I was already typing an answer so I will just clarify this way.  
     Subgroup one, Jonas and others will focus on IoT.  And in the future, we foresee that perhaps other subgroups will come in focusing, for example, on security of platforms and security of data or security of websites.
     But that is something for the future.  Where we discuss responsible disclosure, that is one of the six topics that we have identified that could help with the finding solutions for the overall problem of deploying internet standards and ICT best practices.  
     So if that topic comes forward, then perhaps we will start that as working group number four.  And then it will be broader than just IoT.  But within IoT, responsible disclosure was identified as an important topic to address in at first in the subgroup.  So I hope that that clarifies your question.  Thank you.
     >> MARK CARVELL: Okay.  Wout, thank you very much.  Let's move on to working group number two, which is education and skills.
     And I would like to introduce Janice Richardson, who is a digital literacy expert involved in designing tool kits for children and so on.  
     Have a look at the -- she is with the European initiative called Insight.  Have a look at their website.  
     It's mainly Europe, is that right?  And Janice joins us actually from France.  So I turn now to Janice to explain further the objectives and focus of the educational skills working group number two.  Thank you, Janice.
     >> JANICE RICHARDSON: Thank you.  So good morning, everyone.  Well, this is the introduction of the DC-ISSS working group number two, as you've just heard, on education and skills.  
     I'm -- my background is actually in education, technology, and law.  And I have been a long-term university professor or lecturer in these areas.  
     The report of the IGF pilot setting the standards for a more secure and trustworthy internet recommended the inclusion of internet security in education and skill programs as one of the long-term solutions for promoting the deployment of internet standards and ICT best practices.  
     Participants in the project reported that graduate students of courses relating to information and communications technology had not covered online security.  Internet --
     (Microphone muted)
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Janice, you are muted.  We just lost the last 20 seconds, I believe.
     >> JANICE RICHARDSON: It was recommended therefore that the current ICT educational curriculum at the vocational, polytechnic, and university level needed to change in order to meet the requirements of industry and society as a whole as digital technologies increasingly transform many aspects of daily life.  
     For example, multimedia courses and training programs shouldn't only include how to build websites but also how to build a website that is inherently secure.
     At universities, when students take a course on how to execute complex programming projects, security should be an integral part of the course.
     This working group will address this issue with the aim of reviewing current practice in education and training and identifying best practices as a way forward for possible wider policy recommendations that the IGF can promote.  
     The members of working group two, education and skills have identified the two following issues as priorities for the first phase of the work program.  One, a diverse range of programs exists worldwide in the field of ICT education, skills and careers.  Including government initiatives, private sector programs, and government-led programs involving ICT companies.  
     And two, curricula are often set by the individual school or university and this makes it difficult for them to change in a coordinated approach.  While it is also important to allow for national and regional differences.
     The security of online education platforms has been agreed to be an important issue for educational establishments to understand and make provisions for and this became very apparent during the recent COVID crisis.
     This will be considered as potentially an issue for working group one, Security by Design by subgroup on platforms.
     The goals of WG2 include identifying and reviewing current practice.  Defining what is best practice.  Creating an observatory of global best practices and/or cooperation with existing policy observatories and repositories on digital best practice.
     Examining whether educational curricula should include greater coverage of internet security, safety, governance and architecture depending on the educational or training level.  Bringing together experts with the aim of establishing collaboration. Agreement on how to disseminate and promote the outcomes of the working group, taking into account national and regional differences.  
     Wider adoption for the best practices for developing internet security and skills through their inclusion in national ICT educational programs and provision of guidance for vocational training programs to include internet standards and ICT best practices.
     It was agreed in our stakeholder consultations held prior to the IGF that this working group should focus not only on the wider public -- should not focus on wider public awareness raising for which many diverse programs already exist.  
     The working group will consider its work successful if global best practices have been collated and the main outcomes and key messages of the working group have been communicated to relevant organizations.  Ministries of education, universities, and schools through national programs.  
     In addition, it has been suggested that this working group should be represented at events where ICT education issues are discussed and that might convene its own session or workshop at a future IGF.
     Thank you.  And please don't hesitate with your questions or clarifications.
     >> MARK CARVELL: Thank you, Janice.  And if anybody has got any quick points of clarification, I will just check.  I'm not very good at multitasking on the screen here.  But do we have anything?  I'm sure these issues will crop up in the main discussion that is going to involve everybody that is coming up shortly.
     Okay.  If there aren't any quick points of clarification, let's move on then to the third working group it has been decided to establish on procurement and supply chain management and the business case.
     And for this working group, we are very privileged to have joining us from Mexico, Professor Alejando Pisanty who is at UNAM in Mexico City.  
     So over to you, Alejandro, to talk through the aims and projected outcomes of this working group over the next year or so.  Thank you.  Alejandro.
     >> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: Thank you.  I am Alejando Pisanty, Professor at the National University of Mexico.  
     I would like to start the presentation by saying that standards are marvelous, there's so many of them.  A country like mine, which has a very strong internet from the United States industry as well as now imports and factories of Japanese and European automobiles, of course, leads to the situation presented in this cartoon which says there are 14 competing standards so we develop one global standard that, of course, everyone else's use cases and we have 15 competing standards.  
     And naturally this cartoon has been further developed where now you have one standard and 15 competing certifications and so forth.  This is one thing we surely suffer.
     And another thing that motivated me to come into this is things like this tool kit.  When you try to buy a tool kit for a workshop or for your car in Mexico, you make sure that you have both millimeter and imperial measures.  You don't know if you are going to need a 5/16 or an 8-millimeter.  
     You normally will have a Japanese car with millimeter screws over and then the wheels will have an English measure, so you need something in inches.  So that motivates me to move into the standards and also to be skeptical when you talk about them.
     What we have here is also another set of tools.  And great interest in the last weeks.  And then to find it a great honor being in the company of old friends like Wout de Natris, Mark Carvell, and the leaders in ISOC.  
     I have been involved in the global partnership for artificial intelligence, which is a multi- effort delegated by my government in the economic sector.  And what we find there is that people are trying to establish norms and ethical norms and standards for the ethical use of artificial intelligence to achieve goals like avoiding bias that comes from the algorithm itself, the bias from the data and so forth.  
     The concern there will lead to what I have written up is how to make sure these things are actually implemented.  You have all these rules, and no one is reading them when they are writing software for your data purchasing systems and putting them into operation.  
     It is as good as useless that you have these beautiful standards like you have when you have the mission statement for the company based on the laws that says excel in our markets with integrity and you have a corrupt salesman trying to bribe someone.  I mean it is useless there.
     So the point of our working group is to look at the procurement and supply chain management aspects of establishing and acceptance of standards and compliance.  This working group three was -- I'm very grateful to have been part of it.  
     One of the major conclusions in the report on the pilot project of the standards is that the business case for the development of security-related standards is largely absent.  In my understanding also, security-related standards are not only directly designated for security but things that increase the security may also be just pure standards compliance, so people know what is going on, like the technical standards.  
     So the report also considered how government procurement of information and communication technologies devices and services can be a driver for deploying these standards.  This is because governments can play a decisive role not only as legislators but also as a very large customer.  The government becomes normative in a market when this is a very large customer and very strict rules, and maybe it also puts rules on the suppliers on the things they purchase and install.  
     And so we have examples like the apply or explain procurement advice in the Dutch formalization.  In effect, public sector administrations with purchasing power, access to capital in the markets, or more secure device and networks and digital services generally and these can have a ripple effect in the market.  
     The pilot project suggests that the driver of standard deployment also applies at the large corporate level.  Large corporations think of, for example, ISPs and network operators for ICTs, think cloud suppliers and people who are providing services on top of that like video streaming or e-government services.  They can also help by this ripple effect of, in fact, making it harder for suppliers to be selling non-compliant equipment because there is less of a market for it.  And this creates a competitive edge as well for the adopters of the more security enhancing standards.
     Stakeholders who expressed interest in contributing to the work of this Dynamic Coalition makes for the discussion a few months ago, a few days ago, they expressed support for this in particular for this working group program, the purchasing and procurement and supply chain management business case.  
     For also including this wider private sector supply chain management issue.  This is a very important issue in some countries which are acquiring lots of mission or security or national security critical equipment or software or services and they are very concerned that there are leaks or gaps in the supply chain.
     What we envision as initial goals will evolve as we start working and increase our membership.  The principle of the work are envisioned to be guidelines.  
     One would be a set of comprehensive practical guidance issues on incorporating relevant and optimal security standards with clear expositions in what is required in terms of security and examples of standards to be referenced in this guidance.
     And there will be a compilation of best practice guidelines supported by a set of recommendations that will enable purchasers to make better decisions.  We also wish to promote a framework approach.
     It is not only a compilation and it is detailed rules, but more fine works that allow for people to establish more detailed guidelines within national environments or large corporate environments that are still meaningful for interaction with others, this interoperability, for example. 
     The idea here being is to reduce the major practice that where you have to buy two sets of screw drivers or wrenches in each country because you may have two measures of nuts and bolts and you never know which you have.  
     Much worse in the ICT case.  The need to address knowledge gaps and inconsistencies in procurement practice at the international level was also discussed and we discussed that the industry is highly influential particularly in developing countries.  
     And, on the other hand, if you don't have a national standard, countries will refuse to adopt it as a mandatory or strongly guideline for purchasing because it will be dependent on a foreign vendor that is not stable, that is not under control of the standard.
     We have to get together with the outreach group to make sure that people are understanding at the most basic level as well as at the detailed standards level.  
     And it will be very important to keep in mind, the uppermost in mind the interests and needs of end users.  How all of the supply chain and procurement which goes on behind the scenes, which takes place in government or large corporations impacts the final user, the individual user.  And also here considering the fact as mentioned that purchasing at the individual level sometimes is completely ignorant of standards and completely oblivious or at least agnostic about standards.  
     As was mentioned, the IoT case, for example, the surveillance cameras, the facility surveillance cameras which are highly insecure, and you don't even know that they could be insecure.  And they come from under the radar of authorities by imported informally through e-commerce.  
     Also suggested, and this will be considered and this is also in the process being looked at, whether the liabilities can help enforce the adoption of standards, whether someone in government is purchasing something that is not compliant with a known standard and therefore weakens the security and doesn't strengthen security as well as it could, then it is called neglect and it's called liabilities by public officials in many countries and subsequently prosecuted.  
     And in the case of a product company, it can lead to civil liabilities or commercial liabilities in the sense that they are causing damage by not preventing it enough.  And the fear of a loss of both as well increase compliance.  
     There will be here some more extensive work proposed based on the work that has been done on privacy how Germany and the US have similar standards of privacies by having completely different approaches.  And because in both cases there is a board liability concern.  
     In one case because of the law in Germany.  And another case in the U.S. because of exposure of a data breach, for example, can bring down the share value of a company.  So these approaches will be considered in our Dynamic Coalition.
     It is therefore underlining the need for all types of stakeholders to come together, and I'm calling you all to help us achieve these calls to help us be able to diffuse the work and disseminate the need for standards and compliance and for realistic standards. 
     Spread the word.  They will be endowed with documents and with practices that will help them intervene and shape policies in their countries.  And, of course, to businesses which are either in the selling or the purchasing side to help shape the work coming forward.  
     The first meeting of this working group three on purchasing and supply chain will be on November 27, and we will have announcements for that.  I hope you all are able to come together here.  Thank you very much.
     >> MARK CARVELL: Thank you for --
     >> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: And thank you for supplying the well-shaped document, whatever was in it was my reading and not your writing.
     >> MARK CARVELL: Okay.  Well, you embellished the presentation with the amazing illustrations of a huge heavy tool kit.  I can't imagine doing DIY with that.  Anyway, thanks very much, that was great.  
     And we are getting -- we are starting to run out of time, so I think we better hand straight over to Wout to moderate some open discussion with all of the participants who are with us today.  
     So, Wout, I will hand it over to you now.
     >> MODERATOR: Yes.  Thank you, Mark.  And we are running out of time, there are only eight minutes left.  
     As I had feared up front, we had enough to hold three sessions on all three topics and probably would have filled one and a half hour easily.  And there were some questions in the Q&A which have been answered.  And there is also some comments in the chat.  
     Marten, have you identified that we have time for only one if there is really something sticking out that needs to be discussed.  Otherwise, I suggest that I move into the closing remarks because we are getting very close to our time limit.
     >> MARTEN PORTE: As far as I know, there have not been questions that have not been answered or any comments that would -- now there is one question in the Q&A.  I believe.  Oh, you already answered that.
     >> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: And also expressed interest in the working group, and I'm sending her my e-mail to bring her in.  You are very welcome, Lori.
     >> MARTEN PORTE: Great to here.  Wout, we cannot hear you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Marten.  I was on mute.  
     Lori and all others, if you go to the IGF website for the Dynamic Coalition on Internet Standards, Security & Safety, you can see that you can register for an e-mail address.  And that way you are formally a member or even informally if you just want to observe, a member of the DC.  And that way you can start participating in the working groups so please go there.
     There is a little overview in the chat when the first meetings are going to be convened that will decide on the way forward.
     I will move into the final section and what is called the closing remarks.  Having heard all the comments, you may ask yourself, how does this important multi-stakeholder initiative continue?  
     As already pointed to, the IGF website there is an indication of the program, of a timeline.  So it's a two, perhaps three-year program leading towards policy recommendations and guidelines with the inclusion of internet security in educational curricula and developing training programs.  
     And the possible establishment of an observatory or repository of best practices relating to Security by Design and procurement and supply chain management security.  
     The next stage are the three meetings.  This is an invitation to you to join.  Because without your expertise, without your knowledge, and without perhaps even the liaison function to introduce us to the right people or perhaps that you are able to introduce us to pivotal people who can make decisions on the way forward or introduce people that have that position is extremely important.  
     So not only the content is important, but also the building of the network is going to be extremely important to have a chance of success.
     This DC is also in search of a volunteer to chair the working groups.  And that is something which will be decided on the working groups.  But if you have interest to become a chair of one of the working groups, please identify yourself in the working groups so that can be discussed.
     To provide the support of the complex issue like faster deployment of internet standards and ICT best practices, this deserves funding.  It is necessary.  It will ensure the smooth continuation of the Dynamic Coalition and the working groups.  And we do not ask this lightly.  But what makes it so important?
     What we foresee is that there is going to be some sort of a secretariat function that will provide the support to the working groups and the experts.  And provide that secretariat and make sure that the smooth continuation is guaranteed.  
     To do research, analysis to help write or co-write proposals.  To build and expand the network which is not going to be something to do easily.  To liaise and coordinate within and beyond the DC.  To organize meetings, presentations, sessions.  To give presentations outside of the DC and make sure that people can give those presentations.  
     To organize training sessions or assist and what else is needed to make this a successful Dynamic Coalition.  We ask some of you present here to consider funding the DC-ISSS to ensure that the first step toward reaching the end goals can be made and work starts happening pretty soon.  
     So let me take one step back and reflect with you where we are now, how did we get here?
     It is only in last March that the IGF pilot project produced a report that provided the conclusions and recommendations that we are discussing today.  And since then, we have taken further major strides forward in this issue.
     Once more showing that working under the aegis of the IGF can actually successfully aim for.  We are now at the point where the work program has been established and a diverse range of stakeholders is actively engaging in the three working groups that have been presented on.  
     And that is a broad section of the internet community.  We have big tech onboard.  We have academia onboard.  We have Civil Society on board.  We have Governance on board.  We have regulators on board.  We have the technical community on board.  
     So in other words, maybe -- and maybe I'm forgetting a few, and I apologize -- but we can see that the interest of -- on this topic is wide and is going to bring in the right sort of knowledge and expertise that we need.  
     So what do we aim for next?  And what do we need to aim for?  The ball lies in the penalty spots, to talk to the soccer analogy.  And the rest of the world sometimes calls football.  But the ball now is in front of us.  And will you help us kick the ball into the net because that is what we need to do.  Please reach out to us for to discuss these funding options because we have the ability and the possibility to actually aim for these goals.  
     We are at the end of the session, and that leads me to thank those participating actively and asking questions and making comments in the workshop.  
     First, I would like to thank you, the presenters, setting the stage and the three volunteers from the DC-ISSS working groups to present on where we are and what the challenges we face are.
     And thanks to the Swiss Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs for their support in making the inaugural session and workshop earlier this week of the Dynamic Coalition possible.  Thank you very much. 
     A big thank also goes out to the participants in the preparatory workshops who made it possible to present the initials proposals we presented on today.  Without you, we would have only had a concept and now we have content with the Dynamic Coalition.  
     We wish you a good virtual IGF and I hope to meet on this Dynamic Coalition and on all of the topics next year in Katowice because I sincerely hope that we will be able to convene next year and I hope to meet you again and in the DC-ISSS and work with you on these topics to bring the goal of deployment closer than where we are today because the internet really needs to become more secure.
     So with that, I end the session.  And I wish you all good health and hopefully see you soon.  Bye-bye.     
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-5-dc-net-neutrality-at-times-of-covid-19^^

   >> LUCA BELLI:  It looks like we can get started.  Good morning, to everyone and welcome to the 2020 session of the IGF Coalition on Net Neutrality.  We have today a quite wide and diverse set of panelists, and we are also presenting our annual outcome that has been developed in partnership with the Coalition of Community Connectivity, and the book, "The Value of Internet Openness at Times of Crisis."  That is the main issue that we will discuss today.  Of Course, from a Net Neutrality perspective, and highlighting the various faces of this and I think we have -- we have all understood very harshly over the past months the value of Internet governance, the value of Internet access.  We have been obliged since the beginning of the year when COVID-19 started to spread to digitize everything in our life, health, leisure, public services, our essentials, everything migrates to online work.  
What we still have to understand is at first, a huge part of the world's population still doesn't have Internet access.  And on the other hand, a great part of the Internet population that is connected is partially connected, and it is one of the key points that we want to explore today.  So not only the essential value of Internet openness, meaning open access for those who have access, but how this is essential every human being in this specific moment not to be kept out of any basic social or work interaction and keep enjoying his or her fundamental rights.  What we're collecting in the book today is a set of opinions that really describes the different faces of Internet and also describes that even if you have, if it you have the luck of having Internet access, there is still a huge variety of, a huge number of restrictions that can either be politically or economically motivated, and that affect how we enjoy connectivity, and this can enormously restrict how we enjoy Internet access.  
What's very important to understand is that statistically, someone that has a charter or limited blocked Internet access is as someone that who doesn't have Internet access.  So we don't really have an idea of phenomenon of how people concretely enjoy Internet access because, statistically speaking, the current definition we utilize to identify someone that has Internet access a person that accesses the Internet at least once over the past three months, and this fails to consider a huge chunk of nuances of how we could enjoy Internet access.  Someone that enjoys, that can access Internet, but only can access the websites that are approved by his national government is considered as an individual that is connected and someone that only receives zero-rated applications is considered someone that is a connected individual, but of course it is not their reality.  Someone that only has access to a part of the Internet is not a true Internet user that can contribute to the evolution of the Internet through the connectivity that can content and services that will contribute to the Internet.  
That is precisely the Internet openness and that is precisely what we'll discuss today with an excellent set of panelists.  I'm not going to introduce them all now but one by one in the interest of time management, and actually I would also like to say that together with me to give introductory remarks, it was also supposed to be here with us, Nikhil Pawha, a Co-Editor of the book; importantly, for some quite serious health issue, he's not here with us today so we wish him to be if good health as soon as possible.  
And we start with introductory remarks of another star of Internet Governance who is, Anriette Esterhuysen, the Chair of the Multistakeholder Group of the IGF, and also, one of the Co-Authors of the book, having penned the post-phase of the booklet that gives us a lot of interesting thoughts and elements on why Internet openness is also very important for an open Internet governance.  Anriette, without further ado, I would like to ask you to start the dance with your introductory remarks.
   >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thanks, very much, Luca.  And, thanks, everyone.  Don't call me a co-author.  That really doesn't do any justice to my contribution.  I'm an admirer, and I'm a supporter of this initiative.  It's really extremely important, and I think that thinking about what it really means to have openness and neutrality on the Internet is a continuous task.  And I think that's what is so powerful about this collection, is that it's taking principles that we've cared about for a long time, but it's putting them in a contemporary context and thinking about how they need to be applied now, so that's all I have really to say, Luca.  I just want to express my admiration and support for the endurance of the work that you've all done and the fact that it's been continuous and evolves and that it responds to the question that you address, but that it responds to it in a fresh way every year taking on new challenges.  So, that's all from me, and I really look forward to hearing the authors.  I do have to leave for a while, but I'll come back.  Back to you, Luca.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Anriette, for these encouraging points; and actually, it is also very important to have you as a part of the discussion, in not only this discussion, but several discussions we have had over the week about Internet openness about digital comments, interoperability and many of the dots that we are trying to connect.  So, thank you very much for these opening elements, Anriette.  
Now, let's start to dig into the details of our session today.  The first speaker that I want to introduce is Frode Sorenson.  He's a good friend and also a Senior Advisor at Norwegian Telecoms Regulator, NKOM, and has been chairing the Expert Group for almost a decade and he is one of the Authors of the book and exploring how net neutrality and COVID-19 met over the past months in Europe and what sort of emerged with the increased traffic growth in Europe and how this has affected or has been effected by the relationship in Europe.  So, Frode, without further ado, please go ahead.  The floor is yours.
   >> FRODE SORENSON:  Many thanks for this kind introduction, Luca.  I've been looking forward to this presentation.  Acknowledging the different situations in the different places of the world, this is a European experience, which I will give you now in three main points.  The first one is about the relevance of net neutrality.  The second one is about the impact of the Internet technology, and the third one is about the impact of the open Internet regulation.  Looking first at the relevance of net neutrality.  When the pandemic reached Europe in March, we were faced with lockdowns in many countries and people had to go back to their homes in teleworking, online teaching, and also social interaction was done from their homes, and there was thereby a significant increase of Internet traffic allowed, and in particular because of video conferences that were used extensively in schools and in working area, and this really showed the importance of the open Internet because without an open Internet, we would not be able to do these kind of activities from homes.
Then the problem arose, would net neutrality regulation cause any problems, for example, for operators regarding limitations for how they could manage their networks, and that leads to my second point, the impact of the Internet technology itself.  When looking into the technology, it's important to distinguish between the network layer and the application layer when we discuss net neutrality.  The regulation of net neutrality applies to the network layer, but measures can be taken in the network layer but also in the application layer, so the network layer measurement, measures are typically referred to as traffic management.  The application layer measures are typically done in the endpoint, referring to the end-to-end paradigm which is well known on the Internet.
If you look at the application layer first, we have several functions that really came into play in this situation, the transport protocols, TCP, and now much used Quick Protocol executes congest I don't know control which means that the endpoints are actually slowing down when there is congestion situation in the network so the endpoints are cooperating with the network to manage the situation.
This is also done for some of the applications, video streaming typically applies dynamic adaptive streaming, which increases mechanisms that are doing the coding or the video whereby the traffic load is lower when there is congestion in the network.  Large could be tent providers are also using extensively CDNs, content distribution networks, which are locating content closer to the end users whereby the traffic load on the network is decreasing.
So, all of these measures applied in the application layer and they're automatically conducted when the congestion situation arises.  So, what about traffic management on the network layer?  That leads me to the third point.  The European Open Internet Regulation is applicable also in this situation, so shortly after the pandemic came to Europe, Baric and the European Commission had a joint statement presenting the views of the situation, and they committed to preserve the open Internet in the understanding that the open Internet is really important for us when we are not able to meet physically.
In addition to that, it was also emphasized that the ISPs, the Internet service providers, also have tools that they can do reasonable traffic management, of course, and in the European law there are also measures called exceptional traffic management that are allowed if necessary, and such measures could also be application specific, actually.
And finally, the regulators typically also went into a close dialogue with the different stakeholders of the network to follow the closely and cooperate with the stakeholders in case problems arise where the governments and regulators might facilitate the development.
After this first announcement from the Commission and BRICS, they regularly reported on the traffic situation on the European Internet, and the results from that showed that there was an overall traffic increase, a significant increase, typically around 30, 40, 50 percent in many countries, so there was an increase in pressure on the network.  But the overall situation, there were no major network congestion issues reported in this period.  There were actually minor situations that occurred, but ISPs were working with maintenance and operations in the networks to mitigate these problems.
In conclusion, what are the takeaways from the European experience?  First of all, the network neutrality rules are designed for such exceptional circumstances.
Resilience of Internet technology does a good job and ISPs may also use exceptional traffic management measures when needed.  At the same time, end users’ rights are safeguarded by this regulation.
In conclusion, overall, the European Internet infrastructure has coped well despite the increased load in Internet traffic.  Thank you for your attention.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much for this.  A very good technical points and policy points to start the debate, and we have also the chance of having with us today, who leads the net neutrality unit, the French Telecoms Regulator and it's very important to have their perspective today but only because the President of today could not with be with us and is one of the co-authors of this book, but also because has very well implemented what is the impact of the pandemic of Internet traffic in the annual report, and has a very interesting conceptualization of the Internet as a common good that has to be fostered by public authorities, so without giving too much of a spoiler of your presentation, Aurore, please, the floor is yours and thank you very much for being with us today.
   >> AURORE TUAL:  Thanks.  Thanks for the invitation.  So, a French regulatory authority for electronic communication and contribution in France, as a consequence the architect and guardian of the countries fixed on mobile telecoms.  As in many countries, the COVID-19 crisis illustrated the degree to which people in France weren't only to stay connected to their working, personal, and cultural environments when at home.  The fact that a number of users were modified during the lockdown resorted in increase in Internet traffic as much as 30% according to estimate in France.  Also led to significant change in traffic profile with the usual evening spikes spread out across the day.  The situation raises a number of questions about Internet operation.  Were the networks properly scaled for certain traffic related to the crisis.  How can we ground compliance with net neutrality rules during this exceptional situation?  Regarding net neutrality took place both at European and national levels from the beginning of the public health crisis, and indeed to meet this unprecedented and increased demand for connectivity, one of the questions that was raised was whether it would be possible legally and technically for ISPs to prioritize the networks for certain content that was deemed essential, working, distance learning, and internal medicine.  The nondiscrimination rules imposed by Europe's Net Neutrality Regulation it is not set in practice particularly when having to distinguish between similar streams, for instance, video conferencing and video streaming, or when services are being used for something other than their original proposal.  For example, using video game platforms for home schooling.
As explained by my colleague from NKOM Europe's Net Neutrality Framework allow ISPs to take specific measures in case of risk of congestion on the networks provided these measures satisfy certain conditions; notably, preventing having as little impact as possible on network traffic and giving equivalent treatment or equivalent traffic categories and not being applied any longer than strictly necessary.  This opens a permanent dialogue with ISPs.
In the end, the best way to tackle the issue was estimate a joint effort from all players, of course through for instance mentioning the interconnections when necessary.  Government and regulators through close monitoring of the situation, the issue of best practices and constant contact with the players and users modifies to lessen the load on the network and provider through modification of the practices and direct with ISPs.
Indeed, major content and service provider challenges impact on the networks warrants attention.  Today between this player of improving network management to place under the crisis, for instance, when rolling out new services, introducing certain options or posting updates to popular games online.  The benefits to establish a dialogue mechanism that would enable operators to anticipate and plan for these events even if permissionless innovation needs to remain the rule.  So far for the subject under asset purview, the development of contact tracing solutions to fight the spread of the epidemic also how important it is to ensure an open Internet being just telecom operators, and as for the role played by the two main mobile operating system providers, it seems increasingly vital to challenge the partners under technological choices what they place on app developers, extending the principle to an open Internet to include an operating system which is a step since 2018 seems more present than ever before.
To conclude, networks in France did not experience issues during the COVID-19 lockdown that lasted from March to May and thanks to the telecommunication network capacity and performance and on the other to the mobilization of the ecosystem.  The net neutrality regulation has once again had had relevance and capacity to adapt.  More importantly, it's showing that when it comes to common assets, the law under the law of the strongest.  Baric and European Commission already reiterated this principle through the crisis, and ensure that this principle continue to be fully enforced despite the very singular circumstances and we'll continue net neutrality.  This ongoing crisis already has several lessons that will be useful to cope with lockdown in France, but also to ensure that Internet remains a common good.  Thank you.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Aurore, for this illustration of the work that has been done by Baric also to cope with the current exceptional situation.  Also for raising a very important point that many of us also -- maybe of the members of this coalition have been voicing over the past couple of years, which is also the importance to look at Internet openness and not only exclusively for the classic net neutrality perspective, but also from other perspectives like the device neutrality perspective has been champions over the past couple of years and also thinking about the openness in terms of interoperability of operating systems or even maybe of applications, and that is something that has been raised along the week, but in several debates I have been participating in, and I have been receiving several feedback from friends and other members of this coalition with regard to the interest of orientating a little bit much -- or a little bit more, I'm sorry, the work of this group also on these other key issues which are indeed key for Internet openness besides, of course, looking at net neutrality.  Now to move a little bit it of our perspective from Europe and then to other parts of the world, let me invite KS Park, another good friend that is championing Internet openness and net neutrality since probably of this concept in South Korea, and he has been founding, he founded Openness Korea several years ago and professor for at Korea University Law School, and we have pleasure to have him here today speaking about latest evolutions in South Korean regulation and some concerning provisions that have been adopted in many, if I'm not mistaken, regarding the service utilization measures and other regulations that may contradict Internet neutrality in South Korea.  So please, KS, the floor is yours.
   >> KS PARK:  Thank you, Luca.  I think that COVID-19 is forcing us to focus on the economic aspect of network neutrality, essentially the issue of termination fee.  Pre-internet, formal free of speech granted us freedom to speak whatever we want, but never provided resources for actually delivering our messages to many people.  Post-internet, network neutrality made sure that we are equipped with substantive freedom of speech which means delivering messages to millions and millions of people without ever having to worry about the cost of actually delivering that data.
Pre-internet, sending your message to 1 million people would have costed 1 million dollars in phone bills or postage, but post-internet as long as you pay access fees to your local ISP, it is basically free, regardless of how many people are actually access your message.
But in Korea, there is an attempt by the government and the IS Ps that have formed an oligopoly to charge termination fee or equivalently charge for delivery of data packets, so it already back in 2016, they have implemented SPPR, sending network pays rule among ISPs where ISPs receiving more data or ISPs sending more data than they are receiving have to pay the other ISP that they are sending more data to, and that has already put a lot of pressure on the ISPs to be reimbursed, to be reimbursed for this SPNP fee exchange between ISPs from the users of the Internet, especially the content providers that are putting a lot of content online.
I think that COVID-19 has increased the time that people spend online and essentially increasing the amount of data packets coming from those content providers through the network, and that increase in the volume of data has given excuses, given or opened the windows of opportunities for ISPs to make an argument that, oh, we got to be paid for delivery of all of these data packets, and to oppose that Mozilla epic early access now that have written letters to Korea's, to the country's science and ICT Ministry to stop trying to charge the termination fee or charge for delivery of data.
And but you know back in May as Luca said, the Congress, the legislature has passed a law that put the obligations on the content providers to make sure that the data is delivered to the users, which will again, work -- which will again break network -- which will go against the network neutrality because then whoever pays more for delivery will reach more users and more audience, and substantive freedom of speech that was guaranteed to everyone, even without much economic resources will be broken.
And I think at this point it's very important to notice that in California's Network Neutrality Law, there is a provision that specifically bans charging termination fee or charging for delivery of data to the telecos or ISP users, and because the California law has been locked in litigation battle in the U.S. because of a conflict with the Trump Administration, people have not paid much attention to it.  I think it's time to pay a lot of attention to it to make sure that the same thing doesn't happen outside Korea.  Thank you.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, KS.  Very interesting points that you are raising that have maybe learned from Korea's experience are but also from others -- from other countries or states experience and applied further context.  Very good points.
Now, to keep on continuing our world tour let's move to India where we have Smriti Parsheera, Fellow of CyberBricks Project and of public policy of New Delhi.  And, Smriti, who penned two chapters of the book and you have explored net neutrality and other issues from the Indian perspective.  We know that government has mandates on Internet shutdowns and some restrictions in two states of India, so we have very concrete examples of restrictions ongoing in India in this moment, but we also know at the same time, the regulator is also designing a framework body to monitor net neutrality in India.  So, please, Smriti, the floor is yours, so tell us a little more about what is happening in India.
>> SMRITI PARSHEERA:  Thanks, Luca.  A pleasure to join everyone in the session and to have contributed to the e-book.  I have a couple of slides which I'll just put up.  There we go.  So, as you know all of us who are following this space would know that India is one of the countries which could be said to have one of the most robust net neutrality frameworks in the world, and this is something which has come about between 2016 to 2018 through two instruments mainly.  One is regulation TRAI telecom regulatory authority came out with to ban any discriminatory tariffs based on the kind of content that one accesses, so all zero-rating like services were barred.  Then later in 2018 we had more holistic net neutrality framework come about through license and telecom agreements.  The interesting thing at that point was one of the recommendations made by TRAI to the government was that in addition to having these rules, we should have a monitoring framework where you have a multistakeholder body which takes an active role in ensuring that these rules are being implemented.  And this is something which hasn't put in place yet, but just about two months back we had a new set of recommendations from the regulatory authority, which went into some details about how this body should be rolled out.  
So, first on the question of who is going to be a part of it, what they recommend is that it will automatically be all of the telecom and Internet service providers, but also other stakeholders like content providers, researchers, Civil Society, people from government agencies, et cetera, who will be invited or nominated, so unlike the automatic members, these people are supposed to be nominated, but unfortunately the regulations are silent on how the nomination or invitation process is going to work.
The next part is what this body is expected to do, so there is some more clarity from the regulator and the recommendation is that it's not going to be something which does the enforcement on its own, but it's supposed to assist and advise the government in that enforcement function so advisory role on doing things like receiving complaints from people from their own members or from consumers investigating those complaints, making recommendations based on that.  And the other interesting thing, they role they want to ascribe to the body is they say they'll help in the monitoring and transparency of traffic management practices, so they say that basically every TSP and ISP will have to report what kind of traffic manage they plan to do or are doing and this will help with a public repository and putting it on the website so there is information and knowledge to consumers.  
So, while these are, of course, great initiatives and we're moving in the right direction, where we're lacking in the recommendations is, of course, the question of how all of this is to happen, right.  So, if we say all the ISPs will automatically become members, we're talking about, you know, 400 odd entities which are going to be members of this body, will we have 400 non-ISP representatives also is the question that remains unanswered.  You know, will there be a balance between broad stakeholder groups, and of course among the ISPs there will be differences between large and small content players, whether Civil Society and consumer groups will genuinely represent the interest of these groups or is there a conflict of interest.  So those kinds of issues are something, you know, which yet need to be looked at.  And also, will there be transparency in the functioning of the body, will have to announce what investigations it's doing, why it's doing one versus the other investigation, and so those are questions that are remaining unanswered, but it's an interesting initiative which is being recommended.
The other, you know, issue that I wanted to touch upon is now that we've had these rules in place for about two years, the question that arises is that what has happened in the interim, like you know have we had any unauthorized actions being taken from the TSPs and on regulatory we have nothing known publicly at least about any kind of enforcement action, but there is some interesting work that has come up, and I think Apar will take more about it in a moment which is around researchers and crowd source data from consumers talking about differential practices where they're not able to access particular websites using particular ISPs, right.
Now, one of the exemptions in the law as in most net neutrality frameworks is that if there is a government authorized or lawful order from the government or from the Court then that would be an exception to the net neutrality restrictions, but there is a painful tension between the government blocking rules and the rules of net neutrality.  So, the government's blocking rules through which these authorizations for lawful orders are to be made, they have a requirement that you have to be in strict confidentiality of any request that comes in for blocking, and any action that is taken on that.  Whereas the net neutrality rules say that any exception that is applied has to be transparent, has to be transient, has to be proportionate.  So clearly from a TSP perspective, we are in a position where either they can leverage this disconnect between the two regulations and you know get away with certain practices, or they're torn between two different ministries and two different regulatory authorities trying to implement two absolutely divergent rules on them, and that's something that we need clarity on in the times to come.
Finally, one of the, you know, interesting developments that came up in the last few months in the early days of the lockdown, we saw this proposal come up from the COAI, the Cellular Operators Association of India, a powerful telecom industry body and they proposed to the government that you know, given the load on the websites, given the fact that people are not able to reach us, the data, and maintain connectivity in terms of having active plans, there should be a proposal to have a free access to certain critical websites, so you know as you would recollect the zero-rating regulation that India adopted does not allow any kind of differential rating including free services, but there is an exception in that which allows for any kind of access which is for public emergencies, which clearly COVID would satisfy or things which are emergency service like contacting an ambulance or contacting, you know a hospital would qualify as emergency services, so those would be exceptions where a service provider can go ahead and do that with within 7 days they have to inform the regulator and then the regulator will take a call on whether that's something valid and they want to authorize.
So in this particular incident, the proposal didn't actually go anywhere because, you know, data prices in India already over the last few years the way it has evolved are very low, so really I'm not sure there is no disclosure on what the regulator thought about it, but probably this was on their mind that, you know, cutting -- it's more about access to devices which is the blockage for Internet access at this point and it wasn't so much about data price, although that's one of the factors, but one thing to think about is going forward if this exception is to be invoked, what are the principles that we would expect to be deployed in that case, and unlike the scenario of the net neutrality the broader regulations, these regulations don't give out guiding principles, but clearly we can draw from the license agreement about certain            plans, so one should clearly be that it's proportionate, transparent, and transient and cannot be long-term measures that exceed the purpose being sought.  And there should be no commercial arrangements possible at the back end when you're dealing with this kind of emergency situation.  And finally, so as to ensure that there is no undue burden even on the telecom providers for providing this sort of a service, there should be at the back end an arrangement where the government has the capacity to compensate the providers for such a service out of the universal service obligation fund.  So, these are questions which will probably come up again if we're again in a status where the zero-rating question comes up and it was not something considered and decided upon in the present circumstances.
Finally, with that, you know, clearly what we achieved in India in terms of net neutrality framework is a great policy achievement.  No doubt.  It's been a political battle with strong stakeholders on every side, but the job is not done.  And I think Apar will add to that in a few moments and the job is not done because questions about enforcement remain open, questions about monitoring the role of this multistakeholder body and will it genuinely be multistakeholder and participatory, are things which remain to be seen.  Thank you.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Smriti, and now it's time as we already have a lot of good elements from many very different jurisdictions, it's a very good moment to open to a bit of debate.  I'm sure there will be questions comments from the audience.  Let me just remind the participants or attendees that if you want to raise your happened, to ask a question or comment, you have these Zoom functions that allow to you raise your hand and then you will be given privileges to speak.
We are going to have a little bit of a very short debate now for 5-10 minutes and then we'll start and go back with the second slot of panelists.
Now, there was some -- we can also, of course, add questions on the chat.  I saw that there was a comment by Chris Marsden on the fact that Zoom views increase 1,000% in March according to the measurement which is indeed pretty interesting.
But, do we have any comments from the attendees?  Again, let me remind you that if you want to say anything, don't be shy, and just raise your hand and you'll be given privileges to speak, or if you have any questions, please also of course use the chat.
As I'm seeing that we have a pretty shy audience.  I will take advantage of my moderators capacities and I will ask -- I will put forward a point that I think has been mentioned, and it is quite essential for not only for today's debate but also for the future work of this group, I think, which is amongst this set of distinguished experts that we have here today, do you think that there are other elements of Internet openness besides the simple net neutrality debate that should be addressed, that we should start to look at?  Because let me provide a little bit more on this point.  We have been having many discussions over the past week at the IGF; although we were not all together, there were many occasions, many webinars to interact and speak in custom networks, and really I have a feeling that there is a lot of appetite for expanding the debate on Internet openness besides the net neutrality, the simple traffic management or zero-rating, so price discrimination debate.  
So, do you think there is some specific topic we have heard or stressing the device neutrality perspective, do you think there are other perspectives that should be included in the work of this coalition, and then I see that there is also a hand raised.  So, first, the general question if anyone wants to provide an answer amongst the panelists, and then I see Ian Brown has a question or raised a hand.
>> Hi, Luca, am I connected now?  I'm sorry.  It's not working.
>> We can hear you.
>> Okay.  I can hear.  Luca was muted.  I'm sorry.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I will just say that now you are connected.  I was expecting the panelists to reply before you were speaking but let's do the other way around.  Make your point and then we will reply.
>> IAN BROWN:  Okay.  Briefly you mentioned interoperability and that does seem like something good for this group to can go not least because it's something that several major jurisdictions seem to be moving forward with the EU in the proposed digital markets act and the U.S. House Antitrust Committee suggested in their report that the Biden Administration might take toward and significant reviews in Japan, Australia, and other countries and so it would be great working together in this group to bring a really international perspective on what's happening and ways that the jurisdictions might work together.  It would be terrible if all of these different jurisdictions regulated interoperability in different ways.  It would be very anti-interoperable.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Yes.  It would not be legally interoperable.  Let's say.  So, do we have any -- thank you very much Ian for this point.  That is one of the key issues or dimensions of the broader Internet openness debate that we may also think to introduce to the work of this coalition.  Do we have any other perspectives on this?  Any panelists willing to venture?  KS, please, go ahead.
   >> KS PARK:  I didn't raise my hand, actually.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I'm sorry.  I thought you were raising.  So, Smriti.
>> SMRITI PARSHEERA:  You mentioned questions about web censorship, shutting down the Internet, blocking a website, and processes around that both because these are important questions of openness and there is this interaction with net neutrality essential in the blocking debate and these would be interesting perspectives to bring in.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Do we have any other reply or comment from the panelists?  Otherwise we'll move to the next slot of presentations.
Okay, so we'll move to the next slot of presentations and we stay in India, but with some different points we have the pleasure of having Apar Gupta who is the director of the Internet Freedom Foundation and they have been working a lot and they have played a very prominent role in the consultation of TRAIs recommendations and traffic management, and they have also tabled a very interesting and progressive proposal to have Internet access as a civil right in India, so that is a very interesting perspective that really deserves to be heard, so please, Apar, welcome to the debate and the floor is yours.
   >> APAR GUPTA:  Thank you so much, Luca.  A warm welcome to the panelists and people attending.  I would like to thank Smirti for setting the foundation and a solid understanding around network neutrality, and also, I would like to go back to Luca's framing of how net neutrality and openness squares with the larger political questions around continuing Internet shutdown.
It just seems paradoxical because it is.  Firstly, just some core demographic data from India also will be useful in terms of people understanding how far we have reached in terms of Internet access by itself, where there are close to 600 million active Internet connections, this is not reflective of the number of users because a single user may have more than one connection.  However, it speaks to a very large number of Internet users.  The second is in terms of the usage by itself, across the top social media platforms, Indians essentially constitute the largest number of Facebook users, WhatsApp users, and this essential concentration in terms of usage does have consequences both for openness as well as network neutrality and is factored into the larger political decision-making both around how restrictions on access to the wider Internet operate as well as how the regulators and policymakers view them.
So, firstly, just talking about Internet shutdowns and the recognition of the Internet as a political and civil right.  It flows from very constitutional understandings, legalistic understandings where it's linked to the fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression which is recently litigated in the Supreme Court and the decision came actually in January of this year, and the Supreme Court linked it to the fundamental right of freedom of speech and express as well as to carry on trade and business.  And in times of COVID, we've realized that both are essential facilities, and this understanding is also reflected in how telegraphs have been actually and spectrum usage has been considered by both the courts, the constitutional understanding, and then carried forward actually in explanatory memorandum by the telecom regulators, the TRAI when it first prohibited differential pricing of Internet -- of the application layer, in a way that any website could be charged under commercial arrangement and discounted or be overpriced by Internet service provider.  So, this understanding is reflected also in the Network Neutrality Regulation to a certain extent, if not expressly, then through explanatory memorandum by the TRAI.
Now, the ongoing Internet shutdowns, while they do recognize the political and civil rights, there are large exceptions that are carved out which I think need to square much more closely with network neutrality because it's not only about Internet shutdowns but also encouraging other practices and proposals, for instance, the white listing of websites which essentially means that a mandated list of about 400 to 500 websites may be permitted in a territorial region or geographical region which may be classified as a government to be a bit sensitive.
And secondly now it's coming to much more of an understanding of just purely in terms of network neutrality.  I think Smriti's comments were excellent when it comes to looking at the actual enforcement of the network neutrality protocol when you step beyond the Internet shutdowns to the maximal larger part of how it's governed, despite having recognition in law that even that technical measures for discrimination are not permissible unless those exceptional practices, which are provided within the regulation are satisfied, industry does not have an implementation framework and that's the question that essentially concerns a lot of us, and we have looked at through crowd source data that the same website is sometimes blocked on four ISPs but available on six different ISPs, and one presumes that if there is a lawful order, which is the basis of the restriction on the access of that website, it should be blocked for all ISPs rather than just four.  
So, I just end this by saying that a good basis to proceed with the conversation around Internet openness and network neutrality is to go back to these constitutional principles at least in our domestic law, and I think that recognition is also already, which is very strong and fairly positive and that the access to the Internet actually fulfills a fundamental right, and that kind of understanding also goes beyond the traditional understanding of regulation and it's much richer, it's a human rights perspective.  Secondly, it gives opportunity in regions which are outside Europe and America, which may implement practices which may be restricted such as just permitting small websites in certain zones and finally a lot of this depends on the actual implementation framework and ensuring that it should be multistakeholder, and I know that's a word which will actually depend on the enforcement, but this is what we're looking towards when we look at enforcement.  So, I think we do have some road to actually charter in the future and our work is not yet done possibly for the next IGF we have more learnings to share.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Excellent.  Thank you very much, Apar for this and raises the very important issue of enforcement.  I remember I think it was four or maybe five years ago we actually seven years ago we crafted the model framework of net neutrality and we already suggested the importance of enforcement and also to involve a wider range of stakeholders in the enforcement and also users in the enforcement and in the monitoring of the enforcement is a key point, and I really hope that India will develop a very, not only efficient, but also inclusive and sustainable framework to allow the most -- or the best possible, or the highest quality possible monitoring of Internet traffic practices that are regulated under net neutrality.
Now, speaking about restrictions that are not really clear in how they are framed, it really -- it's a really good segue to then move to another country by coincidence is one of the BRICS countries, Russia, that has implemented some really interesting, to some extent, measures to cope with COVID-19, and we have two Russian speakers today.  I would like to start with Anna Orlova and they have authored one of the chapters of the book dealing with restrictions and limitations that have been introduced by Russia over the past months, and it's very interesting to understand how they have been perceived also by Russian Administration.  So, Anna, go ahead the floor is yours.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Thank you very much for this opportunity to participate.  We have prepared some slides that I will share with you in just a minute.  Please let me know if you can see the slides?
>> Yes, we can see them well.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Okay.  Great.  So, the title of our chapter was on net neutrality times of COVID, and the case of the Russia.  So, we did a study together with Andrey and he will talk after I present, and our research period was from April to May 2020.  The main focus of our research was on Moscow, the capital of Russia because it was and still is the epicenter of the pandemic, and also due to the fact that Moscow has the most advanced combination of e-government systems in the country that were used at some point and implemented and used to introduce counter measures against the increase of infections.
So, to reflect on dynamic of new cases in Russia.  Russia is still the fourth highest country among the top five, and the cases continue to rise.  We could say that Russia had two waves, and now it's in the second wave of the pandemic.  As of yesterday, the numbering of new cases was 20, 582.  Here we can see that Moscow, if I --
   >> LUCA BELLI:  If I may interrupt, I think there is a problem with the transmission of the slides.  I don't know if other panelists can see the slides properly?  For me it is blocked on Slide number 8.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Let me check.  Just a second.
>> You may need to go full screen.  Maybe that is the issue.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Okay.  I cannot actually share the entire screen.  The application doesn't allow me.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Can the tech support please give Anna co-host privileges so that she can share.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Excuse me, Luca, maybe I will demonstrate those slides.  Maybe that would be better.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  We can try.  Maybe it will be faster this way.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Just browse down without going full screen.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I think it's better, Anna, could you try to do it again or otherwise we will --
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  What was the advice?  I didn't quite catch it?  I can browse --
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Browse down to the next slide without going full screen.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Let's try to.  I'm sorry for the technical problem.  Let's try to do the slides again.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  I could share the screen, Luca.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Let me go back to Slide 1.  Is it working now?
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Perfectly.  Perfectly.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  It's working, right?  So, as I've already said.  I said about the period.  And this is just to reflect on the dynamic of the new cases of coronavirus in Russia.  And here you can see the map of the cases all over the country, and Moscow stays the epicenter of the pandemic and within the last two days, on Wednesday and Thursday, Russia was breaking its record with new cases of on Wednesday it was more than 19 and yesterday more than 20,000 cases.
So, basically, what we wanted to show here is that although there are various measures that Russia has been implementing, the situation hasn't really changed much.  So regarding the restrictions that are taking place in Russia since the beginning of the pandemic, there has been various observations, also by international NGOs, and there is a project that is called Pandemic Big Brother which is basically a monitoring of various restrictions regarding civil rights or regarding digital rights, or around the world and here we can see that the case of Russia.  So for example, if we look into two waves, during the first wave we had the following restrictions implemented by the state, the cell phone surveillance, video monitoring, and domain facial recognition, violation of freedom of speech, which here we specifically referred to fake news law and although Andrey will talk about this in more detail, although there were some other examples of violation of freedom of speech.  And also, surveillance using governmental apps that continues until today.  Then there is also restriction in the form of legal prosecution.  Here we will specifically talk about the emergency law.  And then there are examples of drone control to control people doing the isolation properly, et cetera.
And then there are examples of access to official information or limitations in this regard.  If we look in the second wave, we haven't really covered in our study, we can still say that there are still is continuous surveillance by means of governmental apps.  There are continuous violations of freedom of speech, and there are also examples of legal prosecution.  So, we will talk today mostly about the study and the data we have, and we will talk about four main points.  I will talk about digital tools that were used in Russia to survey online and offline, and about automated face recognition system.  And then Andrey will continue to talking about legislation, in particular about emergency and fake news laws, and also about the incidental process that took place in Russia during the pandemic.
So, the first point we wanted to talk about is the digital tools that were used at some point in Russia during the coronavirus pandemic.  As Russia was continuously the epicenter of the pandemic, and the government didn't manage to restrict the movement within the capital and to impose rules of people staying inside, there was a decision taken to implement a system called Digital Pass Entry System and starting from April 15, the system was implemented in the City of Moscow in the Moscow Region and some other parts of Russia a bit later in some regions of Russia.
And this system presuppose that every citizen has to either by going online on the governmental website, by calling, or by sending SMS messages to request a digital pass, and there were introduced many different forms of digital passes for people who had to go to work, for people who had to go to the hospital, for people -- for various needs, basically.  And the problem was that the system was not working very well, especially in the beginning of its introduction, and there were many problems.  Also, on the point of control, so for example, in the Moscow Subway, everyone had to show their pass.  It's a digital number, and reading this information was taking a lot of time and creating people in jams and people were being stuck in one place trying to just enter into the subway.
And the similar situation happened with the drivers because at the entrances of Moscow, the drivers had tools to demonstrate the passes and that created a lot of traffic jams, especially in the first days of the system.
There were also a lot of complaints regarding protection of personal data.  The system had certain some flows, and also there were difficulties for using the system for certain vulnerable groups of citizens, for example like elderly people, there were a lot of complaints because if you don't -- if you don't have already -- if you didn't have a proper smart phone with a proper version of smart phone, it was pretty much impossible to receive the digital pass over the phone, for example.  And people who didn't have electronic devices like computers or smart phones, specifically like elderly groups of people, they had a lot of difficulties receiving these passes.
And then the second point that I will talk about is the automated face recognition system that was also introduced during the pandemic.  It was first implemented in February of 2020 this year to control the movement of people who were coming back from China and especially people prescribed to follow the 14 days self-isolation regime or those who had to self-isolate themselves.  This system later was used for other purposes to monitor the movement of people, specifically those with suspicion of infection, and it combined various technical, online, or digital and also technical infrastructures of the Moscow e-government systems, for example, Moscow's CTV system, artificial intelligence, and smart phone geodata that was provided by the telecom operators, and also face recognition solutions.
And in the end the system was developed to the point it was capable to track almost every citizen of Moscow; however, it was not used in this capacity.  There were certain groups of citizens that were targeted, and there were -- the lists of those people who will be tracked were provided by the Russian authority institutions or bodies, so there was a system of how this monitoring process was created, so it was not used for monitoring the whole city.
However, both of these measures that I talked about, the surveillance and the control measures of the digital pass system, they are based on the Moscow's electronic government framework which is embodied in the Moscow smart city project that has been taking place for the last, more or less last decade in Moscow, and the combination of the online and the offline surveillance allowed the government to control people's access to information and to freedom of movement, and although the point that we wanted to make here is that online surveillance is not authorized by the Russian law, and it doesn't fall under the legislation that justifies as the users of such technology and also specifically in the case of coronavirus pandemic.  And now I would like to pass the floor to Andrey that will talk in more detail about the Russian law passed as countermeasure for the coronavirus pandemic.  Thank you.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Anna, and yes, it was very good to also have this picture of how things have been evolving in Russia and now not only with this debate that we're having today on net neutrality and COVID-19, but it's very good to contextualize also how the measures that the Russian Government has been taking and which contexts have been taken.  Andrey, you are a professor in Moscow, and actually you have been I think one of the first in the world to analyze the fake news bill at the time proposed by Russia that then became the fake news law and how this has been amended during the COVID-19 crisis, so please, Andrey, go.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:    I would like to talk a bit about the state censorship part that is increased during this COVID-19 pandemic when, first of all, in early 2019, even prior to the pandemic, Russia passed a federal law amendment on the law and information.  According to this law, the distribution of deliberately unreliably socially important information on the media shall entail the position of the administrative fine for citizens in about $400 to $1,500.  
So, in response to the COVID-19, this law was a bit amended.  For example, regarding the spread of fake information that threatened people's life and safety, and this law was actually used in April 2020 when the Russian newspaper published information about the situation with pandemics spread in the region of Russia, and this is well-known region of Russia in North caucuses actually and part of Russian Federation and these journalists in the situation with COVID-19 pandemic is a bit dangerous there actually.  And there is investigation on violation of this fake news law, and also there was an order from the prosecutor general's office to remove this article, and this article is now unavailable and available now only in I think in memory and in, for example, but this article is currently unavailable on the Internet.
This is the first point of how the censorship is used.  But also, I'd like to provide you with a bit of background of the state of emergency in are Russia which was not introduced during the first stage of pandemic, it's not introduced now during the second stage of pandemic of the COVID-19.  Instead of that, they used so-called high readiness regime, high-readiness regime is not state of emergency, but it allows for the subjects of the federation because Russia is actually a federation like United States, for example, and Moscow is one of the subjects of the federal subjects.  And this law allows to, for example, for the heads of subjects of federation to introduce decrees, special decrees of the, for example, Moscow mayor had a federal subject for this high-readiness regime, and because of that, because of the limitations of human rights, for example, digital passes, surveillance, restriction for free walk around the street is not introduced by the law and it's actually introduced by decree of the federal subjects.  We should not have these opportunities according to the constitution and legislation.  It's only entitled by decree, and this is the problem here because when the state of emergency actually is introduced, people are able to claim compensation from the state, for example, when their businesses are in trouble, when in other issues related to the pandemic, but according to the high-readiness regime, nothing is actually introduced, and there is no social protection of the citizens, according to this.
And this actually refers to the incidental, the so-called digital protests of the citizens.  Could Anna please share these slides, actually about the online protests?  You can see -- you can see here like the interactive map.  An interactive map is marked with different comments because there is no actual crowding of the people.  This is crowding of the people gathering on this interactive map, and this is here we can see political slogans actually, acts of resistance putting against the Presidents, against actually the authorities of subjects of federation, against authorities of Moscow, for example, in because authorities are not able to address if you see a state of emergency to keep people's rights safe and people's rights and people's security and Social Security because businesses are in danger when they're closed during this lockdown and first wave of coronavirus.  And now, actually it's also no state of emergency in Russia instead of cases of coronavirus are raising, higher and higher and higher at the moment.
And this interactive process, online process is actually a reaction for people and I think it's the voice of the people that should be heard, and this is very interesting interactive of digital protest this year.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I'm sorry to interrupt you but I'm mindful of time and we still have.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Yes, I think I just finished actually with this.  All has been said and I'm able to answer all the questions that you have, I would be glad to answer all the questions.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thanks very much, Andrey.  And now last but of course not least, Alejandro Pisanty, is not only a very good friend but one of the true leaders of the Internet governance ecosystem since decades, and he is professor of autonomous University of Mexico and the author of one, I think of the most intriguing chapters of the book this year, precisely because it has us to think about openness, adopting a broader vision, and he offers an architecture of how this broader vision can be structured with his six-factor framework for Internet openness.  So please, Alejandro, the floor is yours.
   >> ALEJANDRO PISANTY:  Thank you very much, Luca.  I'm also publicly congratulating Anriette because she's been able as Chair of the MAG to pull this meeting completely online without face-to-face meetings of the MAG and that's is a great challenge and an honor that she's also participating in the session, and took part in the book, and thanks Luca and the other co-editors of the book because I think it's an extremely relevant collection and it was already so earlier in the year, but now that it's in book form, it really looks very, very good and I hope it will be a great asset.
To be very concrete, as some of you may know, and as Luca has mentioned I have been working for a time on trying to have a larger picture and understanding of the effects that the Internet brings to different types of conduct, or adversely to analyze things that appear to be completely original to the Internet -- you can see the slide, a framework and I have it in full screen so you should be able to read it, so it should be quite readable.
The purpose then is mapping conduct between online and offs can line and the way we were doing this before, before I came to this framework, which I have this partially with all the participants and I'm very glad everyone is in the meeting as well, and next time we'll find a way to be on a panel.  So what happens very often is that we see people saying that the Internet is the end of the world because there is so much cybercrime, there is so much abuse, there is so much disinformation and they remove the Internet from that analysis and see that we actually have, I mean, phishing is happening people come to you with paper and this happened last December, last year to people I know, a guy comes with a paper, a piece of paper and ask them to sign off, and they do.
So, on the other hand we have things like positive actions that are also rooted for example on generosity the will to share knowledge that suddenly changed in the way they have their effects because of the Internet.  So these six factors that seem to be able to allow us to map all of these types are the mass scaling, including within it the network effects, identity and anonymity management, transjurisdictional effects, barrier lowering, friction reduction, and memory and forgetting and all of these come with the way the Internet is built as best effort, interoperable, open network with intelligence at the edge and with principles of purpose and designed purpose of scalability which has no borders in its IP address and also identity layer of its own, the IPI a volatile type of identity and the only type of identity that you get from the Internet layer itself.  If you speak of the MAG address that's below and the IP management of facts or email accounts, that's an upper layer and that's an application or even a use of the application.
So, what happens when we come to the COVID crisis?  We have an immediate use of the mass scaling of the Internet, we see everybody who can go online and many activities like education, many types of work, purchasing food for your home, or creating a new business in order to be able to be a supplier of these things, even just going on a store like Amazon to sell your goods instead of having Amazon compete against you and drive you out of business.  That's the kind of usage of mass scale that we see.  We also see mass scaling in other positive effects like the spread of positive information of health information like wearing masks, non-pharmaceutical intervention, or the massive collaboration we saw between laboratories that were able to share huge datasets that were able to the structure of the virus and immune system and so forth and also like the spread of this information and forms of cybercrime specific to COVID and so forth.
I'll skip the other factors in order to focus on what I think will be most important because I mean all of these have an effect as I mention and being able to go online, being able to perform social life, and of course we have limitation that's very serious.  This mass scaling worked well, for example, with the traffic in the core but it hasn't scaled well in expanding access to the Internet during the crisis.  Here we see what's commonly jokingly said when the water recedes, when the tied goes out, you see who went without a bathing suit.  You see the lack of preparedness of society, you see governments that didn't have a national digital strategy for access or for forcing lower prices or anything like that, and you have 40% of the population offline.  But for the ones online, this has been working.  Concentrate on factor 6 of memory and forgetting, we need to keep memory and we will use the openness of the Internet to keep our memory even when some people will not want to have this memory.  
All of the decisions that we have heard taken in Europe, for example, in Russia, or in India, the ones in my country, Mexico, everyone who took part in deciding a policy, whether it was using masks or not using masks or social isolation or it was relaxing social isolation, we will need a memory of that.  A co-editor of the book on the symposium made me realize that we have to be very careful also about protecting personal data and privacy in this new huge memory that is being built up explosively around the crisis, but we will need the memory and we will use the memory that the Internet gives us in order to hold officials accountable for their decisions which are maybe saving hundreds of thousands of lives or in some cases are costing hundreds of thousands of lives.  I don't want to use much more time.  I hope this gives a glimpse on how this thing can be used to analyze every Internet event that has a mapping tool previous or non-internet.  Thank you.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Alejandro.  Really, an excellent way of then leading us to our final debate.  Obliging us to think in a systemic fashion about Internet openness and not only to about the usual topics that we follow.  This is a group that is dedicated to specific issues, but first, it doesn't mean that we have to think only in the silos in the country, we never have to do so, and on the other hand that doesn't mean that we then have to expand the range of issues that we can also associate to do work that we have been doing so far, so thank you very much, Alejandro, for bringing this perspective into the debate.
And now I think it's time again to open the floor for intervention and from any of the attendees if they want to chip in and provide a comment or a question, please go ahead.  Just raise your hand and you will be given privileges to be a panelist, to be a speaker.  I see there are a couple of questions also in the chat.  There is a comment from Chris Marsden saying that the disinformation regulation that is now rampant in various jurisdictions has similarities to the debate.  It has a lot, and indeed we see similarities in technologies and stakeholders and other points that have been raised.  And then there is also a comment on the work in Moscow, some enforcement also integrating police databases with (audio breaking up) -- personal data must be important in this case of course.
Do we have any remarks from the floor?  From attendees?  I'm going to remind you that if you do have any comment, you can share them either on the chat or raise your hand and you will have the possibility to speak.  I see the crowd today is still quite shy, so I think that is the moment for the panelists to provide clarifications or additional points that you would like to raise.  You had -- you were very good in respecting timing, so if you have any other point that you think is essential to raise to contribute to this debate, please this is the moment for you to speak, so just unmute yourself and go ahead.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Well, actually, let me have a little clarification or question maybe on the presentation by Apar Gupta actually.  This is a really important issue of what he told about, but he felt that the issue is actually constitutional, but prior to placed into the national constitutions, this right actually, the Internet access, the net neutrality, it should be recognized in international law actually, and then this right should be recognized by the national governments because I think no national government should regulate Internet on their own will.  They should also cooperate with others and that's why these human rights should be universal.  And then in the national legislation or national constitution.  That's actually my position to just share according to this wonderful report.  Thank you very much.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I think the common theme was more about the need for also the discussion of this proposal put forward by the Internet Freedom Foundation about defining Internet access as a citizen right, but also to discuss this at an international level, and there have been discussions about this at levels, but I see Apar has clarifications.
   >> APAR GUPTA:  This context, I would envision my personal person experience has been rights and understanding sometimes develop co- extensively with international and domestic frameworks, constitutional, regulatory, and even in public law separate from constitutional law sometimes at the level and sometimes the international level, and there is a logic that sometimes doesn't make sense and one proceeding the other sometimes does promote a level of uniformity that flows top down from the international level, but practical experience being it quite often happens at a point in time where people are ready for it and that level of consensus in terms of what is a core governance agenda is reached, and I think we are proceeding to it if COVID has accelerated that understanding, and some elements of this are already present in the chat.  And I'm really that I think this is a significant issue once we integrate net neutrality, openness, and access to the Internet within the human right framework, it becomes strong ultimate beneficiaries.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Yes, and there was also, and I just in the chat there was also part of a question for directed to Andrey or Anna about the fact that Russia also has an initiative on Internet access -- on free Internet access for socially significant websites and services and so what is your opinion about this initiative created by the Russian Government to provide free access to socially significant websites and services?
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Well, my answer, actually, I suppose that this initiative is really important and this initiative could be even better, but it should not be within the framework of the national, only the national web resources.  For example, I just answered this question, Zoom the platform where we are here now is also crucially important here in the time of COVID-19 pandemic, but it's not a platform of Russian origin, but this is actually of net neutrality actually.  This is 100% the issue of net neutrality.  Resources from all over the countries should be -- being really important, being crucial during the pandemic should be declared free without regarding of the origin, without regarding -- that's my opinion.  In this initiative, it's my best understanding, in this initiative, this is only about the resources of Russian origin like something like that.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Anna has also taken to this and then I would like to continue as we're already running out of time.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Yes, Luca.  Well, I don't really as Andrey already noted or mentioned that this is their access to only Russian resources and only to the vital resources where you can receive information about the pandemic or what to do, how to request help, and I agree that with Andrey that, I mean, it's a question of net neutrality and there are many other resources that could be also made available to Russian citizens, specifically due to the financial or economic limitations that people suffered during the pandemic, a and that this initiative could be extended but again this is also a debated on net neutrality aspects and it's not an easy issue to decide on.  Yeah.  I cannot hear.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I was muted.  So I was just saying that there was also a comment by Anriette stating that in South Africa there was also massive zero-rating of educational platforms during the pandemic and this is indeed a very good example of good uses of zero-rating and I think those who are -- who have been taking a part of this debate over the past year, as in any kind of a restriction of discriminatory technique or practice, there is always a context to be provided and there is never a black and white solution, really.  It's doing something always good or always bad, but I think many of us have also been advocating for the fact that what is important is the context and maybe kind of exception to the nondiscriminatory treatment of Internet traffic, be it for technical or for commercial reasons may be allowed in specific conditions, of course, the zero-rating case in South Africa is a very good example also of how zero-rating could be beneficial to people that are obliged to access resources when they do not have a means to access them.  Another choice would also be to give them access to everything, and not hopefully only to a selection of resources, but probably would be an even better and more interesting option, of course this will be the debate for an entirely new section.
And as we are really running out of time, I would like to see if there is any final remark from panelists?  If you have any remark, please raise your hand.  Either with your real hand or with Zoom one.  IP question, I see KS has a final remark and then this will be our final remark in the panel.  Please, KS, go ahead.
   >> KS PARK:  Oh, I'm very apprehensive of making final remark for the whole group but I just give my two cents.  There have been different aspects of openness of the Internet, but I think the issue of Internet access -- the issue of building the infrastructure for the Internet and the observance of the basic foundational rule of using that Internet, which is net neutrality, and Internet shutdown, which is happening all around the world, and in this group we talked about India, and sensors in the Internet are related and sometimes one is over the other, but I think it would be practical to discuss them separately and analyze them separately and try to come up with the responses separately.  Oh, but you know with -- with the of course, thought that they are connected politically.  That's my comment.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much for this, and thank you very much, everyone, for all these very interesting points you have shared with the panel.  If you want to take a group picture that was here with the IGF secretary has requested us, you can switch on your camera and smile.  This is the moment.  And it is done.  So, we are done for today.  Thank you very much for your participation.  I will share the -- I'm going now to copy the chat because we have some very interesting points also raised in the chat and share it in the mailing list of the coalition so that everyone can also access to the chat and links that were raised and shared, and thank you very much again for your participation and please let's keep interacting on the mailing list and let's organize another fantastic session next year.  Bye-bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-5-dc-platform-regulations-towards-a-common-vocabulary-raw^^

...in this glossary we wanted to basically capture the picture of all the different competing and alternative definitions that are being offered.
There were people referring to proactive measures to fight copy right infringement as measures ta are taken even when the law doesn't require you to do so. Even when you receive notification, you take it down regardless if this was a requirement. Other interpretation of proactive measures would refer to a platform looking for content that is potential infringing without having been notified. Similar distinction between interpretability. Being able to send packets to each other and interpretability to actually understand the meaning of each packet in the same nuanced way it's processed, original platform where it is produced. Because of these and other examples we thought it was a helpful experience, possibly for policy makers and regulators to have a point of reference for future efforts and discussions. So today we are just going to discuss some of the issues.
The number of authors was extensive. But we hope that everyone after hearing the session will be interested. And we will go to our shared document where it is possible to make comments and improve the existing document. So with that, I would thank you again, everyone. And pass the floor to Luca for a couple of words.
>> Yes, thank you very much for introducing the debate. Let me also reiterate what you just mentioned. The fundamental goal of the project that we present today. Is to possibly contribute to a well-informed debate. But to include different readings of the same terms, precisely it was not the roll of the I.G.F. to be descriptive to take decisions but to help decision makers have smart high-quality debate. The goal in its mandate, very well to discuss public policy issues.
Issues aiming at regulating platforms around the world. We maxed and discussed many of them in last year outcome for values.
We know that a lot of them have been very recently abled by legislators.
You legislators are going to present the proposal in the coming days. Brazilian congress has been debating the so-called fake news over the past months and it has been harshly criticized also for some misconception in some very broad terms many of us have been involved in these processes. The same term has radically different concepts in different jurisdictions.
This is not an issue if those conceptions are rooted in national law. It's a problem when the conceptions are rooted in misconceptions of technology and how it works and how it should be regulated efficiently. So that is precisely the goal of this dploes  glossary we are going to provide. It's for all kind of stakeholders.
We have also referenced different views.
We have tried to do the most academically refined output as possible. But of course, it still needs improvement and that is the reason why we are seeking performance. Not only from academics but very diverse range of stakeholders.
That is the reason why to open the debate today we have invited two guest speakers that have not been directly working on this, on the glossary but are working on this coalition and are extremely interesting and have a global impact on how platforms are regulated. So without further ado. If one by one we will introduce our distinguished speerk. The first one, Julie, not only Executive Director. She is also a member of the oversight board that's been recently launched by Facebook and will start working in the upcoming weeks, or months. We will know more about this. Let me give the floor to Julie and thanking her again for this and for her time.
>> Thank you very much Luca and Nicolo for the invitation. It's great to be here, hopefully we will be able to get back to normal business. As close to normal as possible. Yes, the oversight board which was, whose first members were announced in May, earlier this year, which include not only me but other distinguished colleagues to name a few. Ed, or Mr. carman and other very distinguished professionals.
Actually started accepting cases. So as a reminder, it's a sort of we really would like to see it as an institution that will make finding decision, on Facebook and instagram. We have two ways to oversee cases. On one hand Facebook is allowed to refer cases to us, cases that prove difficulty for them in terms of their own community standards but also towards international law. That's a very important thing to mention. And also, we will be able to oversee cases referred to us by users.
Users whose content has been taken down and who are not happy with the decision that has been made. In the near future, we will take cases either referred by Facebook or by users who are not happy to see such content online. This is not, I mean this feature is not available until now. Something the oversight board is working on and it involves technical issues that require some time. So this is for the principle. Now for the procedure itself, the board has, which is composed of 20 members. The board has in a normal setting 90 days to make a decision. So from the day we received the case, the user and Facebook have some time to provide additional explanation. Also allow, enable to request bridge from organizations. Expert organizations in the particular fields in which, you know, the particular cases requesting us to look at. But also, we also  --  we will also be able to receive public comments on cases. So there will be an opening for comments beyond the user and Facebook who are concerned by the case. And, well, all this should allow us to make a decision in normally 90 days. But there are also external reviews.
Particularly one that allows, I mean requires us to make a decision in 45 days. So half of the normal time line. And our co-chairs. We have four co-chairs who have also worked on other review. I think we call it expedited review within the expedited review process. Which would require us to make a decision in seven days maximum. So these are really for cases that have, well, that require imminent decision given for instance that the danger and threat that the content might pose for, I mean, real world violence and any other possibilities. Yes, what is important to mention and I started touching upon this earlier is not only will the board oversee cases based on Facebook's values and community standards which we honor and which have themselves limitations. But what's interesting is we also, we will also look at international law. There's a big discussion at the moment whether or not, first of all, international law is feat to defend these new rights. On the one hand. On the other hand, it's also a challenge for platforms themselves who have been, I mean asked by many experts including the former Executive Director, David Kai. Who have been asked or strongly advised to apply the United Nations guiding principles on business and human rights which not require, but strongly invite companies to protect human rights and also provide remedies whenever they, well, to mitigate, to provide mitigating effects whenever they infringe on these rights. So it's an interesting challenge also from that perspective. And yes, a challenge that the board is ready to take. Working for the past, since May, working behind the scenes.
First of all to make sure we are all on the same page when it comes to international human rights law. For many colleagues, it was not a specialty. Colleagues who were really experts in constitutional law, for instance who might not have had as much familiarity with the law, so we have had many sessions on that, with the help of one of our co-chair, Catalina botero. We also have worked on the technicality. We have a web platform that allows us to oversee the cases in a very secured manner. And we are also working on issues around privacy. The cases we see involve real persons and required to make the necessary adjustments.
Not only to protect the privacy of the individual but also protect it from also outside interferences including government interferences.
All this to say that from my perspective and that's probably why, that's the main reason I chose to join, is that we are really at a crossroads of platforms.
I like to tell them that focusing on the other profits is not possible, and threatens.
We are seeing issues around censorship, internet shut downs. We are seeing a lot of governments who decide to shut down platforms because of the problems around content and lack of responsibility from platforms.
It was interesting for me at this very special moment to take part in an initiative that would come with hopefully interesting solutions that could be applied of course to Facebook and instagram and why not. That could inspire and give an idea of what the principles and standards, international human rights standards we all work on could be applied to such an evolving theme, which is online content moderation. This is basically a big picture. I hope I'm still in time. Luca?
>> Yeah, you are almost done with the time. I'm sorry for being not really a gentleman with this but we will have to strictly enforce timing so everybody can speak. And we have also time for questions. Sorry for the interruption, Julie. I see there is already a question for you. Let me give the floor to Lofred Madzou of the world economic forum. He has very interesting visions how artificial intelligence can be applied to platforms.
I don't want to give too much of a spoiler what he is going to say. Lofred, the floor is yours.
>> Good morning, good evening, everyone. Thank you for having me. Luca, I will try to keep it short and on point. A little background, I'm working for the center of the  --  a group, corridor collaboration on AI  --  and more explicit what we do is co-design coding frameworks around specific projects. Like facial recognition, how do you ensure responsible use of facial recognition. Work with businesses, governments, academicks.
Most of the platforms are A.I. driven. The question becomes how do we make sure that A.I. is trustworthy? Let me elaborate. The consistence. Or requirements to be more specific. You see where I'm going. I think audit of services and products is one of the means we can use to ensure that the systems are trustworthy. I think it's really important for two reasons. The first one is the sure scale of the products.
Think of Facebook. Some platforms have over one billion users.
Depending on the size, the regulator it will be really hard to match that scale. The question is how can you scale the enforcement mechanisms.
Be like, nope. Assuming we already know what is the right regulation. Let me quickly elaborate on this. On the requirements itself, I will give you an example there are four key steps. The first one is define. What is the definition of risk use in that context? I'm looking at the use of facial recognition at airports. Here, I mean we use cases seem to be quite straight forward but it raises issues.
If  it's your face, you don't change your face. As we define this across free access. Governance of that data in that case. How do you as regulators or trusted party double check their claims by directly sending queries and assistance and getting data out to make sure it's effectively complying with ABC, whatever it is might be legal requirements or as we see more and more AI principles being drafted by these companies. So organizational guidelines. That's what my work is really focusing on. I would say it's a promising area. Not only because we are making tremendous progress around explainability around also I would say enforcement of existing regulation, many companies that filled up this space of A.I. risk and compliance from different angles know when to double up these tools. The thing I want to close on is that regardless of the rules we agree on, regardless of majority  --  that you operate in, enforcement is key. I think something sometimes we over look. People spend amount of time figuring out what should be the right regulatory framework. They don't pay attention to how do you enforce it at scale. The framework has to match the scale of the platforms.
That's what our work is really focusing on. Open for questions at the end but back to you, Luca. I hope it was clear.
>> Yes. The first part of the open debate will be moderated by Nicolo. I see there are already a couple of questions in the chat. So please, Nicolo, go ahead. You are muted.
>> Apologies. Yes. We already have a question from Julie here. From Mary. So she asked, does the board's mandate include any work with advising on the community guidelines? Will this decision be used to reshape the guidelines? Thank you.
>> Yes, thank you, Mary for asking. It's important to specify in addition to content decisions, the board will, also has a mandate to make recommendations to Facebook upon Facebook's request. Well, in two cases. So within the decision, the board will have the ability to include a policy recommendation. It's not mandatory. It's upon, you know, the board's assessments of the need of such recommendation. And other cases, Facebook will be able to refer questions to us, recommendations on very specific pieces of policy. Could it maybe you know, Facebook's policy on  -- 
They can refer that to us. We can make recommendations, which are recommendations.
Facebook does not have to take them, I mean, they don't have to apply those recommendations but they do have to take them into consideration and record publicly on what they have done with the recommendation that we make.
>> Thank you. I may add another question using my moderator privilege. Directed to you again, Julie. What we have been trying to emphasize with this effort is that some concept, different interpretation, different context. I would like to understand what is the balance that the oversight board strikes between values that recognizes the importance for the platform and interpretation of those values in different context. How does Facebook deal with that? Or the oversight board?
>> Yes. The first thing I must mention that I did not say, we review cases that did not have legal implications.
So if there is a law that says this is, this is what we think should be treated, we cannot review that. To respond to your questions indeed, there is a need for context. There's also a need for over arching principles which is what we need now. That's why we are seeing so much inconsistency. PLA2R forms and particularly Facebook consistency applying standards. Plaz the void we hope to fill to provide those principles that will guide and make the platform more consistent how it applies it's own community standards. Consistency with regards to international human rights standards. I think that's the way the over arching principles will come from and will guide us as well.
>> Brilliant, thank you. I see there's a comment, it's not probably a question for Lofred. I would just mention one issue that has come up with regard to facial recognition is the inclusiveness. Basically the databases that have been used and you know, the potential discriminatory effects it might have on certain communities. So how can the work of the world economic forum in that regard help us find the right way to approach the systems so that there is no disparate impacts on communities in the minority and not as privileged. So I guess that is one question that connects to the comment that's been made. The other question I will have for you just so we get on the same number of questions for Julie is, with regard to explainability. Do you believe we can achieve again, some general common principles that could be used to explain A.I. without, you know, basically might be up to circumstances. In certain cases you may need more explanation depending on what type of users and targets you have. For the explainability. It would be interested to see how the world economic forum explain principles.
>> These are very important questions. Let's talk to the first one regarding risk. One thing I will insist on when it comes to facial recognition or any technology, risk manifests, in the context which requires expertise. Obviously it's involved in that process. The user of the company use the technology, procuring the technology. People tend to focus on the most risk regarding fairness, accessibility to data privacy infringement and so forth. What I would insist on there's a much more variety of risk out there. I will give a concrete example. If you use facial recognition for accessing a plane or finding a person of interest using technology very different outcomes. The way things can go wrong are very, very different. You will have different people around the room.
The left try to bring the rights around the table to  --  the risks. So try to make sure we don't have any blind spots. Something we would have missed, right. Human beings like us varies, they won't perceive or prioritize but create a space for open discussion and challenge you have better mapping of a risk. The second thing about ex planability, *r I think there's  too much on this.  what I will insist on is if something goes wrong I want to make sure they are comfortable in that theme. Being comfortable is being able to articulate what went wrong and why. This means I'm looking at accountability mechanism on the whole and not necessarily on explainability. The progress being done, basically when I look at a system, the behavior of a system, I'm looking to the system two aspects are important to us. The first is documents  --  it means simply how that system has been put together. What is the function. What is the purpose of the system. What are the tests that are running and so forth. Given this nature how that system came about. First point. When the system is deployed in operation, keep track of its behavior. Continued use and check impacts on different demographics across risk mapping we have done together. In doing these two things you are going to reduce or mitigate risks. The key point that's a learning system. It's important to make sure across time it remains consis   --  consistent or compliant with our requirements.
>> Thank you. Sorry to interrupt the discussion again but I will be very strict with time so that everyone will be able to provide input into the discussion. Now let's start first (presentation slot and over to you, Nico.
>> Yes. Thank you, Luca. I think that was a perfect closing point. Also need to monitor over time. Because this is precisely what we should be doing with this set of definition we are given. We should go back after some time and make sure that they are sufficient reflecting the discussions taking place. So now, let's move onto the second part of the discussion. The first one in our list is our colleague, Ivar Hartmann, director at center for technology society in  Rio de Janiero.
>> Thank you, Nico. Quickly I would like to thank and congratulate you and Luca for editing the glossary and this session. I was responsible for the entry on terrorist content. I want to make three very quick points that I think underscore the relevance of the contribution offered by this glossary. First is in terms of focus. When we talk about we think of cyber terrorism. It used to be focused on attacks against infrastructure. In the very early days, 20 years ago when people discussed cyber terrorism, that is the first thing that came to mind. That's the first type of threat we worried about. Nowadays it seems the focus has switched to terrorist content on mediums, including platforms.
Media where narratives are developed, strengthened and spread with a global potential but a very precise target. And this is a very powerful tool for cyber terrorism. So that's the first point in terms of focus. The second point has to do with the concept of terrorist content. Which obviously relates to what one means by cyber terrorism and cyber terrorist activities. Cyber terrorist content is related to fear-inducing, and extremist. If you are inducing information and narratives and discourse, as well as extremist mobilization online, this makes it very difficult to distinguish terrorist content from hate speech. Especially more radical hate speech. Now this is a very important distinction however. Given the punishment is much, much harsher than the punishment for hate speech. Some countries hate speech is not even punished. So there's a distinguish between difficult to make is essential. The third has to do with enforcement. So even for people it is very hard to separate terrorist content from hate speech. So that's for people. Especially people with a legal education, that's already a hard job. But for artificial intelligence this is an unsurmountable task. And we know next to nothing about the accuracy of social media automated moderation of terrorist content. We have no idea if Facebook, Facebook system, or YouTube system is 90% precise in identifying terrorist content or merely 60% precise in which case it would be almost as good as a coin toss. We just don't know. Terrorist content, at the same time it's the type of abusive content governments have demanded platforms to identify and remove the fastest, with the harshest punishments against platforms.
But at the same time, it's also one of the abusive content that is the hardest for automated mechanisms, artificial intelligence to correctly identify. So that's a very worrying paradox there. So those are the three points I wanted to make. Thank you for organizing this session and for the glossary.
>> Thank you Ivar. Good dialogue with Lofred's presentation. Perfect. Now, we are move noog another presentation by Paddy Leerseen from University of Amsterdam. Ph.D. candidate. I think on exactly the very topic, the title of our session. So platform governance. I would like to hear then, what are we talking about when we talk about platform governance?
>> That's a great question, Nicolo, like call great questions it doesn't have an easy answer. I have the privilege of defining governance for this exercise. It's a term we see using increasingly, I think. I try to define what is governance. It's a term that is often associated with regulation. In some cases, some people even consider the concepts interchangeable. So there's some disagreement what precisely the distinction is but the typical interpretation seems to be following Julia Black, governance is like regulation but de-centered perspective, we don't focus on as much on governance as much as the actor who's carryout regulation. We also look at more private actors.
This is why governance has become such an important and often-used term in the context of the internet. Where as you know, so much of our conduct is guided by private actors.
So that's the most important distinction, I think between the two concepts. And additionally, there are discussions about, there's a debate about the meaning of internet governance and in that literature, one of the important distinctions that is made, for example, highlight that governance should not only be understood as formal forms of regulation. That is to say rule making and enforcement by entities such as ICAN or ATF but also less formalized routines and technical practices that end up guiding our conduct in practice.
So, this requires for example to also look at technical things like interconnection between service providers if we really want to understand how the internet is governed. Those are the insights I bring to my understanding of platform governance. By the way, I'm not monitoring the chat, so please interrupt if there is anything there. That's what I bring to my definition of platform governance, where I think we can make a similar analysis. First of all, an important distinction made by Tarles Gillespie, thinks it's juvenilistic. It could refer to governance occurs by platforms, how they govern us in digital ecosystems but also refer to how platforms themselves are govern bid other actors.
I think that's a helpful distinction that is not often made. Or not often enough, I should say. And here, you know, based on our definition of governance, on the one hand we can see how platforms govern in more conventional terms of regulation of rule making and enforcement. So they draft terms of service as rules and they enforce them in practices we now know content moderation. But a broader understanding that looks beyond these classical forms of regulation also emphasizes how platforms govern through technical architecture. Through algorithms, A.P.I.'s design of user interfaces and how they interact with users and coordinate with users.
For example, the regular engagement has with the "New York times", all these back channels, for example, how Google news initiative is subsidizing journalists.
All these things can be incorporated into an understanding of platform governance not captured in platform regulation. Moving toward platform governance you can make similar remarks. First of all, we have regulation of various kinds. Public regulation co-and self regulation. In addition we can also look at how platforms are governed not just by the law and self regulatory institutions but also by other forms of pressure third parties can bring to bear. Think of how advertisers boycotted last year. Is not regulation but a form of governance. And similar things could be looked at when we look at how users try to contest platform policies. In light of the time I will leave it there. In short it's a broad category. Much broader than regulation. But it's benefit then it helps to grasp the complexities how platform power is shaped in practice.
>> Excellent. This was very useful. Also with the examples you provided. It was reminiscent, as you were going through the introductory part. I'm sure  --  will agree. There's not much time so I will just move quickly into the next presentation. We have Richard Wingfield from global partners digital.
>> Thank you. I will take a slightly different approach from the previous two speakers and talk about challenges that exist when trying to come up with definitions for a glossary such as these. There are three in particular, when I came a kroos when I was looking at the various terms I was trying to provide definitions for. I would be interested in other panelists if they are similar or different than the ones they found themselves. The first is, often we can't even agree what the right term is for a particular phenomenon. Sometimes we might disagree on the definition but sometimes the same term isn't even used by the same actors.
I don't want to speak to other panelists.
We have numerous terms used by different actors.
A couple of the ones that came across in the terms I was defining were interesting in the terminology has changed over time. Child sexual abuse. Past language was child pornography. If you look at instruments, protocol, etc.. The term child pornography is used there. That's generally no longer considered to be an appropriate term. The idea this is not pornography and no issue of consent for people involved in this and this is a form of child abuse. So do we use a best practice term that we use nowadays, child sexual abuse imagery. Or a term well documented and well used for a number of years and international instrument, child pornography. That's the question I think is important to consider. Policy makers may be more comfortable using term that's are internationally agreed rather than new ones. Another example, revenge pornography, versus non-consensual sharing of intimate images.
Well intentioned people will use the term revenge pornography as a shorthand, compared to what we should consider the term used. We might agree on the term but there are lots of different definitions. In legal terms are rooted in national law. Defamation. No one disagrees it's a good term when we are talking about someone harming another's reputation. But across the world there are definitions that aren't consistent. Some require intention to harm another's reputation, others don't. Some say if it's a truthful comment it wouldn't be. Some say it has to be economic harm that is caused if you want to defame them, others say emotional harm is sufficient. So if we are trying to reach a common consensus how do we deal with the fact there are hundreds of well-established definitions which are not consistent with each other. Do we choose the one we like the most or reflect the actual usage of the term in international legal frameworks? The final challenge, there are some terms which have a particular meaning in the term of platform governance. Example would be transparency. This is a term well used within corporate social responsibility, business and human rights, broadly refering to openness about what companies are doing. If we talk about transparency in the form of platform governance we talk about details on the content or data shared by a platform. If you look at trans pair Ren sy reports by platforms it's those kinds of things you will often see. Again, does that mean we should look at a narrow approach what transparency means in context of this glossary and the audience. Or reflect that it has a more general term within a broader field of business and human rights, which of course is relevant to the issue of platform governance and what extent should we try to match those two potentially different approaches? So going to stop there. I hope I'm on time still. And look forward to hearing from my fellow panelists.
>> You are perfect timing. And this was great. It felt like a peer review from reviewer one. I think for all of us, it was very useful thinking about the way forward with this glossary. So thanks for that. Now we have Rossana Ducato from University of Aberdeen where she is an assistant professor and affiliate at UC Louvain.
>> I promise I won't be reviewer number two. We will talk about the methodology in a way you suggested us to use. And why I think this glossary is relevant. I think that two of the most relevant problems in the debate about platform governance but also emerging technologies are essentially two. First of all, the complexity of the object. We have to define platform economy, artificial intelligence and so on. Second is lack of mutual understanding between experts or people with different backgrounds.
The object of study, there is nothing to do. Sometimes we have to recognize that it's a complexity so this complexity exists and we need to legal, technical, social expertise. But as for the specific problem, the lack of mutual understanding is something where we have to intervene. And to be honest, I think system academic knowledge, academic and  --  is not acceptable any more. If it ever was. So in order to foster mutual understanding, it's necessary to build, to find a common frame of reference. And using this comparative law, methodology not by accident, think the kind of exercise we needed from the glossary, in a way reminds me crucial lessons I learned from my legal status in particular about the problem of legal translations.
In the sense that, each technical language is strictly intertwines with its own domain and system of knowledge, science and culture to learn a language really means to learn culture. Therefore we cannot simply translate one term from one technical language to the other. And we have to explain what are the foundational mechanism, or particular concept and it's necessary to provide context. This is essentially what we did. This is what they tried to do in the interest of the glossary where they were ultimately making decision making. First of all I started from the I.T. phenomenon. What are the  types of systems now used. Saw they are being regulated so far in both sectors, jurisdiction. As what Richard was suggesting there are differences in some legal domains about the same term. Another  point is to consider, what are the current proposals, if any. And of course, many cases it does not say this is the new recommended system so the exercise was to find the applicable law in the particular context. The glossary mentioned by Nicolo and luca. Investigate different meanings and applications behind each term. I would like to thank again the two editors of this initiative. I would like to stress this because sometimes we tend to forget we did this during a pandemic. So thanks to everyone and thanks particularly to Luca and Nicolo. I will conclude with a critique and proposal. Coming to the dark side, starting from the dark side. Cray  critique is about the name of the glossary. I think if someone opens a file called glossary and sees 230 pages we are going  --  rate of heart attack on readers.
Seriously. I see this was the initial aim. Since the beginning it was clear we were going to do to write a glossary. But I think that during the writing, during the course of this initiative, now it has become something richer. So I think it's more of a dictionary rather than a mere glossary. And then coming to the proposal, for a number of reasons, limitation probably, all my entries is they are too Euro centric. A proposal maybe for next year, in my opinion would be fantastic to upgrade the entry with input coming from different legal systems. This is an idea, to continue working with this team. Thank you.
>> Fantastic. Yes, I think that's an excellent proposal. That's indeed one of the reasons we are coming together to have other people from different constituencies, different stakeholder groups, different jurisdictions becoming aware of this and contributing hopefully. We hope this session serves to stimulate that. Okay. I will now move to the last speaker in this series. Which is Rolf Weber, professor from the University of Zurich. You have the floor.
>> Thank, Luca and Nicolo for organizing this and doing the work of the glossary. My main interest in connection with platforms is directly towards the regulatory models, probably very close to Chris. As well as literacy of rules. Having listened to the presentation of Paddy, I'm of course not digging any more into the need for view, literacy when designing and assessing platform models. But I may state that  --  obviously linked to regulation. And my contribution to the glossary mainly concerns self-regulation and co-regulation. The legitimacy of self-regulation is based on the fact that leads to a needs driven rule-setting process. And self-regulation could be quite responsive to changes in the environment. Finally, self-regulation is justified if the application leads to a higher efficiency than provided by government Allahs.
--  governmental laws and less likely than compliance with private rules. If you look into the legal environment of platform regulation, we rarely find any multi-lateral treaties and global provisions applicable to the platforms.
We do have a couple of national laws. It's obviously restricted and in so far at least per se self-regulatory mechanisms appear to have certain merits.
En   --  indeed so far we don't see too many standards apart, from efforts which have been taken by this coalition about two years ago. And therefore probably  --  the horizon. To give you an example of a segment of society which usually hasn't been in the past so active, I would like to draw your attention to European law institute. A couple of law professors have published model rules for outline platforms and the purpose of these model rules is to provide for concrete self-regulatory norms, the preparation has been done in view of the expected publication of the additional services act by the European commission to reannounce for end of 2020.  --  the hope to impact the contents of this package. It doesn't suffice. We do have core regulation as a model. In other words if the level of regulation by private actors doesn't seem to be sufficient a certain involvement of governmental agencies becomes desirable, the state legislator can state  --  and leave different principles by way of specific rules to the private parties. There by regulation could remain flexible and innovation friendly. Core regulation, in other words is a regulatory term leading to actual regulation independent from the government as long as rules remain in the legislative framework. Codes of conduct having been prepared by private actors could eventually be either acknowledged, it's been often done in financial markets also media markets and governmental agencies. It could be seen in compliance with the respect of private standards. Theoretical work on the usefulness of current regulatory standards remains to be followed up. Work for the glossary. Thank you very much.
>> Thank you. Thank you, Rolf. That's another great discussion around regulations, core regulation. And I'm reminded in the chat by Chris Martin it is not just Laurence, actually before him, late Joel ridingberg who wrote lex grammatica. Okay, now I think we have good range of perspective there. There were a few questions. In the interest of time we will read them all and maybe you can respond. There's one directed to Ivar Hartmann. How should or may be solved the task, I guess of fighting terrorism, taking into account the need to gather the terrorist language and vocabulary in different languages. And which languages would be used for filtering such term in practice? Your use cases. And then two comment questions. Bertrand says we should talk not just about governance off and by platforms but governance on platforms.
For example, administrators or groups on Facebook, according to the rights and responsibilities given by the platforms itself. And I would add to that perhaps, I guess this is directed to Paddy, we should also take into account governance of platform workers given we are talking about the work they do to moderate. So that's perhaps further perspective to be included in this. Another point by Bertrand saying what Richard is referring to is international normality convergence. The interceptability of certain types of conduct and similarity of criteria and thresholds around jurisdictions.
And then finally, there's a final comment by  --  Francis. Does this approach on platform governance  --  on platforms and not just collaborative platforms? And governance of and by must also be taken into account on. I guess that's similar to Bertrand's point directed to Paddy. But please, anyone feel free to respond to any of these questions. We have only a couple minutes for this discussion.
>> If I may, I think there was one addressed to me. There was a good point released. At least two methods we know for sure being used by platforms in terms of terrorist content, flagging and identifying. Aside from crowd sourcing flagging, either there is someone hired by a contractor, private moderators working. And in that case, we can only assume but we don't know for sure that there are enough, as there should be enough private moderators who are natives of the country, the language of which is being processed and checked and moderated for terrorist content. If Facebook, for instance has the goal of identifying flagging and removing censoring terrorist content in, let's say Farci, then we can only assume that they have enough private moderators that are fluent in Farci and further more, this is not only about the language, it's also about the culture, of course. In terms of A.I. and automated decision-making. I think the same concern is valid that you cannot have a tool or an algorithm, a model that was trained to identify terrorist content in English than being applied to identify terrorist content in a different language or something which is not, which is equally as bad but you have a tool or a model that was trained to identify terrorist content within a specific country. Even if it's within the same language but a specific culture and country and then you try to use that model to identify in the same language but in a different culture using A.I. to identify terrorist content. We know that will not work. So part of the mission here I think we are increasingly having to acknowledge. Creating public training sets for these types of abuse of content in multiple languages, training sets that are not, that have not succumbed to bias for instance. That can then be used to publicly test the accuracy of the models that different platforms employ creating these data sets is a matter of public interest now.
>> Sorry for the interruption. We really have to start with the second segment of presentations.
I apologize if we are a little bit in delay. The first one for the second segment is Catalina Goanta.
>> Good evening, from the Netherlands. Thank you, Luca and Nicolo for your hard work convening this workshop and spear heading the idea of putting together this glossary, dictionary. I think that's up for debate. The content I would like to focus is content modernization. The early days of the internet when e-commerce was dominating the business model. Maybe some of you remember the unfortunate trend that emerges around the year 2000. It used to be called skinvertizing. They were encouraging people to get tattoos of their logos.
This is an example how social media is becoming the home of social commerce in many new ways. In the past five years to say the lead a very wide assortment of social media users have started to make serious money off their internet presence and we are talking really millions of dollars. These users started being called influencers because they amass army of followers and whose attention is turned into views for the purpose of programs like Google's absence. This has in a way professionalized some of these users, turning them into and now I would like to use a word that I know Chris very much likes, proassumers.
May be considered consumers but also could be considered traitors at the same time. There are a lot of models. I won't go into them right now. But you can find reference not only in the glossary but a book where she looks at consumer regulation and the disclosure of advertising. Maybe a note which I find very interesting, there is absolutely no platform right now. No social media platform that allows users to report hidden advertising. There is no actionable content that deals with hidden advertising although there are mandatory rules in many jurisdictions that definitely mandate the disclosure of advertising. This lacks in the content moderation discussion. The last comment I want to make with mon tiization for this panel, monetized content can pretty much be anything. Videos of people filming themselves eating. Of travel blogs, gaming. Like e-sports. You can monetize pretty much anything. The good side of this, it opens a lot of opportunities for every single social media user. And this is also one of the reasons why more and more young people aspire to become influencers or content creators on these social media platforms.
However, because you can monetize anything, you can even make money making election-prediction videos and this kind of content has been taken down by  YouTube as recent as yesterday as misinformation or disinformation. We have a draft paper  Giovanni will share in the chat. This is showing itself to be a serious trend in the recent elections. Recent webinar Alex from Stanford internet observatory were mentioning unlike 2016 where during the elections the main source of information might have been some external foreign involvement. This year it's been mainly done by inflew Ernsts.
That's why we need to look from a regulatory perspective into the commercial interest into their activities because they warrant a lot of further insight. I will leave it to this though we can spend ages just talking about monetization. Thank you, Luca and Nicolo.
>> Thank you for the excellent points raised. And the questions in the final debate. Without further ado, let me give to my friend, Chris Marsden from Sussex University. I unmuted and then remuted myself. I guess I have four minutes still. I put up a link, a link to an example of common carriers. My contribution to the glossary is about common carriage. Extremely long history throughout tort law. The United Kingdom and United States. It actually goes back to the pub. The pub for those who don't know is a place where people insult each other, speak violently, engage in all kinds of conspiracies in an unguarded and illegal fashion without being recorded for posterity for the entire world. Apart from the last part it's the internet. The last part does change things when it comes to the internet. The interesting thing about common carriage, now historical debate about net neutrality. If you remember is the idea there is no discrimination by carriers, between types of content on the internet so they shouldn't be throttling zoom. Interesting empirical work about the ways which the different carriers, mobile carriers have been dealing with Zoom over the years. I think it's extraordinary a company as small as Zoom has been able to survive the pandemic without being  --  by voice over IP. I should say net neutrality which Luca and I have spent too much of our life dealing with is an area for debate as well. All carriers believe they believe in net neutrality even though they have spend billions of Euros stopping it from being applied properly. So everyone agrees but privately every sun disagrees.
The common carriage debate is essentially a much more nuanced debate than realized by some of the policy makers engaged in this field. It doesn't say you can't have some kinds of discrimination. It says the discrimination needs to be clear and between types not between individuals packages being carried on the internet. So common carriage, not just about people going into pubs and drink but also people crossing bridges and it's actually got a very long history looking at the courage of goods by sea. So the idea behind the way in which you can carry packages essentially by ship. That's why a lot of it goes back to. It doesn't say you have to carry everything even if the ship will sink. It says you will have to offer the same circumstances for one as another. Normally go on in great detail. I won't comment on other things in terms of co-regulation and platform law and so on. Except to say in lockdown, lockdown just resumed in the U.K., which by the way in the U.K., the great controversy around lockdown is the closing of the pub. The closing of the common, as it were, carrier of alcoholics and other people who like to socialize in public. I spent time thinking of legal history of the internet. It's only 30 years old but astonishing how people have a short-term view of it. After the digital tornado, this is a book edited by Kevin woreback. Retrospective of one of the policies on the internet. Look at way it's strobing, it's beautiful. It's also about the way we go forward the next ten years and another book to share with you is this. Which is, you can see it there, private regulatory enforcement in the European union. There's a chapter on internet regulation, just me poking over the top of it which is by me. That's a couple things to look forward to. I also posted on the chat a reference to an article for Georgetown technology looking at concerns Paddy had, which I won't go over now, because Luca, my four minutes is pretty much up, I'm sure. Thanks Toluca and Nicolo for making it feel we are all together even though we can't be this year. I look forward to being back with everybody, certainly next year or hopefully sooner.
>> Thank you, Chris, for the nice presentation. And also for the nice wishes of course. We all share to be back together soon. Let me now give the floor to Giovanni De Gregorio. From Milano Bicocca university.
>> Yes, thank you. Happy to be with everybody. It's been amazing work. It's still a draft. The ideas recommend that. I will focus on two contentious issues we addressed in the glossary. The two phenomenon are quite pretty much. I will tell you there is so much connected but what is interesting is that, I will say the disinformation is one of the main critical way why we need a glossary because there is no way to define this phenomenon in a unique framework. I think the debate on this information even if we don't have time to go into the debate is interesting to understand how much is different, how much we need this kind of exercise, also. Legal and policy exercise in the field. Policy and technology. But what is important is that one of course we look at this information, what is important, no matter where you are in the world, regulating this information, addressing this information means dealing with the free speech. But at the same time in terms of the pandemic, it doesn't just concern right to free speech. Concerns other kind of human rights, consumer rights. but also clashing interests. Think about what happens with this information, where have been also around the world where some conspiracy theorists about 5G have led to some attacks on tech engineers ash the world. So this is also online cannot translate in something that is offline hard. When we look also this information around the globe we see so many different approaches. Task force, regulation. The way we look at free speech and balancing between different interests around the world is so different. What Catalina said before. The market. We can see how free speech is perceived in a different way. Not just the Atlantic but other regimes.
This information is critical because it's spread online. This is why content moderation exists.
It's a broad framework. Not just about removal. It's about soft moderation. Also banning, and recommending and understanding what is behind the screen, not just what is removed. Because we can complained about what is removed but if we don't know how it is organized we can't complain because we don't know what happens behind the screen. Of course there are plenty of information  --  self regulation are very important at the same time. At the same time also they are contributing to increase and compete with public authority. Fundamental rights. The boundary, what you should ask is how to find a balance between private authority and public authority in information society. This is what content moderation provide us when we deal with platform regulation. This also leads to us to understand the logic. Not just content but also data. The difference between content and data is not so much. I would say it's very thin. When we look at especially the solution, policy perspective, because the glossary also works providing what the kind of policy could be implemented in this field. We see different approaches to content moderation. At the same time we can see increasingly call for transparency. I would say I I say so much things. So thank you so much. And I enjoy so much this panel and more than happy to hear and contribute to this group also in the next months. Thank you.
>> Thank you, Giovanni for packing in a lot of things into these five minutes.
A lot of elements for the debate. And really to be able to have means of debate at the end. Let me quickly give the floor to Enguerrant Marique. Please, the floor is yours.
>> Thank you very much, Luca. So I will try to keep it short because I fully subscribe to most in terms of methodology to what Richard and Ivar said earlier. Two changes I had, glossary entries. I was in charge of market, and sew   --  social network. My first change I had in mind was to keep it simple and almost stupid so as many people could get the idea without entering too much in the technicals nor being too superficial. So that was kind of keeping it short. Which was difficult. Doing research you can very quickly enter into rabbit holes where you kind of start making so much Heff-between the models or different kind of social networks that at the end of the day you make so much distinction it's not relevant any more because you just have one instance of a platform in mind trying to define what is social network. We have maybe three or four social networks in mind. Whereas there are many, many more social networks on media in place. We need to stay as general as possible. My fear is if we stay too general we aren't relevant any more. We may  --  adequate level of generality to examine. The second challenge I would like to share with you is terms are so deceptive that you end up writing either so many things that is contradictory because the literature is not unanimous. So if you think about, I was in charge of the words, share economy. There was a day I refused writing an entry on share economy. I asked Luca and Nikola about that but if we start defining these notions, it needs to be a notion of marketplace because the basic trajectories or the basic instructions are the same as in marketplaces.
Yet there are some specific features which may deserve specific paragraph between need to try to stay as general as possible and not getting into defining all the words that exist into internet governance otherwise at the end of the day we will completely get lost. So I will stay there so we don't lose too much time.
>> Thank you very much for your points and confessing your behavior in refusing to describe the [breaking up]
Of course now last but not least we have Yasmin Curzi 
>> Thank you. Hate speech and pornography entries. Both alone contributions from our dear colleagues, Terry and sin cha co. All these topics have much broader perspective but we meant to focus on the gender and standpoint cyber harassment for some can involve offenses in general. We also describe government white paper from 2009, described as broad approach where harmful content is understood as content related sexual exploitation and abuse, intimidation and others in the hate speech entry, I talk about how it's not a new phenomenon in our society. But the internet has enabled it to be carried out on a much broader scale. I also pointed out the discussion shouldn't be centered on waiving the free speech but instead should be centered on how the vulnerable groups such as women and minorities are powerless against violations.
Lastly in the pornography entry I discussed toward the lens of feminist  --  and also explain how the platforms are dealing with the issue in different ways from screening and filtering to excessive censoring. I think that's all I have to say. Thank you, a lot. Once again.
>> Thank you very much for perfectly respecting timing so we still have finally time for open debate. I would like to invite also all the participants, attendees according to Zoom to raise their hand in case they want to chip in and provide comments or ask questions, I will make sure they maybe are allowed to talk and to speak freely. If we have any attendees willing to provide comments or ask questions please use the "raise hand" option on Zoom. If not,  --  well, there's a nice comment about the need for a glossary for cyber lo  and internet lo in the chat. That's perhaps a little over ambitious, knowing how long it took to realize only this glossary/dictionary/encyclopedia of platform
>> I see the attendees is quite shy. No one is raising hands. I would well there's one question. Maybe terms be relevant also be on platforms like ISB, etc.
Of course. Of course. Many of the terms that are used one example in my mind is Chris's entry on common carriage is a perfect example of how things may be used not only for platform regulation but also for either internet law, or cyber law or you name it as you prefer. We have maybe final remark. Otherwise I will take advantage  -- 
>> If you could share what you mentioned about the D.S.A.
>> To share in the chat. What we will do and this is a public announcement is to download all the text of the chat and then share it on our lisso everyone can have all the links and everything. A lot of people have been sharing a lot of interesting resources in the chat. So I will make sure we will download it and then share it with everyone on the list. As there is no other questions shared in the chat, I would like to, yes, I'm seeing Chris raising his hand. So please, Chris.
>> I was looking for the little emoticon but we don't have it for the Zoom chat. One of the great things about the glossary is to get a common understanding. Take a basic example, the term ISP is meaningless in legal terms in most countries around the world. Not a term we use in the European union or North American legislation either. So I think it's really important to have an understanding. That's almost the most common baseline understanding people have about internet platforms and tend to be meaningless. We use I.S.S.P. in Europe. But just to say I think one of the really important elements going forward for more generally is how we can use that common understanding to explain and to translate to each other for next year what this smoke and mirrors in United States means about regulating section 230 on which we all pretend we base our own laws, even though we don't. So we understand  divergence. I think the glossary is so proly perfectly defined for that debate. Congratulations, guys.
It's a very important contribution.
>> There was an important conversation I had with email with Rossana, she also suggested a term using Greek word for the common language could be 'very good choice also at least as subtitle for the glossary/dictionary. 
Our plans and time line were a little bit disrupted. We provided by the coalition directly. Or Nico, we will centralyze this until thend of the year and we will try to review this and maybe we can also ask to help support who have directly the possibility of this. Unfortunately it was not possible before because of all the issues that we know but we will make sure to have a sustainable  -- 
I see Bertrand also has a raised hand. Please go ahead.
>> Yeah, thank you, Luca. It was a really great panel. Two quick points. One, I would be glad to have feedback on this addition of third layer of the governance by and governance on. The second thing what Chris was mentioning. The coordination, competitivity between the regulations that may come out of the U.S.
One thing I am particularly concerned about is the terminology that is going to be used for the different layers in the stack of intermediaries from the ones that are very top of the stack that have full capacity to influence the amplitude of the content to the ones that are much lower in the stack. Whether there is a useful terminology that could emerge to be more sophisticated than what is in the e-commerce directive clearly not sufficient. How do you see this work being conducted?
>> I'm glad I get to comment. You may be the first to use it. Congratulations.
 
You could say the power is delegated to them by the platform and therefore governance by the platform. But I think there are important ways that users also have power independent of the platform, especially when they are in position as moderators, Facebook groups etc.. If you want to draw attention to those dynamics then you think governance on platforms could be a potentially useful metaphor for that. So, I think that's a term that deserves further explanation for sure. So the way I approach it for this glossary project is literature review. How do people use it until now. For that purpose, I would have to find usage to do that. Or you could clarify there are limitations. But you know, hypothetically if you wrote a blog post about this and I could refer. That would work as well.
>> Excellent, just a couple two quick comments on this. First is as I was stressing at the very beginning we aim at consolidating a lot of different views.
Indeed we still have time to add views and what you were stressing, Bertrand was a good point that should be added. I also shared in the chat doing this panel, another point I think should be added to this as governance, it is not really translate in English literature but common in French language literature. Distinction as processes that leads to regulation and regulation on the other hand, techniques of tools that allow to create equilibrium in a system that is naturally not in advance. regulation as a set of tools and technique may be useful
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-5-nri-digital-economy-trans-territorial-regulations-and-the-impact-of-digital^^

>> MODERATOR: I and Sebastien and I will help this meeting to go well and with, of course, Anja all the work and I'm the last piece to come but I hope to do well to moderate the session and as we discussed just before the beginning of the meeting I would like to ask you as we received this very shocking and we are so sad news with the news, I would like to suggest all that we take a moment of silence to think about Irene and what she left behind her and how we can do -- how we can do better for her in the next few days and maybe few years.  Thank you.
     >> Thank you very much.  I see many friends of Marlene in the room and I would like that thank you for the time you spend to think about her and I hope that you appreciate the help that she give us and what we can do in the future.  We have some work to do and a very short session of now less than one hour and we have a lot of speakers and therefore Anja, I suggest that we start if you agree.
     >> ANJA GENGO: I agree.
     >> MODERATOR: Maybe you can introduce the topic because you work a lot on that and you deserve to speak about it a bit, please.
     >> ANJA GENGO: Thank you for accepting to moderate the session.  It is a great honor and thank the distinguished speakers that did not just devote the hour, the preparations start the early in the year.  We didn't even imagine that the meeting will go online.  We were preparing to meet onsite and I recall in April our colleagues were prepared to deliver.  Of course, the pandemic has changed and it will impact the discussion on today's discussion.  That the session focuses really on regional and national specificities of the digital economy and the impact of digital sovereignty and focusing on 12 policy areas do compete inputs coming from local levels relaying to the contemporary challenges to the economies and how did the pandemic impact we will look at the differences between the countries and regions.  For the southeast and European dialogues we have Dr. pan (listing names) and I'm apologizing if I didn't pronounce well the name.  With that, I would give the floor to Sebastien to you to guide us through basically to tour the world on this topic and see where we stand and what is the vision for the future.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Anja.  And thank you very much all of the distinguished participants who will talk and give us a snapshot at what is happening.  As you have said in the agenda, you have very strict time and we need to follow this because if not we will be late.  I would like not to take much time as we already did and give the floor to IGF from Bolivia, Javier.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: Good morning, good afternoon, good evening good night to everybody.  Thank you for the opportunity.  I would like to share experience in my country.  The first one is the occasion when got not market to operating two major cities in oh live Jason -- (?) and there were very different approaches because the only city that took the regulation was the city where I live in, la pad.  We make a legal framework call it private partner to travel services hired through digital platforms and the decision took several months with Uber to try to establish the business model that fits in our local reality.
     The municipal government put a special emphasis on the rights the users instead of the terms of use of Uber.  It was between the lack of regulation and the Uber interests.  It was interested because we established a set of requirements to operating in this city so we got an understanding with them, nevertheless, it was it little complicated because we couldn't comply to Uber to apply to all our regulation.  For example for some disputes between the users and Uber it has to be under the Netherlands regulation.  And the other experience is in the community we get roaming elimination revelation between Bolivia, Colombia and Ecuador and Peru.  Alongside with the Latin America, the bank we make the study from 2017 to February 2018.  Until 2020, we have been in many several coordinations between the regulation of territories on the operator, our local operators.  We make different changes to the draft project.  And the very important thing that us as a group of countries, we coordinate and agreed a common understanding for this regulation call it decision.  854.  The key point of this regulation is that we progressively decrease the prices of data CENB II and all those countries that I mentioned until 2022 we will have the same carriers as we were on the home country.  The key point was important to coordinate to reach agreements like we did with Uber and also with many older digital platforms as Netflix and so on.
     Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Javier.  And three minutes.  Great.  Just right timing.  You are very good.  Thank you very much.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: We will pass on to same topic of the floor to Chad, please.  Francois, you can take the floor.
     >>
     >> JUST I NEED TO KILL YOU THAT HE WILL JOIN US IN TWO MINUTES.  HE HAS ISSUES WITH ZOOM SO to he will be a two minute maximum here with him.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay then.  Maybe as we are very short time, may I suggest that we go to the next item and we will come back on that one if you agree with that.  If it is okay with you.
     Let's go to the second item.  And see are countries ready to respond and align their practices with the global friends of digitalization of the economies?  What are some good practices learning from Panama IGF and Albania IGF and at the end of this Part I will come back.  From Albania, we have Mrs. IrenaMalolli.  And I will give the floor to Irina, please.
     >> IRENA: Thank you for to speak about the economy and challenges and grab Pitts of our countries.  I will take the opportunity of these three meetings three minutes of my speech to share briefly what is going on in Albania what is good as example for others and what isn't going in the digitization of the economy.
     The digitization of the economy is really is to a great number of factor label fors -- relates to a great number of factors and developments starting from digital connectivity, fast broadband, digital platforms and digital services at digital skills and other aspects.  And right now we have a good progress in digital transformation of services for establishment of the Albania government we have a great number of online services provided for citizens and business and with more than 700 online services provided through this portal.  And a great number of users are collecting or are using this portal to have services.
     Regarding the digital connectivity, we have good coverage with mobile broadband based on 3G or 4G but no fixed broadband penetration and approved a new government plan for the sustainable on digital infrastructure broadband for 2020-2025 with pure objectives in order to address the digital divide and to have broadband connectivity for all public institutions and education facilities in order to have all inclusiveness.
     Regarding the digital economy, we know that regulation and legal framework is also important to creating vital resources and digital platforms or free movement of content online or something like that.  We recently passed in the government a new law for open data and reuse of public information which aimed to promote innovation in the digital economy and using active (?) or other developments of technology and applications for promotion of digital economy.  Regarding startups and innovation also a new law is drafted aiming to create a regulatory framework and institutional framework in order to promote and support startups in innovation and ICT.
     For cyber security which is so important, in order to promote or to develop the digital economy, we need to have (?) to use online services and platforms and go through online activity and we have legislation in place for network security on information and critical infrastructure to be safe and use task services and also we are working to increase awareness and for capacity building.  Our authority for electronic certificate and cyber security is organizing a cyber capacity to increase for pupils and students and for digital skills to develop specific strategy for all basic levelsester knowledge of citizens using the online services up to advanced professional knowledge or for the business community and for IT professionals.  This is briefly what is going on and a lot of other projects for development in the digital economy are in place and to be developed through different institutions which are working based on this agenda strategy.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Irena.
     And if I can give the floor to IGF member Nayreth, can you take the floor?
     >> NAYRETH GONZALEZ: We have to start with the fact that the digital economy emerged with the introduction of internet technologies.  And that affect only not only the economy but also society because it is currently the most important engine of up know expectations and economic (?) of the world.  To improve the response and aligning of practice with global trends in the utilizations of the economy, in the developing countries such as Panama, we must collaborate fine solution.  Therefore, it is still imperative to work on promote on issues related to ICT for development that contributes to enhanced capacity to quantify electronic commerce and the digital economy.
     We promote this by holding world meetings make up of multisector representative.  Collaborate to close the digital barrier as more than half of the world has limit or not internet access.  Inclusiveness is essential to build a digital economy that works for everyone.
     The case of this is the construction of a infrastructure by the government of Panama in conjunction with the private sector on nearly 100% where she seeks to withstand the infrastructure necessary for internet access connectivity in areas too difficult access in the country.  We are also working on the Panama hub digital initiative taking advantage of the fact that several fiber optic cable pass through Panama.  The digital hub has among its objective to a (?) provide companies dedicate to sale throughout the internet and digital platform to start the operation in the country.  Or to strengthen education as the digital economy we require a series for new different skills as well as protection policies.  It is necessary -- to make life long learning opportunities for all.  As well as the deployment, training, all ways of working barrier and training personnel are needed for new skill.  Panama is working to promote the creation of knowledge in micro, small and medium sized company and user.
     Elementary programs and professional training.  We also have the creation of our (?) which the agreement of establishment of contact networks and training of their capacity related to electronic commerce and that technology.
     The digital economy by establishing the rules of the game.  This task falls to the government in close tiia lock with the other stakeholders.  These require policies that make the digital economy work for the majority or not just for a few.  Policy makers are working on decisions that current trend increasing internet qualities but where imbalance caused by the digital economy.
     (?) in digital products and service must be taken into account.  In this, Panama has to work even more.  For example, it is debating a tax law for services provided and in the internet digital platform.  Last, but not least is not to forget that we must pay attention to the new increase for digital economy has create ranging from failures in cyber security to facilitation of illicit economic activities which closely relate to the establishment of the rule of the game in the country.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Nayreth.  Nice, well done.  And I will leave time for and I suggest we go to the next item.  What is the concrete camps of good practices of cooperation for improving our economies on regional levels experience shared by SEEDIG.  I will ask Olga Kyrliuk to take the floor.  Please go ahead.
     >> O ELGA KYRYLIUK: Thank you.  I must admit that the digital economy we are discussing today is of huge importance for the region of southeastern Europe and it so because leverage in digitization is not purely an economic challenge for our region but it is also a matter of international security of gee row political resiliency and strategic relevance.  Indeed, increased cooperation in the countries in the region could help to strengthen the individual strengths and benefits and also to address the collective challenges.
     Moreover, joint policy and strategic region to help to am plyify the region position at the international level.  Statement, I must admit that joining forces is never an easy task especially talking about such a diverse region as southeastern Europe.  Our region is covered in the more than 20 countries and these countries are very much diverse.  It is even understand this even more in you can see that some of these countries are already part of the European union while others would probably take an indefinite number of years to get the membership.  And also too often the countries find themselves in a position of direct competition with each other because very often they are competing for projects, for funds for investments.  And this also somehow createssen ternal competition instead of making them stronger as one actor at the international level.  But on the other hand, our region could also use this diversity as its strength because instead of taking many years to try to reach fairly equal level of digitalization our countries could instead combine unique resources and try to become more stronger together.
     For example, try to imagine that the breaksthrough in digital economy the southern European region could make if you try to combine human talent in engineering come interesting Ukraine and digital solutions in the field of artificial intelligence from Slovenia and Bulgaria and add on top on that, harmonized and then you have an ideal situation.  For that that has to be the countries and I would probably try to make an assumption here by saying that maybe instead of trying to exceed already existent regional formations our kintries could better focus on joining the forces between themselves and in this way become stronger.  And with the unique perspective, southeastern Europe could become a connecting brick between the increasingly polarized relations between the yew union and United States and China and moreover could become also the digital policy influence not only at the European but also at the global level.  And we should also bear in mind when we are talking about cooperation of the regional level that outcome can't push for strong cooperation just based on the geographical proximity of the country especially in the context of southeastern Europe, they are diverse and fighting hard to protect their identity and sovereignty and that is why we need to be careful when we are coming with the ideas of regional cooperation projects.  But also we should acknowledge that not every digital regional cooperation project requires engagement of every single country.  Some of these projects could be easily started just with few countries onboard and then they could be scaled up if proved successful and if seen as necessary.  And here I would like to refer to the example of four countries from southeastern Europe namely Bulgaria and Croatia and others.
     >> MODERATOR: Conclusion, please.
     >> At enhancing the cross border interkickive pity and digitization.  And as I am running out of time I would like to conclude by saying that countries in our region should focus -- should look beyond the differences and they should unite their forces in order to become stronger and focus more on the cooperation.  And SEEDIG is always ready to be for discussion and decision making.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you again.  Sorry for interrupting you.  We need to try to focus on the timing because if not we will be very late.
     IGF Chad is with us.  Can you take the floor, please.
     >> Thank you very much.  So I bring to Chad what hello, do you get me?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, go ahead.
     >> COUMNOBEYE THANK YOU VERY MUCH.  ACCORDING TO CHAD AS WE HAVE STOPPED TALKING ABOUT EITHER THE FIRST the first thing that happened in Chad here is the changing of the minister before the minister was called the ministry of past technology and new technology and communication information but now the new name is ministry of -- so this is the first thing happened in the period of COVID-19 and is the good thing for us.  According to the sec sore, we can say that the ministry the government of Chad has a lot of area of low and the (?) of internet with fiber optic of Chad ofure stand and Chad and aisle gearia also we have also the great program as difficulties in COUMNOBEYJ.  We know Chad is a big country so if it is not for us to connect all of the territory we know we have one million of (?) so it is not easy.  There is also the problem of the nonurbanization of the town and the problem of culture.  Culture, you know.  A lot of people they don't have money enough or resource to buy a smart phone and to be connected also.  What is interesting in Chad the government has which is called workship, we call it PSDNP, planned strategic poly(?) and then we (break in audio) the goal of connecting all people by internet.  So I think maybe on the future as you know it was difficult for me to be connected because of that situation of our connection is not good sometimes also.
     So according to about what we are going to do, Chad is on the way of (?) so we think that it -- ensure the goal of the government.  Thank you very much.  I don't know.  I'm so late I cannot talk much.  Thank you very much.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  You get it right and on time and thank you very much.  Now we have time for people express themselves and discuss and ask questions.  Don't forget to use the Q&A to put your question if you would like to write them.  Or raise your hand and if you have question you will be able to talk.  And there is no more people who are just listening, you are all as speakers but before you decide to speak, please raise your hand and I can give you the floor and if you like to ask the question in the question and answer place for it as you can see on the bottom of your screen.
     Okay.  I don't see any hands.  If there are no hands and no questions, I will give you some time to ask question.
     >> People cannot use the Q&A part.
     >> MODERATOR: They can raise their hand and they are not doing so either.
     >> Just post in the chat or maybe I can come in with a brief question.  I know that we have been debating about it when the session was -- when we were preparing the session and relates to those that are left behind to vulnerable and margin untillized groups how do we achieve that we all benefit from digital economy when we are not all connected to the internet and in addition to the fact that even if we have connection in terms of the available infrastructure there still is also a huge problem for a large part of the world.  That is something that would be interesting maybe to hear from the colleagues.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Anja, for your help.  Anyone want to take the lead and answer the question?  Olga, Javier.
     >> Ky start.
     >> Thank you very much.
     >> OLGA: Thank you for the question and it is important one and you raised probably the most critical points and this is why exactly at the regional level it is especially complicated because the countries have different level of development in terms of infrastructure and access.  And even if it is requiring a lot of funds to put those fiber optic cables and to bring internet to every village, this probably would take more time time and funds but something that we can do right now and this was your second point is actually to try to educate people to give them those digital skills that they need so let's say once they have the connection in their village or town they are already able to fully use it and to benefit from that connection.  That is why I believe that education at least requires less resource and the current pandemic showed that somehow even those who were not ready fully they moved to their remote learning distance learning.  So probably the pandemic also teached us how to react fastly instead of just taking years and years of discussion and how to actually act in a prompt manner.  So yes, this have very important and probably why the countries are struggling to find a common ground but this is something that every country should address the two issues.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Olga.  Anyone of the other panelists want to take the floor?
     >> NAYRETH: In line with Olga, I think that the COVID-19 has highlighted the importance of delivering the digital technology to ensure a rapid agile response to both the pandemic and economy recovery in its aftermath.
     The current crisis should be seen as an opportunity to bridge the digital divide among reals and increase broadband access to create incentive to adopt digital technology across all key government industry and service sectors and to promote a stronger digital culture across the population.  Javier, go ahead?
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think that increased the digitization or internet.  I heard a statement that said that on the six months we got increased penetration of about six years and here in Bolivia we are getting a loot of requirements for the internet connection but you know, our geography is really huge and it is kind of impossible for them to get to owl of the sites of Bolivia and I think that the very important factor for this aim is to try to develop community networks via free frequencies.  NGOs or public or private entities could use that frequency to get to the very, very remote areas to get the internet connection.  And it is important to remember that the digital literacy is very important.  We need to teach the people how to use internet and how it can improve their social and economic life.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Javier.  I have a hand from Carlos Alberto Alfonso.  Carlos, please go ahead.
     >> CARLOS ALBERTO: Thank you, Sebastien.  I was thinking of examples following what CENB II said of the region of operation and cooperation in countries with common borders and geographical borders and what other ways to help enhance the regional operation or collaboration is by picking up issues of common issues linked to territory questions and which affect the development of the internet.  One single example but, of course, participants may suggest others, the need to organize the spectrum policies at the edge of common geographical borders.  An issue we cannot escape from a regional cooperation with bordering countries.  Another example is like in Latin America, you have Indigenous communities which cross two agree graphical border like the (?) between Peru and Brazil.  And there are other examples.  In Africa, we have several examples and so on.  So these sort of (?) trans border policies is interesting to consider.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Carlos.  Anyone else want to take the floor?  And comment?  Any other questions to the panelists ready in your pocket as you have done already, Anja?
     >> JANUARYIA GENGO: This was a challenging aagain that to put together because it is a broad topic and as you can see from the colleagues, the situation and conditions and our vision seems to be different for what we expect from the digital economies.  Yes, maybe my question would be and I do come from actually yesterday's planning call of this high level leadership track that will be happening at the IGF next year is in terms of the digital economy when you look at your communities, in which sectors you see now currently that the biggest transformation that was caused by.
     >> I think.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think the biggest is the remote education or (?) brought a transformation from the classroom to their houses.  So it was an -- a very deep impact to families for fathers, four parents because they needed to be on their homes to support their child and also the teachers had to use internet and whatsapp and the other educational platforms.  So I think that much work are pending to do on this next years because the COVID will stay here in this world so we need to improve the new policies and as one said trans national policies to get support for the policies.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Javier.  Anyone else want to?
     >> OLGA: I can go next.  I would agree that Javier and I would name for the real the healthcare because it is everything happening and changing because of COVID.  As we see any crisis actually can be an opportunity.  We just need to make sure that we are using this opportunity and catching the right moment to develop.
     And this COVID-19 pandemic it actually revealed a lot of weaknesses and helped us to mobilize the resources.  Even though for me sometimes it was so much high breaking when I got to know that some schools in my native town don't have the internet connection and while I was sure that probably it is not an issue at all for Ukraine because, indeed, the internet penetration has very high rate.  But sometimes you just if you have to be in a situation when you understand this issue still exists and they are not that far as you could think they are.
     So and Of course the healthcare where a lot of things nowadays happening where we are tending to telemedicined a the consultations online and all of these things.  So probably it will be even difficult for us to come back and maybe we will not even come back to pre-pandemic way of services.  The government is developing in many countries in the regional governments are trying to increasely provide services online and once the citizens feel this is useful and this is efficient they would probably incest for all of those things to stay in place.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Olga.
     >> MODERATOR: There are would comments.  How do we eDoo he fine digit literacy.  We also discussed this in the AprIGF.  But it is very to define it, it was from IGF and it was from (?) and why do you think someone should be connected.  I will give the floor and then if there are a last few words from the pantist I was give them the floor.  Please, go ahead.
     >> AUDIENCE: Thanks, Sebastien.  There are different countries and different regions who discuss and debate national on regional positions.  To what extent have they brought important differences to the global IGF and successful in aligning and harmonizing national positions to global positions for example and national journal issues being aligned to -- aligned as journal issue and global journal issue.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Raquel, can I give you the floor and then I will come back to the panelists, please.
     >> RAQUEL: Thank you very much, Sebastien.  And I would first reacted to the question that Angela and the comment made in the chat and go with the one comment to the panelists.  Regard, the question about connective and why it is important and I think Angela frame Anja framed in the sense that people would be forced to connect.  In my view I think it is important to get the connection able or given people the options to connect about if they are willing to.  And that is the very important nuance that needs to be considered in this case.  And then making them available is the entrance point for universal access and really we just see this especially in Latin America, but also in other parts of the world where this digital gap and the digital divide it really having a new meaning in terms of how you are included in the society or not and it is not only about forcing people to communicate but it is about being fully as citizens or not.  I don't want to extend too much but I felt compelled to make comments around it.  But my question would be on the topic of the panel more to the digital transformation and impact on the economy in a very pragmatic way also.  In your experience, how do you see connected to where we are discussing in terms of the improvements for the IGF in having this outcomes more clearly targeted and do you see that through your experience with the national end in some cases the original, this really happening and how this comes together in terms of some of the best practices or lessons that we can -- thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  It is a very important but long question and I will just give them one minute to answer.  I'm not sure that they are able to answer all of the question that were raised and specifically the last one because it is a very long discussion.  But thank you for your question.
     I will for each one of you one minute and then we will be going to the next section.  Who wants to start?  The one who didn't talk.  Did you want to now say something?
     >> IF I WOULD LIKE TO SAY SOMETHING ABOUT WHAT IS THE LAST PROGRESS PART OF DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION IN ALBANIA FOR THE TIME BEING what I mentioned is the digital transformation and public services.  We have created the government portal as a unit portal and we have invested in this digitalization of public systems and development and digitization of public services and it was a very good example during the pandemic situation that through regional agency of information society a lot of services helping citizens during the pandemic was developed and provided.  And I agree with what is discussed about the digital connectivity and how it is important in order to have digital Xi links and digitalization of the economy.  And it is a precondition.  Since digital connectivity has great impact for all actors.  But I think that we can go in parallel and hand in hand with all kind of developments from digital skills we can advance or preparing new generation but not only new generation, we need to adopt the labor force, the digital technology and to be able to use this kind of new possibilities, the platforms and applications and to be ready for digital economy.  And in parallel as policy makers since I came from minutery we need to prepare the relevant angle and regulatory framework in order to promote technology.  This is what I can say based on discussion from (?).
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Irena.  Anyone else?  If not, we move to the next section and you will have the opportunity to talk again.  But short.  But if you want to say something.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think it is very difficult for us as a lat in country for companies like Facebook, Uber and Netflix and Microsoft so a is a good practice we have with the community making (?) the framework I suggest that maybe our small countries in western Europe and Latin America it is very good idea to group together to gather and try to develop some frameworks like the European nations did.  So I think it is very important to face this new (?) alongside with the American companies we need to get together our force to make a better framework.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Olga, please?
     >> OLGA: The last question.  I think for the things we are discussing to actually become decisions and to actually make ooh difference, we need to have the decision makers around the table and we need to have them around the table not only once per year when we are having the annual IGF regional national level or whatever but we node to continuously during the year communicate with those stakeholders and actors and this is something that we started doing SEEdig, not only the annual meeting but now trying to launch various intersessional projects.  For example the project dedicated to COVID-19 tracking data protection in the region as a result of which we prepared a set of representations for for policy makers and then we tried to communicate and react on that and I think this is important.  Because if we just keep the cycle closed and we don't bring new people in and don't get our results out to the right people, then basically we will just stay at the level of discussing the issues.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  We are late already.  I need to -- did you want to say a few words before we move or we can move to the next section.
     >> JOSUE: Here in Chad our country what is important during the period of the pandemic of code is also the digital transformation of COVID the (?) to call and be in touch with the doctor to this is a good practice in our country.  But the real effort is we need to have a good internet connection and new policies to promote again ICT in our country.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And we are late already and therefore you will have to be very short in the next section.  The question is digital transformation of our economies, what is needed to be done in eastern Europe and Chad and Albania and Bolivia and you have less than one minute please.  Olga, very short speech, please.
     >> OLGA: So this is easy because after every SEEDIG meeting we have the message with the stakeholders and we had the digital economy session and this is what the community has decided is the most important to create the enabling the environment which means to bridge the digital divide in terms of infrastructure and in terms of education and then you need to ensure multistakeholder cooperation between all of the actors involved in digital economy.  You also need to harmonize the cross border and make sure that everyone has to follow the same set of standards and need to incentivize innovation and to create the environment where there is a healthy competition included by promoting the public private partnership.  So this will be is the key points.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  The next is Irena, please, very short, please.
     >> IRENA: I will say what is important for the region to go ahead in the economy is to advance for cross border services interoperaability of the system and services in order to facilitate citizen movement or (?) business environment.  And in addition, what Olga mentioned, to invest for the digital divide in order to have all inclusive digital transformation.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Irena.  Nayreth.  Very, shoot.  Too.
     >> We must continue to enhance the technology innovation for support investment in national broadband for future.  Scientific research and pollty and legislative frameworks on the competitive cyber security industry.  It is necessary to address certain weakness to accelerate the country's digital leave for the above all interested party we must continue holding working meetings with the various actor www.the environment in order to monitor and promote the digital economy win the country.  We must not Rule out seeking the support of the international community in commercial financial and fiscal cooperation necessary to place the digital economy in the world on a more sustainable path.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And Javier, please.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think that there digital economy is not only the communication infrastructure but also other stakeholders and other economic sectors like the local universities and local governments or a type of ministries for economic issues and planning issues because it is very important to foster the capacity building for the digital literacy and also for new technologies for the digital content, a lot of local digital content and new technologies like cloud computing and 5G and IoT and so on.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And last, but not least, very short.
     >> THANK YOU, DO YOU GET ME?
     >> MODERATOR: YES, GO AHEAD.  PLEASE.
     >> HELLO.  SO WE THINK THAT OUR -- OKAY.
     >> JOSUE WHAT WE NEED IN THE TRANSFORMATIONAL we ask the government to accelerate under the fiber optic of Chad and Niger and Nigeria.  And also in the sector of education it is very important to continue to train, to train a new -- to train young people, to train teachers and in the domain of learning and ICT also.  So we need also a lot of (?) and that domain also.  And then we need also new policies as -- the same thing here in Chad also.  We need the new policies to -- for the question between the country and between the countries of CESE which is called in (?) this community is linked and the state, the members are linked so we need to increase the cooperation between those countries also.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And I know that I didn't give the floor and he is upset so I will give them the floor for 30 seconds and then we will conclude the meeting with a few words from Anja.  Do you want to take the floor?  Yes?  No?  Okay.  I tried my best.  Thank you very much.  I wanted to before to give the last word to Anja, I wanted to thank you all.  It is a very difficult exercise, very short time and very important questions and ting all in English and I know that your language is not English and your first language is not English and that is very kind and very well done.  Thank you very much.  Anja, you prepared this round table fabulously.  I will give you the last word.  Thank you very much.
     >> Anja, congratulating you on impressive time management.  I know in superexperience around I know my colleagues will join me.  It is extremely difficult because there is so much to hear and everything somehow different and many challenges are present in so many countries and regions it is definitely worth of hearing.
     So really impress I.  Congratulations this was very punctual.  I expected a good session because I know you worked on it hard.  I hope in IGF 2021 we could build on the good results of this session and expand further and hopefully when we meet in concern to exchange on the improvements that were made in this next year on digital economies in many countries and regions.
     On the (?) there is the call for commitments in case come of your NRIs would like to share plans or projects you plan to focus on to advance the goals of Internet Governance Forum or the goals objectives that were set in the road map for the digital cooperation recently issued by the secretary general.  You can access that form on the website.  You can also reach out to me and I will try to respond as quick as I can.  But with that, thank you very much.  And it was excellent, such a difficult day and sad day but I think you brought actually the purpose why we need to continue doing what we or doing in the way we are doing.  Thank you so much.  Thank you, Sebastien.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  The meeting is auned and have a good follow-up on IGF and thank you for participating.  Bye bye, all.  Take care.
     >> Thank you so much.
     >> Great session.
     >> Thank you, everyone.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-5-of27-promoting-trust-on-the-internet-through-osaka-track^^

 
    >> MODERATOR: Okay.  Ladies and gentlemen, I am afraid some of the participants are still having some technical problems, but it is already the time to start so let's get started.
     I hope that the problems will be soon resolved.  So good morning, good afternoon, good evening, everybody.  
     It is my great pleasure to welcome all of you here today in this virtual IGF open forum on Promoting Trust on the Internet through Osaka Track.  I'm Yoichi Iida, Deputy Director-General for G-7, G20 Relations from the Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.  It is honor for me to be here and moderate the session with the distinguished speakers.
     In the very beginning, let me introduce Mr. Shintani Masayoshi, who is the State Minister of our ministry for our opening remarks.
     (Captioned video)
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  Thank you very much for the message, Mr. Minister.  
     Today we will discuss trust on the internet.  The Osaka Track is an initiative by the Japanese government launched last year on the occasion of the G20 summit to contribute to international discussion on cross-border data flow and the digital economy at large. 
     At the same time, we also proposed a concept of data free flow with the trust which emphasizes the importance of trust in the digital economy.
     The fundamental idea of this concept is to maximize the benefit of the digital economy, it is critical to promote open and free environment for data flow and data utilization.  
     But at the same time, digitalization brought various challenges to the society.  So when we strengthen the trust in the internet and digital economy at large, people can participate in the digital economy more actively without concern and data free flow can be promoted.  
     It is very important to generate this positive cycle between freedom and trust.  With that, I would like to introduce Mr. Vint Cerf as keynote speaker.  As everybody knows, Dr. Cerf is famous as the father of the internet.  Because of the time difference, he sent us a video message for keynote.
     >> VINT CERF: Hello, my name is Vint Cerf.  I'm Google's chief internet evangelist, and I really appreciate the opportunity to participate in the Osaka Track of the IGF 2020 open forum.
     The topic of this discussion is trust in internet space and how can we achieve it, who will be participants in establishing that trust, what actions need to be taken, what stakeholders have to be involved.  It's my view that trust in cyberspace starts with respect and trust for the multiple stakeholders who must establish policy that will create this trusted environment.
     When you think a little bit about this process, we can learn from one organization called the Global Commission for Stability of Cyberspace.  And in that organization, there have been something like a dozen proposals made for what I would call norms in cyberspace.  These are not treaty agreements or anything, but what they do represent is common agreements among a number of countries about behavior that they would endorse or behavior that they would reject in the cyber environment.
     The first one that they came up with had to do with the protection of the public core of the internet.  By this, they meant the routers, the underlying infrastructure, transmission facilities, optical fiber cables and things of that kind, and domain name system components and servers and resolvers and so on.  All of these are considered to be part of the public core of the internet.
     The idea here is to agree on a global basis that none of us will attack and interfere with or undermine or destroy the operation of that public core.  And why would we adopt such a norm?  
     One answer is that the internet has become a very, very critical part of the economy of the world.  It is not just digital economy in the sense of buying and selling and supplying of digital goods and services, but it's also the role that the internet plays in facilitating economy of all kinds.  
     The more we can trust that infrastructure, then the more we can build on it.  The less we trust it, the less likely it will be that economic development can rely on that underlying infrastructure.
     And so our job, I think, in this discussion, is to figure out what norms and what other practices and perhaps even more treaty agreements might we want to establish in order to assure that this infrastructure can be used for economic development, for education, for research, and for entertainment and for all of the vast array of other things we have learned that we can gain from having this global infrastructure at hand.
     The current statistics show that only about half the world's population has access to the internet, so we already have a big challenge to make this available to everyone on reasonable, affordable and sustainable terms and conditions.  
     There are policies to be adopted about investment, for example, in competition and openness with regard to train and exchange of information and data flows and all of these things are really vital.  But how do we get to the point where these complex environments are trustable?  Well, for one thing, we are going to need tools for strong authentication.
     And I'm not suggesting that therefore everyone has to self-identify in a strong way for every use they make of this infrastructure, but rather that if at need, we can establish strong authentication and it is extremely valuable.  
     Imagine that we are exchanging contract agreements on the net and then we want to authoritatively sign them.  What we want is digital signatures that are recognized as authoritative in all of the jurisdictions of the world in which that contract needs to be satisfied.
     And so if something goes wrong, we want to be able to identify the party strongly so that they can come to some agreement in a jurisdiction and in a venue suitable for resolving whatever dispute may have arisen.  
     There are equally important opportunities here for educating the general public about its role in establishing trust in the internet.
     For example, we have to learn to use two-factor authentication in addition to passwords because passwords alone are not good enough.  We need to insist on cryptography end to end in order to protect information at rest and in transit.  We need to establish not only the technical standards but also the practices that will achieve those objectives.  
     I'm sure I could keep going for a while, but the point here is to have a discussion about these issues.  And perhaps in the course of our discussion identify specific actions that we could try to undertake that would lead to a more trusted environment in the online space and therefore opportunities for economic improvement literally everywhere in the world.
     So I thank you very much for allowing me to start this conversation.  And I look forward to the remainder of the discussions and hopefully to the identification of ideas that we can put into practice.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  So I really thank Dr. Cerf for this very insightful message.  
     He mentioned tools, identifications, authentications and standards.  But in addition to those elements, I think he emphasized the potential norms by multi-stakeholders and also he mentioned practice or actions.
     So now I would like to join to panelists and listen to their points.  First, I would like to invite Dr. Gridl.  Dr. Gridl is the Head of Division VIA5 managing Internet Governance and the International Digital Dialogue in The Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy of the German government.  
     Dr. Gridl took the leading role in Germany when the company hosted IGF last year in Berlin and guided the conference to a great success.  He also actively engaged himself in the consultation on global cooperation when Germany took the role of co-champion for recommendation 5A and B of the high-level panel on digital cooperation report.
     That resulted in the option paper on possible improvements of the internet governance mechanisms.  So, Dr. Gridl please take the floor.
     >> RUDOLF GRIDL: Thank you very much, Mr. Iida.  
     And distinguished panelists, guests, participants, good morning from Berlin. I'm honored that I can participate in this very important open forum organized by the MIAC, our dear partners in digital dialogues and policy throughout the year.
     I would like to emphasize on the experience that we made during the preparation of our IGF and also what you also mentioned, the options paper.
     And I think we identified two factors that needs to be fulfilled if you want to advance and have a trustful and meaningful and a faithful discussion and result on internet governance issues.  
     And these two factors are inclusiveness and transparency.  I would start with the factor of inclusiveness.  And when we started to prepare the IGF 2019 in Berlin, we came from a place in Germany where internet governance was known to I would say very specialized and very well-informed group of experts and many multi-stakeholder groups, but it was nothing that was known in the public.
     And so at the very beginning, we had to face some position by Civil Society, by smaller businesses, and by people from the parliament saying what are you doing there?  Is this some big business conglomeration or something that you are making up with just a few countries of the west or something like that?
     So what we were aiming at for this IGF was to be as inclusive as possible.  And so we built up structures that would allow SMEs to bring in their view and to participate.  We invited members of the parliament, which was a very important step in my view because with the parliament you automatically have the Democratically legitimatized people on board to the modifiers, to the Civil Society.  Of course, the Civil Society was something which was very important to us, also the global south.
     So we make experience that by getting more and more inclusive with our preparations and with the IGF, work, of course, became more complex and it took us much more time and we had to, you know, respect many more views, on the one hand.  But on the other hand, the support and the success finally was also gaining day per day.  
     Especially I would say also with the global policy we had seen very unpleasant scenes at the IGF in Paris, with the global south feeling sidelined and felt a little bit not respected.  So we took that very seriously and together with all of our partners from all of our stakeholders from the MAG, from the United Nations, from the other nations, I think we managed to be as inclusive as possible.  
     And that created a big layer of trust into what the IGF is doing, into where this is heading and what it can do good for the world, for the people, for the companies and to society.
     The second aspect which is interlinked with inclusiveness but it's not the same is the aspect of transparency.  And that is something that I also would like to highlight when it comes to our work on the options paper for the recommendation 5AB that you mentioned.  
     We were mandated around one year ago to co-champion together with our colleagues from the UAE this recommendation and to find solutions or to find answers to questions that have been raised by the high level report on digital cooperation that came out in July of 2019.
     And I have to say that there were different voices in our system, in the global system, on how to achieve this goal.  There was one very strong school of thought saying okay, now we have an IGF, we have multi-stakeholder consultation already with the high level report, now we are sitting together a small group of experts and we are filling out of what we got and what we think the line to take for the next 10 years.  And so that was the debate that was going on.  
     But finally, the other school of thought conveyed -- and that is very important -- and that school of thought said okay, we cannot sit together behind closed doors and write something down and then at the end present it to the world and saying that is the final solution to all of our problems.  We need to do this in a very transparent way and take onboard the views of all of the stakeholders.  
     And that is why we started this in Berlin, but I think at the end also quite successful process of implicating the most possible number of stakeholders and to be as transparent as possible.
     For instance, we asked for written contributions.  And every written contribution that we got, we immediately posted it on the website on the options paper so everyone who wanted to follow the process was at all times in a position to see what was on the table, which stakeholder had which position.  There was no secrecy about it.
     Another example is that we started the citizen's dialogue, a worldwide dialogue with those citizens interested in this digital cooperation theme.  And we are also very transparently and very openly on the internet.  
     All of these stakeholders could get their views and we could also reach stakeholders that would perhaps normally not have been reached.
     These are the two elements that in our experience are besides all of these technical things that you need to have like Dr. Cerf said with identifiers and so forth, but this the transparency and this inclusivity of the processes of internet governance are in our view and our experience two major pillars of building trust and thus creating a foundation, a solid foundation for what we are endeavoring for the next years.  
     Because even with the headline of like true multi-lateralism and true multi-stakeholderism or genuine multi-stakeholderism that is really truly at the heart of this endeavor.  That would be my contribution, and I'm looking forward to the discussion.  Thank you very much, and back to you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Dr. Gridl, for very impressive presentation.  Actually, I recognize that inclusiveness cannot be achieved without trust and trust will not be meaningful without inclusiveness.  So it's very convincing.  
     Now I would like to invite Ms. Rinalia Abdul Rahim.  Her focus is on making a bigger and stronger internet possible.  She has more than 20 years of experience in ICT for development and was instrumental in driving that agenda in developing countries.
     Previously, she was a member of ICANN Board of Directors.  She was elected to the position by the global community of internet and users at large.
     So, Ms. Rahim, please take the floor.
     >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you very much.  
     Thank you very much for the opportunity to discuss this very important topic.  Trust is something that we in the internet community really care about.  
     Together With our community around the world, we champion an open, globally connected, secure, and trustworthy internet for everyone.  The internet is as we all know is an amazing thing.  It is a complex decentralized system.  So in such a system, trust is integral to success.  And I think that you will hear this message over and over again in the discussion.  
     The interconnected networks that make up the internet continuously evolve, and what keeps the networks connected in exchanging data is essentially trust.  The pandemic has shown us that the internet is highly resilient with its decentralized and distributive governance that involves multiple players with different roles and responsibilities, the internet has delivered on connectivity, speed, and resilience on a scale that has never been achieved before.  
     There are many ways to foster trust on the internet.  I will highlight three with a few examples of what people may consider to be good or best practices.
     The first way to foster trust is through the adoption of norms and agreements about governance that make the internet secure, and Vint has certainly touched on this earlier.  The point that I want to make is that without security, there is no trust.
     In an environment of decentralized and distributive governance, norms that reinforce trust need to be adopted and practiced by all internet stakeholders to ensure security.  
     So Vint has mentioned importance of norms that protect the public core of the internet to have resilient, reliable and predictable internet infrastructure for everyone, those who operate and manage network infrastructure in particular need to adopt and practice norms that promote security and trust.
     So here is one example.  MANRS.  MANRS stands for Mutually Agreed Norms for Routing Security, it is a baseline industry best practice.  We promote MANRS among network operators and to providers of internet exchange points and content development networks.  
     Those who adopt norms for routing security do so based on a sense of shared responsibility for the internet.  This is essential for security that builds trust.  
     The second way to foster trust is a through a strong commitment to policies and practices that support the widespread use of robust security technologies.  We need strong multi-stakeholder commitment to this.  Government commitment is key together with the commitment of industry and consumer groups.
     To support widespread use an adoption of robust security technologies, a focus on users is really critical.  Users need tools and technologies like privacy controls and encryption to be secure when using the internet.  Whether for individual users or for internet infrastructure, end-to-end encrypted services and protocols support trust.
     What is alarming is that more than 80% of users currently don't use encryption.  This is based on a global survey that we have conducted.  To address the problem, we need the tools and the technologies to be available and affordable and we also need user education and encouragement to adopt.  A multi-stakeholder commitment makes all of this possible.
     Emphasis on privacy by design is also important.  Privacy needs to be embedded in the design of systems and processes in the transfer of data.  As an example of good practice, the APAC framework for securing the digital economy has recommendations on how countries can collaborate, empower users, secure personal data and make use of digital security technologies.  
     The third and final way to foster trust that I will share in this discussion is to ensure that policies that are developed and harmonized across countries do not harm the critical properties of the internet that have enabled its growth and innovation.  
     When it comes to the internet, the inclusive multi-stakeholder approach to develop policy and reach decisions is important to foster trust.  The openness of the policy making process matters greatly.  And Dr. Gridl has mentioned this as well in his intervention.  
     In developing policies that enable the free flow of data to support the digital economy or anything that relates to the internet, for that matter, it would be useful for policy makers to know whether policies that are being considered have the potential to harm or enable the internet.
     The internet has been strong and resilient because of five critical properties.  Something that we at the internet society refer to as the internet's way of networking.  We developed an internet impact assessment tool kit as a resource for policy analysis and development.  
     With the tool kit, policy makers and stakeholders can assess and be informed by the impact of proposed as well as existing policies and regulations or business decisions on the critical properties of the internet.
     These are three ways on which trust can be fostered on the internet.  As a panelist for this session, I have been asked to express voluntary commitment to the IGF on behalf of my organization.  
     So I will end my statement by saying that the Internet Society either directly or via the Internet Society Foundation will continue to support multi-stakeholder processes in the global, national and regional IGF to foster an inclusive approach to internet governance discussions.  
     We will also continue our support for capacity building activities such as the IGF Youth Ambassadors and the schools of internet governance.  And we will continue to educate people on topics related to internet governance through the provision of online via learning courses at ISOC initiative.  
     Thank you very much for the opportunity to share our views.  Mr. Moderator, over to you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Rinalia Rahim, for your important three ways based on your rich experience.  And it is very impressive to have the good practices.
     Now let me turn to Ms. Timea Suto, a knowledge manager for innovation for International Chamber of Commerce where she manages International Chamber of Commerce BASIS initiative, which stands for Business Action to Support the Information Society.  
     ICC is the largest private sector organization representing businesses from all sectors and societies in every part of the world.  ICC BASIS has a view that ICT technologies and the internet are enablers of growth, development and inclusion and for our citizens.
     So she will speak from business perspectives.  So Ms. Suto, please take the floor.
     >> TIMEA SUTO: Thank you.  Good morning and good afternoon, everyone.  Very many thanks to Iida and colleagues of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications for inviting me to participate in this panel.  
     To start, let me quickly introduce my organization, the International Chamber of Commerce.  As Iida mentioned, ICC is the world's largest and most representative business organization with members from all sizes and sectors in over 100 countries across the globe and works to promote open trade and commerce as enablers of global peace and prosperity.  A mission that is now more relevant than ever.  
     As we look at how we cannot just recover but build back better from the COVID-19 crisis, BASIS takes its role very seriously, working with governments and all stakeholders to inform and partner for better policy and outcomes that serve our shared interest in sustainable economic and social development.  
     In Osaka in 2019, it was already more than obvious that access to digital technologies and the benefits that they bring are a prerequisite for this agenda.  COVID has turned this into a necessity as we moved almost every aspect of our professional and personal lives to the digital space.  
     Already in April this year, Microsoft reported that they saw two years' worth of digital transformation in the space of just two months.  Our future is unquestionably digital, and data is at its core.  
     As the pandemic slowed down the flow of goods and people, digital trade based on global data flows has been a lifeline to keep our economies moving.  Allowing these flows to continue is essential to the efficient functioning of our increasingly interconnected economies and societies.
     Trust is the single most important element that safeguards the interconnectiveness.  When we look at what trust means in this context, I would like to highlight three elements.  
     The first goes back to what Vint opened with in his keynote.  Trust means respect for the multiple stakeholders involved in the policy-setting process.  This requires openness to the input of all stakeholders in the policy-making process at both national and international levels.  
     Openness to participation enables stakeholders to better carry out their roles and responsibilities because it ensures transparency, awareness, responsibility and accountability in addressing different facets of public policies.  
     My second point stems from this openness, and it is about understanding.  Again, going back to what Vint said in his opening remarks, we need to understand how the technology works to be able to build on it.  And we need to understand what technology enables, what cross-border data flows mean for our economies and our societies.
     It means that a young entrepreneur in the early stages of conceiving a product can use nearly infinite pool of knowledge and information online to develop an idea.  Then to convert their idea into reality, they can access new forms of financing and credit which increasingly use AI-enabled tools.  
     When the product is ready to be launched, they can draw on the experience of graphic designers, marketers and other professionals from anywhere in the world and cloud technologies that can reduce the reliance on expensive computer hardware and software.  And finally, when the product is ready to be sold, they have access to a global rather than a local customer base.  
     In the same way we need to understand the technology, we also need to understand the policy development process.  We need to be mindful of how the policy action or regulatory measure that we take in one area can affect other areas.  And need to ensure that we have a holistic approach in the policies that we design and that the policies enable rather than defer further innovation.
     For example, several companies have framed their national data policies to restrict cross-border data flows through digital sovereignty regulations.
     This will require businesses that operate globally to adapt.  Instead of having one global business, transnational companies need to deintegrate the operations and their corporate structures to comply with new rules by rolling one business two systems or many systems approach.  
     Billion dollar companies might be able to find the resources necessary to do so to remain competitive, but digital protectionism will increase the barriers or even make that insurmountable for the small businesses and startups that need to participate in the digital economy or are looking to join global value chains.  
     And my third and last point is that we must ensure that the enabling policy systems that we design are globally interoperable to help companies navigate today's extremely fragmented and complex regulatory environment.  
     The APAC cross-border privacy rules system and the OECD guidelines on the protection of privacy and transport of personal data offer useful examples and templates to foster cross-border transfer of data.  
     At the same way, trade agreements that address data flow should also support and emphasize their importance.  They need to prohibit unjustified or blanket restrictions on data flows and establish fair inviting rules to facilitate information flows across borders.  
     So to sum up, fostering trust in additional space for me requires three things.  First, openness to multi-stakeholder participation.  Second, concerted efforts to share information.  And third, strengthen international cooperation.  Which really are the three pillars of the IGF itself.  So maybe I could have just been very brief and instead of taking up this much time I could have just said fostering trust in the digital world means the IGF.  Thank you very much, and back to you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Timea Suto, for your very comprehensive presentation.  
     We actually lack of understanding, mutual understanding even over the simple wordings and concept are often witnessed and always make discussion and the communications difficult.
     And intra-operability is one of the key elements to foster the trust in cross-border data flow and we see a lot of efforts ongoing over the world.  So thank you very much for this presentation.  
     And now I would like to invite Mr. Kone from Smart Africa.  Mr. Kone is Secretary General of Smart Africa, which is an innovative commitment from Head of State and the government in African countries to accelerate sustainable socio-economic development on the continent.  
     Leading Africa into a knowledge economy through affordable access to broadband and usage of ICTs.  The Smart Africa has 30 Member States and acting with five pillars of policy.  Access in government, private sector entrepreneurship, and sustainable development from its manifest.  
     So I would like to listen to the points from Mr. Kone.  So Please take the floor.  I am afraid you are muted.
     >> LACINA KONE: Thank you very much.  You can hear me, right?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes.
     >> LACINA KONE: Hello?  Can you hear me now?
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  We can hear you.
     >> LACINA KONE: I will have to mute the video because the bandwidth is not stable.  
     So if you can all hear me, that is very good.  So, first of all, I really would like to express my gratitude to the organizers of this IGF 2020 under these difficult circumstances as the world is facing -- it is important to have this international conversation on the governance of (break in audio) so critical to our economy and society.  
     To talk a little bit about Smart Africa, of course, as part of the trust, we believe that first of all, trust is important for Africa.  
     There are many reason.  One of them is, among them is there is new story to be told about Africa continent.  Six out of 10 -- six Africans and six out of 10 fastest growing economy.  And five of the top 10 performance of the World Bank ease of doing business are in Africa as well.  
     We have a young fast-growing organizing populations with a big unmet need, untapped resource, wealth and new innovations.
     Most of all, we believe that in the leap frogging opportunity represented by the rapid introduction of the digital and mobile technology and which already made Africa the world leader in the mobile market. 
     But we still have challenges when trying to fully seize this opportunity.  One of them is that our digital markets are still fragmented and mostly national.  An example of that, you know, in the European union 68%, the intratrade and commerce between the EU countries represents about 68%, in Africa is only 18%.  
     The vision of Smart Africa is, therefore, to make Africa a single digital market by 2030, which is only 10 years away.
     We are not simply an international organization made of international governments.  Our alliance was actually founded because we believe that a multi-stakeholder approach is a fundamental requirement if we want to leverage ICT to accelerate the socio-economic development of our countries.  
     We are convinced that this cannot be done by government alone.  Socio-economic development caused by digital technology requires a true multi-stakeholder dialogue which includes the private sector developing and deploy technology, governments in their role as a regulator, and citizens who use technologies and are affected by this transformation. 
     Our alliance is made up of 30 countries but also of international organization associations and a major representative.  Smart Africa provides the space to create the right synergy amongst stakeholders in Africa from infrastructure, this project on supporting inter-Africa connectivity, which concern the infrastructure to the layer of possible services deployment or the support of innovation intact in a locally consistent and digital literacy for users. 
     So talking about the approach to data free flow with trust is very important.  How do we pose the question of digital governance, and more precisely the question of free flow of data in a trusted environment?  
     I appreciate all of the possibilities and all of the panelists, you know, who actually spoke before me, particularly Dr. Vint Cerf when he talked about, you know, it is about trust in the core infrastructure and the core protection, the core network and trust and talked about authentication and talked about end-to-end encryption.
     For us, digital governance framework are not yet harmonized across Africa, but we play an increasing role in the support of emerging technology like artificial intelligence or, as a matter of fact, IoT.  
     And more globally, in the socio-economic development of the country, we need to ensure that we do not recreate borders that are not necessary in the digital world.
     The digital world has really no borders.  They are basically mainly governed by the law governing data flow between countries.  One example, we need to make sure that the right resources are in place to make it simple for a startup from Ghana, for instance, to get authorizations to organize data transfer from Kenya.  Otherwise, we lose the opportunity offered to our companies by the scale of our continent.  
     In order to increase the use of the value and the value derived from the data, capacities to make smart use of available data must be enhanced on African continent.  Both in the public and in the private sector.
     Infrastructure for the circulation of data must be developed, which is the core network.  Access to public data to be improved, which also will require a fundamental other element that I would like to add to Dr. Cerf, which is I call it KYC.  
     As a matter of fact, to talk about statistics for some of you who are familiar, there is about one billion population around the world.  Although we have 53% of the world population connected, we still have a 47% unconnected.  And by talking about unconnected, I mean by that, they have no sort of infrastructure and so on and so forth, but that is not the point.  
     Being connected is one thing.  Trust in the core network is one thing.  But what goes into the core network is trusted that is where the key comes in to play.  So one billion population around the world do not have any form of digital identification.  And half of those half billion are actually in Africa.  
     So the detail becomes which are the conditions because before you do the two-way authentication, you must be trusting the person who are actually putting the content on the network.  So for us, that is a challenge right now and that is what we are working on.
     So these efforts, however, need to be carefully compared by the design of the governance system and rules that ensure, one, that the protection of right and freedom of African citizen.  
     With the implementation of the privacy rule in 2014, the first Pan-African framework was adopted with the African Union Convention on cyber security and personal data protection.  The convention almost six years after the convention was signed out of 55 countries in Africa would have about four countries have signed and there is only about 29 countries have developed a national law in digital.
     Number two, the protection of business and organization who need a trusted environment and legal certainty for the update of the digital product and service use.  According to 2018 statistics, Africa report, cybercrime cost African economy $3.5 billion in 2017, which is quite a huge amount.  
     And the last point is the protection of African State sovereignty and interests, ensuring that value creation benefits African economy to this end with the dependency on foreign infrastructure need to be reduced.  For instance, through the deployment of the backbone or the creation of data centers in Africa.  
     If you look at the African map today, we can barely count how many exist in general so increasing number of the data centers will push the information to the edge.  Now the contents of African content will remain in Africa and this in turn will also accelerate, make the internet faster and more cheaper.
     So to conclude, private sector first, multi-stakeholder dialogue, setting up a framework respective of a sovereignty of State, this is the way forward.  
     Where many organizations involved in internet governance have, indeed, complementary role to play.  We need to recognize this autonomy and keep valid in the mutual participation.  
     Thank you very much for your attention.  I'm happy to explain in more detail what projects Smart Africa is working on to achieve this objective.  For example, in the field of digital ID.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Mr. Kone, for the very rich presentation.  And it is interesting to know the current situation in the African countries.  
     We believe in Africa it is the continent of hope and the data flow not only across the African countries but also between African countries and the rest of the world should be more promoted and the digital economy should be developed all together with the rest of the world.  I look forward to listening more details on other opportunities.  So thank you very much.  
     And let me now turn to Professor Murai.  For the interest of time, just a brief, Professor Murai is known as part of the internet in Japan.  And also outside of Japan he is known as internet samurai.  
     So in 1984, he developed the first Japanese university network, Japanese university Unix network unit, which is the Japanese Internet Research Consortium.  
     And then he has been long engaged in research related to internet technology platforms.  He was also very active in all aspects of the government not only in Japan but also across the world for the development of internet.  And he was inducted into the Internet Hall of Fame in 2013.  
     So now he is appointed as advisor to the Japanese cabinet office to lead the digitalization of the whole government as well as the whole nation.  So we would like to listen to Professor Murai.
     >> JUN MURAI: Thank you very much.  Thank you very much for inviting me for this very important panel about the trust in the internet digital space, cyber space.  So I'm very much honored to be participating.
     So my voice is okay?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, okay.  We can hear.
     >> JUN MURAI: Okay, great. All right.  Well, thank you very much for the invite over these very much distinguished panelists because you already mentioned most of the things that I wanted to share with you.  
     So it is a very even for the point of view, the intra-operability of the data and the transfer to be understood by everybody.  So the data architecture, like Lacina said, the security based on the security, the security by design and the data sharing architecture with very much in kind of strong security technology is going to be a key for the kind of trust on the cyberspace.
     So let me add some of the, you know, points I mean to be shared because it is very important to be shared based on all of your discussions about the kind of trust in the data exchange and everything.
     So one thing is about the -- we need to do the internal, internal to the Nation State and then the international to the Nation State.  So each of the Nation State need to be, you know, kind of internal country need to be, you know, well designed in terms of sharing the data, open data kind of thing, and then also the security thing.
     So otherwise trust among the Nation State could not be, you know, achieved.  Therefore, this is a basis.  Therefore, if there is a kind of a relationship with our other Nation State international cooperation and other things would be extremely important not only from establishing the international relationship, but also from the kind of supporting each other on their -- on each of the internal data regulated policy and the governance and then the advancement of the technology which is also very important.  
     And also the three points I would like to share especially with all of the panelists and the audience as well, the first one is about the internet inclusion accessibility.  So Vint mentioned the world population, almost half, beyond half of our population is accessing the internet.  
     But it is -- I have a detailed data and finally this year in October, last month, the world population of the internet exceeded the 60%.  So 50% was the last year, but 60% I got the statistic was the same one as Vint mentioned.  For the first time in more than 60% of the world population now accessing the internet.
     And, therefore, do you understand that if -- how much time left for doing this, right?  So this is one of the subjects I want to talk.
     So I kind of thought that the world population of the internet users starting from year 2000, which was 6%, and 60% in 2020.  And when do you think we will have like almost 100% all of the world?  When will that be happening?
     So it can be, according to all of the graphs you can draw based on that history it will be not later than 2030.  2025, 2030, I mean mathematically, right?  
     And, therefore, I don't think we have a lot of time left until the most of the people around the world accessing the internet, you know, to that time comes.
     So this is kind of something we should know.  So action about the data flow with the trust type of a thing.  We need to kind of rapid action toward that kind of thing because of that reason, because the population especially -- we just got our friend from Africa reporting about Africa, right.
     Africa is like in this year's report, Africa is like a little bit more than 50% of the population in Africa.  And in Asia, it is 60%.  55% actually in the Asia region.  So the rest of the places, Europe and North America, it is 90%, 95% and that kind of thing, the penetration of the internet users.  
     Therefore, you know, it is a lot of room for growing in Africa and the Asias.  That is the kind of situation.
     So from the internet inclusion point of view and also the mutually supporting for the development of the internet in the coming five years, should be centered on those two areas, that is one point.  
     And the second point is about the technology thing changing in the coming five years, 10 years, very much.  I mean internet technology is evolving and changing all the time.
     And so we already mentioned that IoT and the artificial intelligence type of the technology for the kind of data, utilizing the data and then also providing the services on top of the internet.  But that is changing, right?  
     And the IoT use or data use, censor use is just beginning and so is the artificial intelligence is rapidly changing its kind of power and the technology over time.
     So it is a very important that, you know, we have been carefully understanding about the changing of the technology year by year.  And that then we try to understand and that then they are making those new technologies to be transparent among us and then understanding and then also emphasizing on the security on those new coming technologies and the services, which is also very important.
     And that then we hear the new infrastructure even, we are pretty familiar with the cable and the wi-fi, 5G.  But, you know, it is a lot of development these days is coming from the space.  And then even the stratosphere space is coming to cover the entire globe which is another alternative way for accessing the internet for the 100% of the surface of the planet which is changing, completely changing the pattern of the internet space and the cyberspace in this planet and for the human being as well.
     So these kind of technical development and revolution to be shared and to be understood among us.  Lastly, the abusers when the new technology coming in, they are always the abusers are new technologies, right?  And then we really need the proper use of those nice advanced technology.  
     And that then we need to discuss, right, and so -- and also we need the proper use rather than abuse, and ethical use rather than abuse, which is very important.  In order to achieve that, we really need the space to discuss and the sharing that kind of the what is the new things happening?  What is the issues?  What is the new security issues, security technology to be shared?  
     So we need a place.  And I sincerely hope that IGF is going to be exactly is a place to do that and there could be many other ways.  But the place in the sharing among this like this time is going to be very important.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  Thank you very much, Professor Murai, for a very rich presentation. And it is very impressive to know, you know, 60% of the population is now accessing the internet.  
     So I wanted to make a question and answer into action, but because of the time limitation we have to close the session within one minute.  So sorry for the poor management of time for the panelists, but I hope everybody enjoyed the very good presentation from the five speakers.  
     And at the end, as the moderator of the session, I would like to thank all of you.  And we are hosting IGF in year 2023.  And we will make best use of the -- every piece of information you provided during this session.  And we will make very productive and very sustainable transparent inclusive IGF.  
     And one thing which came very clear through the session was IGF will be a very powerful tool for the inclusive trusted and sustainable internet and digital economy.  So I believe we keep working together continuously and we will see each other very soon.  Thank you very much for your participation, and hopefully see you soon again.  Thank you very much.    
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-5-of28-swiss-open-forum-on-self-determination-in-the-digital-space^^

 
     >> MODERATOR: We will start if all of the panelists could put themselves on mute that would be great.  So we have everything -- Dominique, I see you are still unmuted, if you could mute so we don’t have any feedback.  Perfect, brilliant. And then I have some background noise, I don’t know where that is from.  Now it’s better, perfect. 
Great. Well, thank you all very much for being here, you IGF participants.  It’s great to have you all here.  Many thanks for tuning in to this Open Forum on Self-Determination in the Digital Space.  My name is Andrin Eichin, I’m from the Swiss Federal Office of Communications, and I will be moderating the session today.  
As you can see, we have a number of speakers lined up and at the end we will also have some time for your questions and inputs.  But before we start, it would be great if you could in the chat quickly say who you are and where you are from and what your interest is so that everybody can see who else is in this conversation.  And before we start with our speakers, let me give you a little bit of background on what we are working on within the Swiss government.  
As anywhere else in the world, the use of data has also grown rapidly in almost all sectors in Switzerland.  We see new and innovative database service being developed, for example, in mobility, health and finance and others.  And those services can enhance efficiency and improve well-being in both the private and public sphere.  On the other hand, an increasing and concentration of data in the private sector or governments can also create the risk and dependencies for individuals, companies and also the general public.  
So the questions we have been asking ourselves are how can individuals be at the center of this development, how can we further empower individuals and enable them to be in control of their data?  And how can we at the same time enable the use and reuse of data for the benefit of the economy and the society as a whole?
I will go with this open forum to give you first insight into the work that is currently going on at the Swiss administration and then open up a discussion on how we are approaching the issue and that is where you will come in as well.  And you can see on the bottom you have the Q&A section so please use that.
And in the last segment we will also allow people if you want to intervene to raise your hands and give a short contribution.  But let's kick off with the first speakers.  I will introduce as you go.  The first speaker is Ambassador Roger Dubach to give us an introduction to what digital self-determination means.  He is Deputy Director of the Directorate of International Law in the Swiss Department of Foreign Affairs.  You have the floor.
     >> ROGER DUBACH: Thank you very much.  Hello, everybody, ladies, and gentlemen.  I'm pleased to open the session and to present you some thoughts about digital self-determination.  And Andrin described, we think that the digital reality increases the way we exercise our fundamental rights and liberties and we are aware that data is the most valuable raw material in digital societies.  
For this reason, we believe that in democracies, citizens should have access to data and understand the value and effect it can have on their life in order to make self-determined decisions.  The way data is made available, accessed exchanged and used it is not only paramount for meaningful politic participation by constitute the basis for a flourishing digital society.  We think today in the digital world citizens are primarily users with a very limited say with regard to their data.
     They either give up personal data by consuming digital products and services, or they choose not to use the digital service at all in order to protect their personal data.  And so there is where our idea of digital self-determination comes in. So the objective is the question is how could we turn a user into a proactive citizen into a co-creator of its digital environment.  So somehow how to bring the people into the driving seat of digital transformation.
     So if I say this, it is very much based on individuals but there is very much a collective element as well. So digital self-determination apply as well to businesses, associations, for instance, a district in a town so there is definitely this collective element in the notion of digital self-determination.
     And we think that in the current environment there is very little space for that.  There is the consent, the informed consent, but it becomes very much a blind clicking exercise. And so there has to be a new way to deal with these issues.
     Our approach is to try to establish trustworthy data spaces and such data spaces should be ecosystems.  And around these data spaces or these data spaces should be designed or have to be designed in an inclusive and fair manner allowing equal participation.  In doing so, the trust between those who use digital services and those who process data will be strengthened.
     So, trust is absolutely crucial in our concept.  And we think that with trust and transparency in the data space there will be more interaction and participants would be more willing to share data and so to use and -- to use the innovative and new -- I mean to make an innovative and new approach to data use.
     Such data spaces have also to be how to say they should be developed in the meaning that it is about whole data life cycle.  Digital self-determination needs to be thought through the whole data life cycle.
     We are very much aware that this is a big issue that there are a lot of questions.  And that is also why we would like to discuss this issue with you today.  In Switzerland, we started about thinking about the concept two years ago.  We have put in place a kind of a national network with people in the public sector, private sector, academia, and there is an increasing number of people joining this discussion.
     And so with this spirit, we also would like to engage a discussion on international level and we very much think that it makes no sense for a country like Switzerland to have this discussion only on a national level and that is why we are here today to present the first thinking and hope we will engage in a common discussion and identify the challenges and see how we could put this discussion forward.  Thank you very much, and I give back to Andrin.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Roger.  Our next speaker is Dr. Matthias Galus.  Matthias Galus is the head of the Innovation Office at the Swiss Federal Office of Energy and responsible for digital advances and technology diffusion in the sector and works on the adaptation of the regulatory regime for efficient renewable energy integration, energy efficiency and decarbonization and will talk about how the concept did be translated into the energy sector and what the challenges entail in the sector.  Matthias, you have the word.
     >> MATTHIAS GALUS: Thank you very much for this nice introduction.  Of course, we do see that the future of the energy system is very much digital as well and wrapped around the questions on how to use data and how to access data much better in order to use it for a more sustainable and renewable future in energy provision that is, of course, then used for different applications in other sectors.  So if we have a look at the energy sector how it is today, I give you a very brief introduction in order to make you a little bit more familiar with the system or with the energy sector.  Next slide, please.
     So basically, and I think that is the case for many countries, in the world, it is dominated by incumbents, by national, rather big national energy companies. And if you look at different countries, of course, there are more or a little bit less of those companies.  But they are still there and looking at the transformation in the energy sector more and more new players come in, especially from the renewable side.
     If we look now at questions on digitalization on data access and so forth, we do see that often we face kind of aging or infrastructure for data exchange at least in Switzerland I -- I am tempted to say that most of it is Excel based unfortunately when it comes to data exchange which is quite disturbing, of course.  However, that is the case.
     And, of course, we do see a large momentum to change that.  But, in general, the data exchange is then based on, you know, FTP kind of solutions where each player sends messages to all other players so it is highly decentralized and the manual part of processing the data is quite strong still.
     So we will soon see more and more metering devices at the consumer level introduced by federal regulations. And I think that is the case in many countries in Europe driven by the European Commission but also internationally so-called smart metering devices that are then connected to a digital infrastructure in order to have the data on consumption and production much better available as it is today. 
Just a brief comment here often the data from household levels that it is available every let's say if it -- in a good case it is a month in the normal case it is six months.  So it is quite a big gap if we look to digital world and the consumers and others deliver data to the companies that are natural monopolies which is also quite a special case for the energy sector. And then the data is managed and shared on behalf of consumers without having much of access for the consumers or any decision making of what is done with the data so far.  Of course, there are privacy rules in place, but it is not obvious for the consumer right now what happens to the data.
     We see a large momentum for digitalization and more and more platforms are about to be built and created for different services, all of them trying to use that data much more efficiently and to get a hand on it. And that, of course, raises the question how do we look at the data and how do we have it?  So if that is basically the case here, if you see I just created a very simple more or less simple picture so the data comes bottom up from the so-called prosumers and consumers, the data owners and they go to different incumbent companies. 
And then what is planned here in Switzerland is the national data infrastructure in the middle that kind of orders the data exchange with all other stakeholders that right now need to have the data for security system operation but also new player.  So the data infrastructure will play a very central role. And if we look at -- have a look at the next slide.  
It is somewhat a bit different than the digital space.  So if we talk about infrastructure, we talk about the lower bottom area where we really build the physical connections for sending the data, but then distributing to all other players, that becomes -- that is the gray part -- that becomes more of a digital space where people use data in different forms and aggregations to do something with it to offer services or to keep the system up and running.  And there we can pose the question. Next slide, please.
     How do we ensure that this digital space if we want to call it, like this is actually kind of an ecosystem where digital self-determination where consumers can enforce who is doing what with their data and they do have kind of a transparency of what is happening to the data? And another question is then, of course, if we want to have this which kind of rules do we need to have and what is the role of the data infrastructure that will certainly be regulated in Switzerland?  Because at the interface between data infrastructure and the digital space, we could enforce certain rules on how different data ecosystems will use the data and enforce transparency for the consumer.  Next slide.
     That brings me to the end.  Very quickly, I just pose a couple of questions.  Because it is not clear what is a digital space and digital sovereignty.  Do we really have the same understanding also, in when talking about the difference between the national data infrastructure and who is to operate them in order to have a digital space that ensures digital self-determination.  And how such a concept could look like for individual consumers. Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Matthias. And thank you very much for bringing the whole concept a bit more to life in the energy sector.  
Next on we have Kerstin Vokinger. In her research she focused on questions at the intersection of law and technology.  How to regulate technology or how technology can serve society with respect to individual rights and talk about how Swiss law has reacted to database developments in the health sector.  Kerstin, the floor is yours.  You are still muted at the moment.
     >> KERSTIN VOKINGER: Thank you very much for kind introduction.  I would like to highlight legal aspects of digital self-determination and insights from the network the Ambassador mentioned at the beginning of the session.  
To summarize again, what is self-determination -- digital self-determination mean?  Citizens have control of and access to the data they have provided or to data that is relevant for their decision making. And digital self-determination is a way of enhancing trust into digital transformation.  In order for this to be successful, we believe that legal principles that enable and enhance digital self-determination is crucial.
     And one of my key messages is that the Swiss legal system already provides such legal basis and principles.  So even though our Swiss constitution is more than 20 years old, and even though digital transformation evolved especially more recently in the more recent years, we have, among other things, two fundamental rights.  The right to personal freedom and the right to privacy that include the right of digital self-determination.  For example, the right to privacy includes the right of every person is protect against the misuse of their personal data.
     And digital self-determination is not only embedded in our constitution and our fundamental rights but also in laws and acts.  Not only in theory but also in practice we can see that the digital self-determination is valid and respected.  And I would like to share two specific examples in that regard.
     The first example is the Swiss COVID app, a digital tracing tool surely familiar to you.  This digital tracing tool has been developed to help control the spread of the coronavirus and when within Bluetooth range the phone exchanges random identification codes with other mobile phones that have a compatible app installed.  And they are stored for 14 days before being deleted automatically.  If they test positive, they receive a code and it allows them to activate a function in the app thereby also warning the other app users.  We can see that digital self-determination is being protected on different levels.
     First, using the app but also sharing information with other users is based upon pure voluntariness.  The individual decides if and which information he likes to share.  Second, no data is saved in a server.  It is a decentralized system and a third example not more data than necessary is being collected.
     Another probably less prominent example for digital self-determination are the electronic health records.  They are regulated in a federal act.  Electronic health records show how to improve health by enabling more efficiency, structure and data sharing, data sharing between patients and healthcare personnel, be that nurses or physicians but also hospitals.
     And we can see also here with regard to the data sharing the protection of digit digital self-determination in the federal act.  Examples, first only if the patient or individual consents an electronic health record is established.  Second patient may upload data and the patient decides who may access his or her data.  Even if emergency situations if the patient decided beforehand that someone specifically or no one at all may access his data that has to be respected.
     I would like to conclude my short presentation with the three key messages.  So first, to enhance trust in digital self-determination and digital transformation the law must provide a compatible and trustworthy legal framework and in Switzerland this law doesn't have to be reinvented.  It is a fundamental right that we have in our constitution and laws.
     And third, two practical examples for digital self-determination has been successfully implemented are the Swiss COVID tracing app and the electronic health records.  Thank you very much for your attention.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Kerstin.  So this gives us a first oversight on how we have so far approached the concept of digital self-determination. But as you can see, we are so far very much centered on the Swiss perspective. And as Ambassador Dubach has mentioned, this is national problematic and the next segment and the following interaction with the audience aims to open up beyond just Switzerland.  
So we have a few commentators lined up that will reflect on the elements that were raised.  As I mentioned, after that we will open the discussion wider so please share your questions in the Q&A section and later on you will be able to raise your hand if you wish to intervene.  
The first commentator is Professor Mark Findlay at Singapore university.  In addition he has honorary chairs at the Australian National University and University of Edinburgh and New South Wales and honorary fellow of the law school university.  Thank you very much for being here.  Mark, you have the floor.
     >> MARK FINDLAY: Thank you very much for the invitation to join this excellent panel and give reflections from an international perspective.  Can I say perhaps somewhat provocatively that digital self-determination depends on people knowing something about their data.  And from the work we have done recently, a significant amount of your data you know nothing about.
The production of secondary data and the production of data which in fact comes back to you through platform preferencing, a range of different situations where in fact you are totally unaware of the fact that you are a subject.  It makes the formal protections of digital self-determination quite problematic.
     Secondly, digital self-determination from where we are sitting in an Asian context raises three issues associated with that phrase.  The first is the digital.  And digital is obviously something which talks about a space, space that is related to communication, a space that is related to technology.
     But that is not a separate space.  It is not a space which is cordoned off from the physical so the majority of people who use social media day in and day out cut across the physical and digital daily.
     Secondly, self.  I would like to make a point about self.  If the western northern notion of the self, digital self-determination when talking about the protection of individual rights, individual privacy, a range of issues like that if you are looking at particularly an Asian cultural perspective the self is entirely determined by the family, by the society in which you live so it is a much more communal notion even in a business sense.  Asian business is about communal concepts of association.
     And so when talking about determination, as Roger opened up earlier on, talking about the self being a concept much more directed towards the way you sit within society.  And finally the issue of determination and I will move from that very quickly.  Determination assumes some power.  We have been doing recent work on COVID and COVID interception and in many situations with groups like migrant workers the institutional age range or other sections of the society that are discriminated against in a structural way, questions how they can use the technology is much limited by their powerlessness in society.  When talking about digital self-determination, we must consider questions of the power to choose.
     And we need to build those into any framework of protection, any framework of security and assurance that we believe digital self-determination provides in a very active and vigorous way. Thank you for that.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Mark.  Insightful things here.  If I quickly summarize from my perspective, you mentioned the aspect of knowledge the fact that we often don't know what kind of data is going around and that we are kind of like have a massive blind spot in that regard.  
You mentioned the point about the audience who are we approaching when you talk about the self.  Is the individual or is it a larger entity.  Which I think is a really, really valid point and something that Roger mentioned before as well that is the way we have approached it so far is not just the individual as well, it is the individual as well but it goes a bit wider and maybe we can discuss about it later on.  
And last, but not least, that the point about the power relations and the power to choose, I think that is one of the -- that is at the center of this whole discussion.  Very, very useful.  Thank you very much for the contribution.
     Next on we have Marco-Alexander Breit.  You have the floor.
     >> MARCO-ALEXANDER BREIT: Thank you very much.  I think when it comes to the energy and health sector, I can assure that the German health COVID app is working quite the same way.  I would like to answer a question first from my point of view that is how outcome digital sovereignty and digital self-determination related.  I think that digital self-determination is something that is based on digital sovereignty.  Why is that so?  
I think that digital self-determination is something that individuals can do.  But me being a state representative from the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy in Germany, and being the head of the project Guyer X that you might have heard of, I think that what you first and foremost need is a digital sovereign data infrastructures and digital sovereign technologies and the possibility to use European technologies wherever it is needed.  That doesn't mean that we need to do everything, but we need to be in the position if we want to choose between a European product and the product that comes from abroad that there is a European product.
     So I want to try to emphasize the point if I give you the notion of European large-scale companies industry giants, that I have data relations from the United States to China but as we see technology and the use of technologies and services is more and more dragged into the power struggle.  So what we see is that unless we are in the position to use our own infrastructures and our own edge computing infrastructures or our own AI services and data management services, that we can still be caught in the middle between this -- in the middle of this conflict.  
That is even important when you take into account the political side that brings a lot of attention and a lot of awareness to data sovereignty and digital sovereignty in the corporate businesses especially as a lot of these larger, larger scale larger infrastructure providers, we call them hyperscalers, go deep into the domains of their former clients and they go deep into other domains. And that is just cloud infrastructure and some of them even want to build cars and some want to build automation -- automation platforms.  Some of them want to go into artificial intelligence that helps businesses improve their CRM and all these thing.
     So what we see is these companies are very big, they have a lot of access to data and capital and they have a lot of success with having good and competitive product. And as they are related with the customers they see how the customers work and say well, you know, we could do this, too, because we have the data and the money and the people so why should we stop?  This is another point to add to the list of where we are not sovereign.  You have to be in a position to choose.  It has been mentioned already.
     We need to be able, and I emphasize again be able to choose a European technology, based on the fact that this is firmly based on European data protection laws and regulation, too.  And if you want to use an American company, if you want to use a Chinese company, it is perfectly fine. But if there is something that you do not want to share if the other people, in the people in your own country the personalized data then you need to have an alternative.  And that is what we are working on.  The importance of platformization has been mentioned already and this is of utmost importance to be honest.  If we want to sell our regulation and sell our data protection, then we need good and competitive and strong products.
     And these products are more and more platformization products or hardware.  The iPhone?  It is a hardware obviously but it is a platform.  So the more people are using the iPhone and I really love my iPhone, too.
     The more people use the iPhone use the health applications of Apple.  And if they are good, why not?  But it is the same people when asked by the insurance companies if they want to use the app of the insurance company they say oh, my God, no, I do not want to give you my data because this could have detrimental effects on my health insurance or something like that.  But you give it to Apple for free.  
This is something that mentioned the awareness and platformization are closely together because all of us that have been Facebook or are still using Facebook know we pay with our data. When I had Facebook in 2006, I had no awareness of the data issue, I had no awareness what I'm going to publishing the Facebook account that is free with and what kind of effect this would have 10 years later how transparent I as a customer and as an individual is in relation to the platform providers.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Marco-Alexander.  Interesting here to hear that same elements that Mark mentioned before about the right to choose now intersected with the more kind of infrastructure hardware and the platform products that you mentioned.  So definitely something to take onboard for us as well.  Thank you very much.  
Next up, we have Anriette.  We are looking forward to your thoughts on this as well.
     >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN: Thanks for inviting me.  It is interesting to reflect on the conversation from a developing country perspective and I think I will start off with really agreeing with what Mark had said that digital self-determination requires people knowing about their data.  And I think it also requires a particular type of access to infrastructure.  And levels of skill and a certain type of citizenship and relation between citizen and State which is characterized by trust.  And that simply doesn't exist for most people in the world.
     I'm interested in the digital self-determination and digital sovereignty because there is an active conversation in many countries about digital sovereignty.  It there isn't trust and a reliable legal framework, as pointed out, you have immense fear of abuse. And therefore even if people have the capacity to comply and participate in digital self-determination, they might be reluctant to.
     And I think the other -- and I'm interested in how the speakers would feel about this, how extreme social inequality would actually impact on the notion of digital and self-determination.  But to me, an immediate application that I do see in developing countries is perhaps at a more de-centralized and localized level.  You have in many very poor rural areas people are creating their open internet access networks and community networks and creating their own renewable energy networks using solar and I think those bottom up initiatives could be immensely enhanced by digital self-determination.
     And perhaps if one looks at implementing digital self-determination at a more localized level, that can over time through partnership of local government or regional government actually begin to contribute to more state or national level -- and digital self-determination being innovative in Switzerland can be applied in developing countries but probably more at the more local level than at the more centralized level.  But many countries are very different.
     So these are general remarks.  Data and looking at sovereignty applied by the state.  With the oversight over nonpersonal data.
     If anyone has comments on that or looked at that, I would be curious to hear.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you much, thank you very much, Anriette.  Really useful.  Two things that stand out, and one that I'm grateful that you mentioned is this element of trust that we put so much importance on is something that has come up so very often in the national discussion so really good to hear you kind of translate that into as well into a perspective from a country from the global south.  
And the other aspect that I really enjoyed hearing from you is that approach of seeing digital self-determination as coming from a local context in a localized environment.  This is something that we have discussed as well based on the fact that we are a federal country where we have a lot of different levels of governance and government.  So from that perspective, quite interesting as well to highlight that point.  Thank you very, very much for this very insightful contribution.
     So last, but not least, we will have our last commentator before we open up the discussion, and I would like to give the word to Dr. Urs Gasser, the Executive Director of the Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society.  Focus on information law, policy and society issues and the changing role of academia in the digitally network age.  As always, thank you very much for being here and the floor is yours.
     >> URS GASSER: Thank you so much for such an important and thoughtful conversation.  I was listening carefully and instead of sort of adding my own comments what I'm trying to do is distil. maybe four questions that may mark a productive tension as we are I think still wrestling with the concept of digital self-determination and what it means.
     And we'll see if the answer is it is all of these together which is harder to say what is digital self-determination.  The first challenge is are we taking a protective stance or is the concept about the empowerment?  
I think we heard also in Kerstinn's presentation the background of digital self-determination, especially self-determination has a legal history and a concept from constitutional law in the realm of protection and a defensive right actually. And I think one question is as we know translated into something like digital self-determination which is not a right per se but a concept or position.  Is that sill the same connotate?  
For some of the position papers out of the Switzerland isn't the idea around empowerment or probably here in U.S. context, agency, give people the ability, the skills and tools necessary, the infrastructures not only to control the data but also to make meaningful use of data to evaluate data which is less some sort of protective and other in the category of empowerment. That is the first tension.  
And the second tension I'm hearing out is, is it about the technical infrastructure conversation or human capacity building?  The concept starts out and the description and the promise that it is a concept to be committed to human centric issues.  But immediately of course even in the Swiss context we talk about Swiss cloud and cloud infrastructures and the rest come up with example as well. And we tend to start with human centric notions, but immediately we move towards infrastructure conversations. And maybe that is part of it, yet I think we also have to address or consider what is the mindset requirement?  What is some sort of the human software part of the story?  Data life cycle was mentioned, but what about human life cycle.
     How are we thinking about the changing degrees of self-determination when we look, for instance, at young people or elderly people?  What is the human software part?
     The third tension, and Mark introduced it and Anriette added to it.  The concept of -- I think by definition the concept of digital self-determination starts with emphasis on the individual.  Now there are at least two issues.  One is the one that Anriette pointed out helpfully, the question of structure inequalities and symmetries.  And I would add to that even in developed parts of the world so-called in advanced economies we see that relying on the individual hasn't worked out that well, actually Kone's work and other in the tech and data context.  
Second, as another dimension to complexify, isn't it the case that the world's biggest problems from climate change to public health and the like may actually need more data sharing and something like data solidarity?  And I think there it is more than just the label and the semantics whether you emphasize data digital self-determination or solidarity, I think these are fundamental questions in how we position our policies and our own mind sets.
     The fourth tension I am hearing out is this a story about personal data or is it a story about all types of data?  Of course, the questions was already asked what is the relation between the concept of digital self-determination of privacy even without answering that question just going through the examples we heard the use cases I think there is a tendency at least to focus on personal data.
     And that is fine and understandable.  Yet, if we go back to the first question, well, isn't this really about the story of agency, then I think the real potential in front of us is and challenge as policy makers how can we unlock the potential of the data age for individuals so that they can participate in the wealth of the data that is accumulated in so many different ways?
       How can we empower people to become data scientists?  Civil citizen data scientists to shape their own lives?  To create their own environments and make better decisions based on all data and not only the control of their personal data.
     So these are a few reflections.  And my fear is that we say yes, yes, all of the above.  But the concept of digital self-determination becomes a Rorschach test where everybody can read into what they want which might be fine but not necessarily helpful in policy context.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I'm incredibly grateful to break down into the four tensions that you highlight well and I would have my own views on how to resolve the tensions.  We are already running quite late into the session and I want to open up for questions as well.  
So you will now be able to raise your hand if you would like to speak and ask a question.  We still have a number of kind of open questions I see in the Q&A many of you and us have been very busy in answering questions.
     But maybe we can pick up some of the unanswered questions as well.  So, one that I see is how does digital self-determination apply to an individual in a way who wants to create a new global online service?  She will not have much agency to innovate if she and the coworkers have to re-comply the product to comply with 37 different sets of national regulations, the digital sovereignty.  That highlights the elements or the tensions that Urs highlighted about is this about empowerment?  About protection?  And also the difference between the technical concept or human capacity and where are we finding ourselves in there?  Anybody wants to kind of like highlight or react to this question?  Maybe if -- Matthias.
     >> MATTHIAS GALUS: Maybe I will give it a shot.  I tried to come up with an analogy here.
     So if we look at data as a resource for economic processes, let's say, for new products, it is kind of the same when, you know, you look at other resources in different countries if you look about, you know, how to produce coal.  You have different regulations in each country, of course, how to, you know, run a coal power plant or a coalmine and how to deal with, you know, the working staff that is working in those production facilities and so forth.
     So I believe economy will find a way, especially such a strong tech economy to deal with certain kinds of different rules when it comes to data and using the data, especially if we look on the empowerment of the individuals.  Because that for me is a very central point that if we want to talk about empowerment, if -- when it comes to self-determination then, of course, data, or the data access can be done quite easily once you are empowered by the consumer.
     But we have to come up with rules for that on how this empowerment would be actually realized, I guess.  That's my point of view.
     >> MARCO-ALEXANDER BREIT: Can I add to this?  In Europe we are talking about regulation, regulation, regulation.  It is good that we do this, but nevertheless the regulation and data protection and values are sold by the product.  That is what I meant with the Apple example.  
I'm not turning against providers or companies here.  But the thing is Apple has a good product.  So what happens is Apple sells a lot of devices and then they bring up apps and then they -- the people buy the devices and use the apps and then somebody, you know, United States, Europe, we force them to adhere to some rules and then they stick to rules.  
But if it goes the other way around first set rules and then try to invent services and try and invent applications that follow the rules but are competitive, it’s like a billion times harder to do this because you have no devices and no applications first and no platforms and no customer base and then you are supposed to do a regulatory feasible approach for something like just an application.  So what I tried to say is innovation sells standards.  And not standards sell innovation.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Marco.  We then have two raised hands already.  I would like first to give the floor to Michael Nelson.  And I would ask you to kind of keep to 20-30 seconds max so we can have the best number of interaction.  Thank you very much.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Thank you for asking my question from the chat.  I apologize for not going on video, but it is dark here in Washington.  I want to disagree strongly with what Matthias just said about data being like coal or oil.  That is completely the wrong way to think about this.  Data is global.  Data is the new air.  And to say oh, we are going to have different regulations in different countries, no problem and to say digital sovereignty is consistent with self-determination is to miss the whole point of digital sovereignty which is to assert at the national level rules that are different than other people.
     And to limit what individuals can do in that country.  Thank you again for asking my question.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Michael.  I don't know before we react to that, maybe we get to the second intervention that we have from Humayra Rabab and then we can react to them.  So you have the floor.
     >> HUMAYRA RABAB: My question is about the most recent comment about allowing innovation to take place and then focusing on the regulation.  Wouldn't that then open up to opportunities where innovation allows the legislation to change which may bring in security concerns or privacy concerns where maybe an innovative product is allowing more surveillance that isn't required at the current climate for example?  So that is really the basis of the question.  
So if we don't allow more regulation on innovative products or companies, can we then see surveillance being the product being sold to governments because regulation isn't a priority at that stage?  Thank you.
>> MARCO BREIT: This is the point why it is hard to find the right sweet spot between innovation and regulation.  For example, in Germany we have laws that if you want to export certain goods to states that have no Democratic regime, then you are actually hindered by this.  For example, we try -- we phrased some of our laws that AI, facial recognition is something that we need to think about twice before we export it.   Nevertheless, you see industry giants from the United States that said oh, yes, we don't want to foster any kind of autocratic regimes so we stopped building and exporting facial recognition software, too.  What I'm trying to emphasize here is that there is a thin line between innovation and regulation we need to walk.  If you go too much into the innovation direction you have the dangers you mentioned.  And if you go too much in the regulation direction then you will have no competitive goods in the world market and maybe then the autocratic regimes will have the opportunity to flood the world with their services because they are running so well and well, they don't care about regulation right now.  
This is what we can see especially in the view of AI where China is doing a lot of progress when it comes to facial recognition and the use of facial recognition and obviously it is for causes that we wouldn't necessarily endorse in Europe.
     But if we don't step up our game in facial recognition, we will be in the position to buy these in the end?  I don't know.  But the danger is looming.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Marco.  We are slowly starting to get to the end of the session.  I feel like there are still so many questions that we could answer and discuss but I would like to slightly maybe abuse my right, my privilege of being a moderator and ask two questions before we then wrap up with Thomas Schneider to the group.
And the first is to maybe the Swiss contingents or experts speaking there.  I thought that kind of the logic that was set up to us was really useful so I would like to ask you to react to what are your first thoughts to the four tensions that Urs Gasser mentioned. And then maybe to the international commentators that we have it would be quite useful to hear a quick reflection on how do you think we can go from there and start the international discussions around those four tensions.
And, Anriette, from you we heard there are so many different approaches, so many different challenges that we face in different countries and different contexts.  How do we go addressing this in an international and meaningful way?  Maybe start first with our Swiss experts and ask you to keep it short and quick so we then wrap up with only a slight delay.
>> KERSTIN VOKINGER: I couldn't agree more with what Urs Gasser said.  I think he raised valuable and important points.   
On the one hand, when Urs emphasized that the self-determination is something that we have very much embedded in our Swiss understanding and Swiss system already before the digitalization and that helps that we don't have to reinvent the wheel. But we can sort of already use the principles that we have and therefore already have out of trust and actually are functioning. And I think that is a very important point.
And the point he raised regarding data sharing with regard to climate change, an example with public health crisis that data sharing there is crucial and that is what we are discussing in our network and we further have to discuss is how to balance the different -- sometimes can divergent interests between the individual and the public interest but sometimes they can be the same.  We have to think there more about how can we further emphasize data share and enhance data sharing and make sure that, of course, this is not being misused.  That is a valuable input and emphasis we should have in the network and in upcoming conversations we have.
     >> MODERATOR: Matthias, you have 20 seconds.
     >> MATTHIAS GALUS: 20 seconds, wow.  These were crucial points for me as well and I don't have a clear answer so we have to keep up the discussion on those points.  
What I do see absolutely is that if we talk about more self-determination concepts like this, it is about the right to choose and if we want to have a little bit more of this right we have to talk about digital skills and that was mentioned by Anriette and that was not necessarily very broadly available in communities and we also have to talk about infrastructure that actually gives the transparency to people so that they can choose.  So it is a skill set combined with infrastructure questions of course, and then you know, a lot of measures to sensualize people in order to have an increasing skill set to deal with those questions.
     But that is I think it is a long way.  Right now.
     >> MODERATOR: Brilliant.  Thank you very much, Matthias.  Roger?
     >> ROGER DUBACH: Thank you very much.  First of all, thank you very much for this very lively discussion.  I very much enjoy and learned a lot about what we are going to do.  Perhaps quickly to react to the four tensions mentioned by Urs Gasser which are helpful for our own thinking.
     For the first one, I mean I think that it is very much about empowerment.  But I think the self-determination is a right we have in the current life and do not have in the digital world.  It is how to bring the concept in the digital space not as a defensive approach but very much as empowerment.
     And then on the second one, I'm very much on the side of human capacity building.  I see that, of course, there is the infrastructure part, but the discussion about digital self-determination is already very broad and I would not like to engage in technical infrastructure discussion as well.  But that's my personal view.
     On the third one, the individualistic or commentary concept.  I mean yeah, the -- the easy answer is to say both.  I think it is about individually -- individual rights or data control but, of course, with the collective dimension.
     And the fourth one, I mean we started our thinking very much and that is also what Matthias Galus pointed out if you talk, it is hard to deal with personal data.  We tried how to see to use personal data in data spaces.
     That is where we are with our thinking.  Of course, I very much see the point about all types of data but that is I think we have to think a little bit about this tension as well. Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And I really would like to give the floor quickly to our international commentator as well.  Please I know it is difficult and it is a big question.  If you could make it as short as possible so we don't overrun too much because afterwards we will have Ambassador Schneider sigh a few words as well.  Anriette, your thoughts.
     >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN: I will be quick.  We need to talk about human rights and accountability of States as well as corporations.  I think the points are spot on about human capacity and technical capacity needs a lot more thought on how they interact with one another.  
And then finally I think the point about data solidarity and how that relates to data self-determination and my question is do we have the legal concepts and the regulatory tools to build data solidarity.  So much of what we rely on to achieve self-determination has been personal data protection laws and principles.
     And so my question really is, is that enough?  Is that enough or do we need to build new principles to achieve the kind of data solidarity that he was referring to that can, I believe, co-exist with digital self-determination.  Really interesting session.
     >> MODERATOR: Brilliant.  Thank you so much.  Mark, your thoughts?
     >> MARK FINDLAY: Two things.  We should stop thinking about data sovereignty because we live in a global world and the problem with pandemic control is that states focus on their own interests and don't focus on the issue of public health as a global concept.  
The second issue associated with that is just to realize the fact in the south world the majority of individuals don't live in functioning states and they don't have the power or the capacity to assert their sovereignty or even their human dignity.  Final point to think about, and that is that the world is largely run now not by Nation States but by multinational corporations and they run the platforms that produce and manage the data so concepts of sovereignty make sense when talking about a multinational world and 70% of those live in worlds that don’t live in functioning states.
     >> MODERATOR: Marco, I know you might have a slightly different vision.  Please go ahead.
     >> MARCO-BREIT: I yes, I do but I don't want to end on a negative note.  He zoomed out and made the structure theory and zoomed in and made from the reaction theory consideration if we want to determine how they work together we need to understand this this, if you want to be free, you need to be living in a country with free structures or free consider the structure of freedom.  And if you want to change the structures towards freedom you need the collective action.  This is not a separation or a tension.  I think this is just two sides of the same coin and this is how we should understand it because I want to be self-determined but the discussion needs to be digital sovereignty because we know what kind of data is going to flow between you and me and on what kind of infrastructure is going to run.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  Your five cents, Urs.
     >> URS GASSER: Maybe two thoughts about how to have conversations about digital self-determination.  
The first one builds very much upon Mark's and Anriette's reminders that we have to be careful when using a term or a concept like digital self-determination. And I do think, of course, especially in international arenas as we mentioned the south a number of times, this is extremely important to have these normative assumptions in mind.
     The second in terms of the output side, the normative consequences of introducing new terminology and new concepts particularly if it is coming, you know, or is related to a government of a country.  I think we have seen already in our space of technology and society issues that there is a danger.  There is a risk by introducing highly ambiguous concepts because they can easily be hijacked by politicians and tweaked because they are so open-ended for their perspective.  And I think these two things being aware of the normative assumptions and second of the normative consequences of innovative new concepts is perhaps wise to keep that in mind.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Urs, for the words of caution in this time as well.  That is really useful.  It has been interesting.  I'm sorry that we were not able to answer all of the questions.  The chat has been lively and we posted our  e-mail address and we will repost it right now. Thank you very much, Dominique, where you can contact and send us questions as well and we are more than happy to react.  
And before we end here, I would like to give the word to Ambassador Thomas Schneider from the Federal Office of Communications to wrap it up and give us a vision and a way forward.
     >> THOMAS SCHNEIDER: Thank you all.  Can you hear me?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, we can.
     >> THOMAS SCHNEIDER: We hope this is the start of an expert change throughout the world that will grow and help us and everybody to promote empowerment and digital self-determination and reduce risks of control for people to be controlled by whether it is a government or a company by others than themselves basically or their society.  
One element is legal production of human rights.  It is not enough that the GDPR led to us clicking 10 times I accept when using a search engine.  It is not complete.  We need to think about technical standards and economic regulatory incentives that helps individuals, businesses and societies to move towards self-determination and the key point raised by many of us.
We also need people to be empowered to realize what is at stake and see the risks but also to see the opportunities and to enable them to create services on their own on local level with whatever partners they trust to help them improve their lives.  Two sides.  One is protection and one is regulatory measures. And the other is empowerment and the identification of opportunities and incentives to get people to become active to use data, to use the opportunities.  
And in particular, in developing countries -- and I’m very glad for all those who brought this in -- there are more challenges about legal securities and social inequalities and things that make it historically more difficult in some countries or cultures to get to the digital self-determination because already analog self-determination may be more challenging in one way or another. 
Also there I think that as Anriette said actually the concept of digital self-determination can boost and support in particular local initiatives can bring people together with the same understanding so they develop their open services and not just use what is there. They have no control and don't know what is happening to their data, but to encourage people to get a perspective to become more self-determined, and more free and independent, and also to see the economic opportunities.
     So and, of course, my last point I think and this is one that I want to end here is we all are aware that local initiatives are important but in the end this is not a regional or local or national issue this is a global issue and we should think across borders.  And digital sovereignty if you have no control on the infrastructure, it is getting very difficult to make free decisions if you don't know whether the information you get is accurate, whether the tool you get is actually doing what you ask it to. So, of course, I think this is not a contradiction, but something that is a mutual dependency.  
The question is just on what do you rely to create this digital sovereignty in the sense that does this have to be your national government that you are forced to trust that will regulate everything for you or a more sophisticated differentiated network of trusted partner in your country but also with other countries and other actors that help you create this digital sovereignty on infrastructure level and regulation level.  
This is the not end of the story, this is again just the beginning that we need to discuss digital sovereignty but maybe also think about what does this mean and do we really just depend on our administrations on national level that will take care of it or there may be other ways.  In the end, finally we are convinced this is a big issue for us and it is or will be a big issue for basically every human being in the world going digital or is already digital.  How can we work together and create an informal exchange structure and informal network as a first step where people that are working on issues be it in different fields, health, traffic, mobility, environmental issues, how can we work together to support each other to share our knowledge to go towards digital self-determination and digital sovereignty in a sense that we also need to know where the infrastructure is doing and we need to be able to have confidence in it.  
From our side, this was an invitation to show what we are doing.  To see what others are doing and thinking and now we need to get together a network.  Contact us, share information with us and help us with your ideas on how to move this important issue forward.  So we are very happy to have had this discussion and see it as a good start for something that will probably hopefully keep us busy in a positive way for the next years to come.  Thank you all very much.  And looking forward to continue the discussion.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Thomas.  Thank you to the audience for the active and lively interaction.  Apologies for taking 15 minutes of your life away that was not scheduled, but I think it was worthwhile.  It was a superb discussion and really insightful.  As Thomas mentioned, if you would like to continue this discussion, do get in touch with us.  We look very much forward to all of your points.  Thanks again and hopefully we can see us all each other next year again like to continue the discussion at the next IGF 2021.  Thank you very much and hope to see you all soon.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-5-of49-upholding-rights-in-the-state-business-nexus-c19-and-beyond^^

   >> MARK HODGE:  Okay.  Hello, audience.  Good.  Let's kick off then.  Great.  Thank you.  Hi.  Welcome, everybody, to the session.  Thank you for joining us today at this IGF panel.  My name is Mark Hodge, a Senior Advisor to the UN Human Rights B-Tech Project, and we're delighted to have you today with us, and for those not familiar with the UN B-Tech Project, it's the OHCHR project to focus on the advancement of the implementation of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights in the context of technologies, but another way it's really to look at how to leverage experience from corporate accountability and corporate responsibility field into discussions about responsible use of technology.  It's not the only piece of work that OHCHR leads with regard to technology by far, there are lots of other projects and efforts not needed by very special procedures and the office itself, but our particular focus at B-Tech is to provide clarity, convene diverse stakeholders, to explore challenges, and produce, ultimately, some guidance and recommendations around how to advance stronger application of the guiding principles.  There are four focus areas in the project, and I will not go into them in depth.  Some of my colleagues will post links to the B-Tech resources and those who want can look at that.  We have four focus areas and one is looking at how to address risks to human rights that are inherent in company business models.  The second one will be looking into human rights in end use.  And the third focus area is really unpacking access to remedy and what does it mean and complexity of ways that technologies can impact the rightsholders.  And the fourth focus area is trying to unpack what it really means to states to apply a smart mix of measures to how they engage and make sure they uphold their end duties to protect human rights in the sort of digital era.
Really, please, a cross-cutting area of work focusing on investors, so please just keep an eye on our project pages as we begin to produce more and more kind of outcomes and share insights from various experts there.
So today's session as stated in the title is diving into an aspect of the smart mix of guiding principles, the UN recognize something called the State Business Nexus and recognize that states when they contract with, when they procure from, when they license technologies, when they partner with technology companies, need to take their own role in guiding those companies and incentivizing those companies to operate respectfully, but also need to make sure that they meet their human rights obligations as states as they do so, so this plays into examples we hear about the digital welfare state, the use of technologies in the criminal justice system, in the police, also in intelligence and defense of course as well.  Also today realizing the global pandemic put that into sharp focus.  A need and dynamic and states are looking into technologies to help address and build their strategies and actually provide robust responses and effective responses to the global pandemic.
So, the question today we've got four excellent sort of speakers to help us unpack how do we do this?  What are the dynamics, what do we need to think about as we think about this business nexus, and what are the reality faced by different stakeholders?  We've got Gary Davis the Global Director of Privacy in law enforcement at Apple, and Gary, maybe you can give everyone a wave in case they can't see your name.  Stephanie Hankey, Executive and Co-Founder of Tactical Tech; and again, Stephanie, if you could wave, Phil Dawson and John based in Australia, and we thank you, John, hugely for being with us at a very late hour where you are.
What we're going to do is have a quick round of initial inputs from each of the panelists and then have a discussion, open up a discussion among the panelists.  We worked very, very hard to bring in the questions that you raised, there is a Q&A function as well as a chat function, so please use that and then we'll do our best to find time at the end to try to address some of those questions, and please share questions anyway because from the B-Tech project perspective.  There are questions that we can pick up and it gives us a signal of where we need to go with our work more widely.
So, Gary, I would like to start with you if I can.  We know that Apple and Google have been central to sort of trying to provide the technologies to help states and others find ways forward through your exposure notification work and really committed and tried to make a privacy-oriented stance on this.  We love to hear, we read a lot all of us, so it's a really good opportunity for us to hear from inside, Gary, your experience of this journey that you've been through as the over the past months.
   >> GARY DAVIS:  Certainly, and thank you, Mark, and thank you very much for inviting Apple to participate on this distinguished panel today as part of this year's Internet Governance Forum.  In many respects, I think we can now say that the COVID-19 pandemic has reaffirmed that the fundamental principles of data protection and privacy remain alive and well.  Perhaps this was a time there at the start when governments were rightly moving fast to protect their citizens where it may not have turned out that way but that passed quickly.  And I would like to take you back to what seems like a lifetime ago now to a Saturday afternoon in March, I joined Apple colleagues to talk to the Irish Public Health Authority in relation to support which they were seeking from us in relation to the use of Bluetooth technology to establish close contacts between persons subsequently diagnosed with COVID-19 and persons they may have been in contact with.
Over the coming days and weeks, those contacts actually intensified with public health authorities around the world, and culminated in Apple and Google announcing an unprecedented initiative, really, on contact tracing.  And in the weeks leading up to that announcement on the 10th of April.  We were really in continuous contact with those public health authorities who were seeking our help.  So therefore, our response to work together while unprecedented, was appropriate to the emerging situation that we've all found ourselves in.
What was clear to us, however, very quickly was that some of the contact tracing ideas that were coming forward posed a risk to privacy and human rights as they involved extensive data collection on citizens, but more specifically in fact, some of the proposals would have actually undermined their very purpose, broad adoption, and our view was that the only way to achieve broad adoption was to ensure and maintain user trust.  Here in Europe we're fortunate like many places around the world that we have a strong legislature base that protects privacy.  But even here, the legislative base cannot maintain trust on its own, so we recognized immediately that there must be fundamental principles we must adopt and be very public and open about.  That is why over the weeks between the 10th of April and the launch of what we became known as the Exposure Notification API we had a number of interim public updates to provide more information to public health authorities and the general public.
These updates were completed by extensive engagement with the media, privacy regulators, privacy advocates, and of course governments.  Transparency was and is a must in this space.  Transparency, of course, while a minimum requirement is not sufficient on its own when public health authorities want and need broad adoption of their contact tracing initiatives.
The second important principle is data minimization.  Together with other initiatives emerging at the time such as DPT3 we believed effective contact tracing could be used by using a decentralized system which maintained control fully in the hands of the individual.  So therefore, we sat down some basic privacy protection principles, and those principles were users must explicitly choose to turn on exposure notifications, so they have to actually take the action to turn it on on their device.  The exposure notification system does not share location data from a user's device with the public health authority, Apple, or Google.  The exposure notification system doesn't share the user’s identity with other users, Google, or Apple.  Matching for exposure notifications is only done right here on the user's device, and users decide whether they want to report a positive diagnosis.
Importantly, the system is only used for exposure notifications by official public health authorities and isn't monetized, and also importantly, Google and Apple made a commitment to disable the exposure notification system on a regional basis when it is no longer needed.
We remain still very much engaged in this space and continue to iterate on exposure notifications in response to requests from public health authorities to support them.  We held over 100 technical briefings with those public health authorities, government officials, and others, so we remain in constant contact with them.  Just in the last few weeks, for instance, we announced exposure notifications express, which is a new way for public health authorities to deploy exposure notifications quickly and easily avoiding the need for them to build and maintain an app.  Public health authorities with exposure notifications, remain fully in control of how notifications will be triggered, what next steps to advise their citizens on, and guidance to expose notifications for further contact tracing.
Importantly, however, our bases can line privacy and human rights principles which I just outlined have not and will not change.  I also want to briefly mention something about which I'm very proud outside of the contact tracing space, and that is the Apple Maps Mobility Trends Reports.  At the start of the pandemic and as governments responded with lockdowns, we started receiving requests from some of those governments for data that would help them to understand how their populations had responded to the lockdown orders.  We wanted to help, as that has remained our approach throughout the pandemic, but clearly, we needed to do so in a way that aligned with our position on privacy as a fundamental human right.
Fortunately, therefore, Apple Maps was already designed from the ground up to reflect those principles, as use of maps is tied to random rotating identifiers on the device and not a user's identity.  However, even with those protections in place, we did not consider the rights that were to simply provide raw data in response to such requests, so instead we worked over a very short deadline to produce trend data against a baseline of 100 from the 13th of January of this year so governments could then visualize the movement up and down but not receive the individual data.
We also considered the issue of fairness and availability of this data.  Why should it only be available to those governments that thought to ask us and actually had the capacity to integrate it?  Therefore, we took the proactive step to publish the data on a worldwide basis with useful visualizations once a minimum number of journeys were undertaken in a particular region so as to ensure that there was no possibility to link the data back to individual journeys.
We continued to publish that data today and have committed to doing so as long as the pandemic remains a public health concern.  And with that.  Thank you very much, Mark.  I hand it back to you.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thanks, Gary.  We were able to give our panelists time to also ask questions and come back as well in a moment, but I wanted to just invite Stephanie to sort of layer in other perspectives, you know, the question of the State Business Nexus and from your perspective, how should we even just be conceptualizing and where should we be focused.  I invite you to help us widen the lens enough around this question related not just to COVID but more widely.
   >> STEPHANIE HANKEY:  Thanks.  Yeah.  I can talk about technologies in the context of crisis and disaster more widely, but I think there are so many technologies just within the context of the pandemic, so it's great to hear from Gary about two specific ones that Apple were involved in, but you know what we see is that technology is completely central to the response, and that it's a big problem that needs a quick response.  And so technology and so technology-thinking or data-centric thinking is definitely at the forefront of responses all over the world, and I think we tend to think of, for example, track and trace systems first and foremost, but I think what we're seeing is, you know, not only in the micro-level in terms of how to help but also on a bigger level all kinds of innovations like the Map Trends that Gary just mentioned, but also lots of technologies needed for modeling and predicting and understanding the risks at a broader scale.  Technologies for monitoring it and also getting kind of feedback in an ongoing way, and being able to do things like predict clusters or monitor breaks can outs and so on, but also for mitigating and how to even enforce lockdowns and control it and that kind of thing, and then lots and lots of technologies coming, seemingly innovations in technology coming like wearable trackers to figure out if people left a space or not, whether people are staying at home or not, and also not just sort of looking at behaviors as well on a much bigger level.
And I think we see all kinds of technologies emerging which feel new, but mostly have been around for a long time or have been used for other things, and so I'm reminded of, I think, Naomi Klein's work thinking about the chain which is that in the crisis we have the ideas laying around, and I think that's what we're seeing here.  I think the media reported it as new technologies for the pandemic, but actually what we see is increasingly enormous amounts of technology that's been around for a long time being used, and I'm thinking about specifically the type of data, so for example data from mobile phones, data from credit cards, data from TV cameras, home sensors even, but also technologies that have become sort of more clearly used or at least very often suggested to be used, not necessarily always successfully used and I'll come to that in a second.
What we definitely saw, especially at the beginning, was I think an unprecedented synthesis of private and public data.  I think, for example, if you think about what happened in Singapore, you ended up with information from location data, for example, from a mobile phone combined with credit card data, combined with travel data, combined with health records, and sometimes you see TV cameras as well, and that's a kind of data synthesis we haven't seen before and definitely not on the public level, so that raises a lot of questions about consent, about you know how these technologies which were mostly used by law enforcement previously, that kind of data synthesis was used -- is used commonly, so for example for intelligence in law enforcement.  So, what happens when you sort of overnight start applying that to citizens in the public space?  And what kind of questions does that raise?  And I think that's what interesting in that is that it has also been largely transparent.  There are definitely some governments and instances where we haven't known about the technology, but very often the technology is testify might not be transparent, but the fact that they're using the technologies has been relatively transparent even in some countries where intelligence services offered overnight, the technologies that they use, mobile phone tracking in Israel, for example, in the context of we've got this anyway and it works why don't we use it kind of thing, so I think we haven't had enough -- I was surprised even as everybody has been looking at data privacy and security and surveillance for really 20 years, that we didn't have more of a discussion about that sort of overnight switch, let's say, on synthesis and use of data that we saw.  This is very different to what Gary was talking about in the context of Apple, of course, and the reason why I think it's different as well, and I just want to flag it, is I think there is so much emphasis on these very large platforms and technology companies and the efforts they've made, but what we're seeing actually is entire industries that we perhaps are less aware of in the public eye, less aware of what the technologies are that are now being used all over.
And I'm thinking of technologies being developed by researchers and academics and small-scale startups and so on but also an enormous amount of technology coming from surveillance companies and being used by governments as well, and of course, maybe not that surprising, if you want to do disease surveillance or you know help people track individuals in surveillance with technologies, the same technology that you use to track criminals or terrorists or in some instances they're used to track human rights offenders and journalists and those technologies are extremely useful in the context of tracking in this case coronavirus positive patients.
And we've seen quite a few examples of that.  Some just suggested and some not necessarily proven, but certainly a lot of activity in that space.  For example, an NSO group in Israel who does mobile phone technology for tracking surveillance are now applying it to the pandemic saying AI which uses facial recognition technologies, and you know it's endless, actually.  I mean, you could literally do a whole session on all the technologies that have been used in all the different contexts, and it's global as well.
But I think it's kind of raised questions also about what is that data that is there already, and I'm surprised that we haven't had more of a public discussion about the role of behavioral data because that's what's -- despite all the different examples of data being used, at the heart of it in terms of the most valuable type of data, it's really location data and you know information on where you are, how often, for what length of time, who you're next to, you know, and how close you are to other people, and even if you're at home, has become much more valuable than I think anybody could have imagine, and I think this is technology that has been there in the marketing, targeting, profiling industry already but not really used in the context of health previously, and in that context, I think the idea of consent becomes really complicated.  I just wanted to mention maybe one of the companies that is particularly controversial right now which is (?) an example of a company that most people probably have not heard of before, but they've been working for a very long time and they are an example of the kinds of technology companies where there is generally some slightly skeptical view of the company, maybe there is not that much transparency around how the company works, maybe the types of organizations they normally work with is quite complicated, gives them a complicated profile.  For example, Palantir does surveillance predictive analysis and modeling technology, so the way the technologies are being in the context of the pandemic, for example, they get hundreds of datasets together and use that to help the government get an overview of movement of people and of COVID cases in a country because a level of data complexity they're not used to handling as governments, but they're also now talking about an art to using technologies, which helps governments do tracking and tracing as well, but the reason why it's controversial is that they, for example, have worked with the government for years with border control, predictive policing technologies, and these are not consumer technology companies.  And.
And in the context of the UK Government, for example, they've been very I would say governments need to show that they're doing something and need to have these big solutions, and I think they've gone after partnerships like Palantir despite the fact they may not have been the human rights protectors or safeguards in place necessarily.
And maybe just, I know we probably don't have too much time but maybe to say one more thing, I think there is -- there is a very big focus on the discussion and there should be on privacy and security, and the examples that Gary gave about what Apple was able to do and they're able to do with the tool is really important, and I would go so far as to say that based on the premises of basic data collection and privacy and security right now, it's necessary for any responsible company to take the kind of steps that Apple has taken and Google, and you know I would say in the community of people, not only corporations but also in the sort of alternative technology scene, there are some basic principles and guidelines but all companies should be following it.  I don't think we should have that discussion anymore.  That should be a given, I think.  The reason why Apple and Google were trusted in that context is not only because of their scale and ability to deploy things without kind of confusing the public, but also because they're trusted in terms of not making those kinds of mistakes and also protecting people's data because as we know from a lot of the homegrown government solutions can lead to mistakes and lots of failures in the systems as well.
But there isn't enough emphasis on the other discussion which is why they're able to do it.  They're able to do it because essentially they have a monopoly in the space, they're able to do it because of the kinds of brands they've built up as kind of being the main player in the space, but they also get to define or in that case we have to think about like who gains the insights, who has the insights, who gets to define the problem, all of these kinds of questions we're not asking.  We're very focused on the privacy of the individual and we're not always thinking about are we really mature enough to think about, for example, a public crisis like this, where is the public good in that data, where is the public interest in that data and why working at private companies in that context.
So, it's like I guess in summary of what I've just been saying, there is not enough emphasis on the whole industry and all the different small players.  But then when we look at the big players, are we asking the right questions even, and I would say that privacy and security is a given and they have to operate like that.  What's the next question we need to be asking in these kind of contexts?
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thank you, Stephanie.  You mentioned a few times sort of the states sort of working with who they're already naturally working with and sort of repurposing some of those things, and I suppose even though there is transparency there is a question there as you said whether states are asked, whether states are asking those questions and whether we're asking states to ask those questions, right, in that context as well.
Phil, I would like to turn to you, and sort of Element AI is really engaged around human rights issues clearly in relation to things like waterfront Toronto and Sidewalk Labs and I wonder if you have a point on how the state business nexus is playing out in the context of smart cities and also begin to help us think through, what do we do around this?  What are the solutions moving forward to help us put mechanisms in this business nexus to ask the questions Stephanie is talking about but also to make sure that we've got some governance around some of those things?
   >> PHILIP DAWSON:  Thanks, Mark and Gary and Stephanie so far for bringing some really interesting things to the table, and hopefully I can make some good links.
Yeah, States Business Nexus has been around before COVID, obviously, and one of the areas when it comes to digital technology where it's been in focus already is definitely been Smart Cities.  Which is interesting because in some ways, municipalities or local governments have not -- are not the historical or traditional subjects of international human rights law and yet they have been looking to it increasingly as a tool to help guide the deployment of digital innovations in their cities for a variety of purposes.
But it does get a little bit -- it can get a little bit confusing because just given the history of development projects not only in cities, but typically proceed through private developers, and so it provides a kind of opportunity or an instance in which the responsibility for the development can fall into a bit of a gray area.  In Toronto last year our team at Element AI led a human rights impact assessment, or preliminary human rights impact assessment of Waterfront Toronto's Sidewalk Labs proposed digital innovations for the City of Toronto which they won through a request for proposals from a quasi-public entity Waterfront Toronto, and before even the deal was closed and the contract was agreed to, Waterfront Toronto committed to the preliminary human rights impact assessment, and what was interesting is one that was in and of itself widely viewed as a very bold move by Waterfront Toronto at this stage with, you know, the deal still being negotiated and as probably many of you know, ultimately the project didn't -- it fell through.  But at this early stage, they commissioned a human rights impact assessment of the entire proposal, and what was interesting is that in that call for proposals for the human rights impact assessment, there were references to the UNGPs and references to another document as well beyond the universal declaration of human rights, the city's coalition for digital rights, and so there has been already a lot of work done by local governments to try to apply human rights principles in the local context, okay.  So, this is another document that we had to take into account as a lens through which to analyze the potential human rights risks of the project.
And still more than that, what Waterfront Toronto was doing through the assessment and consultations and other initiatives that took place was to take the city's coalition for digital rights statement, and then further translate that into the specific context of the Toronto project that was being proposed.  They were developing what they were calling the draft digital principles or ultimately, these intelligent community guidelines that were even more specifically translating these human rights principles into ultimately contractual obligations that the developer and the developer's partners might have also had to comply with.
So in terms of, and when you look at bridging the State Business Nexus and you know this is one of the avenues that was being explored is taking the human rights law, the work that cities have been doing in transcribing it into the digital space, and then building out guidelines that are more specific and could be embedded into procurement contracts, and now we didn't obviously see those because the project fell through, but it was an interesting I think a pretty avant-garde approach in the Smart Cities context.
And you know these contracts might have included penalties for intentional re-identification for, you know, unlawful surveillance, anything that was in contravention with the digital principles that the city had developed and was developing in consultation with the public.
So, you know, that was kind of a fascinating experience to be a part of and to help begin to shape, and even though it did not -- the project ultimately did not continue, I think these are important precedence to pass along.
Something that did come up that was a bit of a challenge, I think, and I think Stephanie was touching on this in part of her comments in other areas is, is the challenge of oversight.  You know.  How do you really in that particular context, how do you ensure that these contractual provisions are being respected, one with your primary developer, the master developer, and then with other developers that are subcontractors, through those contracts, so you could require them these principles to be embedded in contracts, but how do you really know if they're being respected, and then how do you require -- or how do you ensure that enforcement is real and effective?
So one of the things that came up in that context as an idea is that, you know, the city, rather than outsource so many of these innovations, should have been taking a lead role in developing the digital infrastructure that some of these solutions could have been built on, and then they would have had a better chance of owning the governance of the system that was being deployed, they would have had a better chance of also incorporating citizen participation in the governance and not just consultation pre-project, and then realizing some of the other principles that were in these, you know, in the city's coalition for digital rights and the guidelines that they were embedded in contracts.
So, the question of ownership of digital infrastructure and ownership of governance, came up quite a lot.  And obviously we didn't get to see this play out, but you know, had the project proceeded, and largely the respect for rights is governed by contracts between two private parties, and you know if you're a citizen you have complaints, so where do you go?  Who do you file a complaint with?  So, people talked about, should there be a digital expansion of the local ombudsman's role to include digital rights complaints?  Would that institute -- would that institution have then been empowered to -- and maybe this isn't for John, but to file a complaint with the human rights commission or, you know, so there were some institution building that might have needed to take place.  And, you know, obviously we didn't really get to see where this would go, but the conversation in Toronto is going on with potentially another project in the future and other cities are having these conversations too.
I want to -- before I end, I want to tie it back to the conversation around COVID and the COVID Alert App because I think that at least in Canada, I have more experience.  The genesis of the National COVID Alert App yields some lessons for Smart Cities, I think.  So obviously, Canada has been working with the Google App Foundation but what they did do then is they built out the rest of the app in house.  So, the Canadian Government civil service, the digital service built out the app and carried out consultations on the -- on the direction of the app and also the governance of the app.  And they have published a Terms of Reference with oversights of this external council of public health experts and privacy experts and technologists, you know, have as part of the council to increase transparency of the app and to report publicly on the public health outcomes that the app is actually achieving to ensure that it's actually effective and, you know, not part of the tech for tech's sake criticisms that we often hear on these projects.  It reports on privacy and it reports on any complaints that may be lodged.  And all of this is online, and I think it's been an example of public sector leadership in developing civic tech that thus far, even as we're waiting for downloads to increase and for public uptick to improve, and I think we're at 5 million downloads in Canada there are 35 plus million people so we have a ways to go and provinces to get on board, but even so as we wait for it to become hopefully more effective in terms of uptick, at least as a public/private sector project, you know I think there are some lessons that we can import then to the Smart City context, and obviously there are things that would be different because a lot of this happened quickly in a time of crisis, but I think there are some valuable lessons here about the ability of public sector -- the ability of the public sector and civil servants to themselves build technology that will hopefully be useful to citizens and then to adopt the right governance mechanisms to ensure that there is transparency and that citizens have an account of the value that it's actually bringing.  And maybe I'll just stop there.  Thank you.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thanks, Phil.  I really appreciate that, and certainly from the perspective and what you put in force and how it's enforced and remedy for rightsholders, those governance questions are really central.  I'm conscious that you sort of mapped out, and I want to turn to John, you know, Gary and his story was sort of telling really the sort of process through which it and to be very much Apple and Google having to say look, here is how we're going to set the principles, because to Stephanie's point there is a knowledge base and within some of those companies of how to do this, and the leverage to say, no, this is how it will be done and we're into the going to do it this way or that way, and then both Stephanie sort of saying that we need to be asking the tough questions and Phil arguing for sort of a mechanism by which states take more ownership over the processes.  I wonder, John, if you could speak from your perspective, given the work that you've done at the Australian national human rights commission how do we think about even state's wherewithal capacity to answer these questions and I know you've thought about that a little in the context of protecting human rights in the digital era sort of work.  So, John for your general reflections and also comments specific things that you've been trying to move for Australia to help states or encourage or guides or require states to be robust in this?
   >> JOHN HOWELL:  Sure.  Thanks, Mark.  Thanks to all panelists.  Some really interesting reflections here, and particularly interested to hear about the different perspectives on development of contact tracing apps at the current time and the bit of work that we've done with the government here on the Australian rollout of that, but that's slightly different from the question you've asked me to reflect on, Mark, which is the ways in which government can really help facilitate all players who are perhaps developing new technical solutions to respect, protect, promote human rights.
So, one of the big proposals which the commission has made in recent times is that there is a need for some sort of specific leadership on particular subject matters.  We've been focusing very much on AI technologies and running a major project on protecting human rights in the context of developing artificial intelligence, and in that particular context, we've made a proposal for a body which might have some sort of applicability to some of the technologies and solutions talked about today specifically or there might be some analog that could be used in other contexts or other sorts of technical solutions.
I have to emphasize at the start that this is very much a tentative proposal at the moment.  We're in the middle of a sort of project, a two or three-year project, and when it wraps up, we've released a lengthy discussion paper about 12 months ago containing this proposal, and then we've been road testing it with another set of national consultations around Australia, and we'll have a final report out in the coming months.
So, at the moment, I'm expecting a tentative view of my organization, I'm expressing it, but it's safe to say the recommendation looks substantially the same.
So the concept of the AI commission arose in the context of it more generally so I might backtrack a bit to give some context for how I'm thinking about harm from resulting from AI has evolved and so that has led us towards this proposed partial solution to help, you know, harness the benefits of this new technology while minimizing those harms.
As I say, we launched a project in about 2018.  We released a couple of discussion papers since then, conducted two rounds of national consultations consulting in particular on artificial intelligence, what's being used in all forms of decision-making, principally by government but also in the private sector to a degree.
And then we've also had a subsidiary or secondary part of that project on accessible technology, including A I and other technologies as well.
What we notice is that at the time when we started this project there was a ground of interest in artificial intelligence, the benefits it could bring, the harms it could bring, but there wasn't I think in Australia or globally at that time nearly as much of a focus on human rights, so we weren't really interested in centering human rights in that discourse.
I have a slightly jurisdictional bias in the approach in that Australia perhaps has, in some ways, weaker human rights protections than some other jurisdiction so that may have inflected the discourse here a little bit but I think in general we weren't seeing a lot of discussion about human rights in terms of protecting against harms from artificial intelligence.
We've quickly starting seeing an increased focus on a different solution, which was a focus on ethics and creating ethical frameworks to help guide the development of human rights.  That was a great development for us, but it really strengthened our resolve to focus in on the role that human rights could play in the particular space to benefit industry developing and deploying AI technologies, but also to protect the rights of members in the community.
What we notice from the sorts of solutions that have been trialed and proposed were that they were nonbinding sorts of ethical principles, there wasn't much normative heft in terms of the ethical frameworks being deployed, there was a lack of precision in the content, framed at a high level of generality, and technically minded participants that we were speaking in consultations would often end up coming back to a question of oh, well whose values are we really talking about here, these values are all culturally situated, all relative, and my values may be different from your values.  And what is in the right to do as well is really embodying fundamental values is that they represent agreed values and normative framework they sit within allows to us apply those values in particular contexts.
This is all I'm sure preaching to the choir, but I think it's relevant in the way we've talked about a AI Safety Commissioner because we're focused very much on a body which is focused on protecting and promoting human rights specifically, so it's not just me simply preaching human rights 101, but it's really central to our thinking and how our thinking evolved to the need for regulation and what kind of principles would underlie that regulation.
In turn, that helps to build trust in the community because I know there are agreed standards which are being protected by a leadership body.
In the domestic political context, our thinking also evolved around a couple of big developments in Australia.  We were focusing very much on AI decision-making.  There were a couple of examples of use and proposed use of AI decision-making systems in Australia, which garnered quite a bit of attention.  One is something that became known as robo-debt collector.  It was an automated process to collect payments of welfare benefits.  It collected half a million erroneous debts but had had automatic decisions that had to be repaid against citizens whom it simply wasn't proved had been overpaid benefits.
That was a rules-based tool rather than a machine learning tool, still within our sort of concept of an AI tool.  It was deployed quickly but it was erroneous and also the deployment turned out was unlawful and there simply hadn't been enough thinking in the particular department, which is the department obviously focused on delivering Social Security, to what or how they should be thinking about a tool working, thinking about if it's lawfully based, how is it affecting the rights of citizens, how transparent it is, how much of a right have people been given to challenge decisions affecting them in a timely way before they're negatively affected by the use of technology, and so there was a bit of a from our perspective, a capacity issue there that perhaps led to that deployment of that particular tool.
A second sort of big example which perhaps I'm more aware of fell within primitive work we were doing at the commission and the Australian Government proposed some legislation to allow facial recognition technology to be used in Australia.  Some of those solutions would have been available to private industry, some of them just to law enforcement and national security services in Australia, but it would have involved building a national database of facial images.  It would have been automatic enrollment for anyone that had an identity document in Australia.  It would have looked in space, territory, federal databases of identification information, and allowed both one-on-one verification requests, identification requests, but also this legislation which is drafted extremely briefly and very, very generally would have authorized theoretically realtime many to many identifications of unknown people in almost any context by national security services, for example, but every agency could have used both parts of the bill, but certain law enforcement and national security agencies could have.
And that was push through relatively quickly, or was going to be, but it's one of the first national security pieces of legislation that I can recall that was essentially blocked at the committee stage in parliament because of the concerns about the lack of safeguards built into the legislation.  It would have built that solution, and it was really the fact that there weren’t any significant safeguards and there didn't seem to be much consideration.  The list was made public about how the safeguards could have been approved, why they weren't present in the legislation, and that legislation has now stagnated for I think over two years since it was first proposed., which has actually been a worse result I think to the government and for law enforcement than developing a more protective solution in the first place to enable legitimate uses of those technologies.
And so, again, perhaps that's a sort of AI example, but it's an example of the way human rights perhaps were incorporated early enough within the agencies that were proposing that particular tool and the legislation that was going to enable that particular tool.  So, our proposal for --
   >> MARK HODGE:  Maybe just a minute to outline the proposals on the safety commission.
   >> JOHN HOWELL:  Yes.  I'm sorry about that.  So very briefly, the idea of a safety commissioner is really a proposal for a leadership body.  It's framed partly because we were thinking about how could AI perhaps be regulated.  We realize that there are already a lot of regulators throughout the industry, and we realize that government is reluctant to impose new layers of regulation, but that regulators needed support to apply their existing powers to the kinds of tools which using AI solutions.
We also realized there was a need just for the regulators but for government and industry that are using developing, procuring and deploying tools to gain a better understanding of how they could do that in a human rights way and what the impacts of those tools might be and how they could ameliorate those potential impacts.  The idea of a safety commission is really a body that could build that expertise, disseminate that expertise, build capacity, and provide ongoing support, particularly to regulators that are regulating subject areas where those tools are particularly likely to be used.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thanks, John.  It's something we had common in general in the human rights space, internal coherence across agencies around what it means to protect rights in the particular area of responsibility so in -- so that's a good example, thank you, and just John in a moment as we wrap up, maybe you can tell us the punchline as well and where that person might be going and how the government is reacting to that proposal to see where we are from it.
I wanted to ask and we do have a question from participants, so I'm going to raise that question in a moment, but firstly to turn to Stephanie, Phil, and Gary who I know you had a few Internet problems and John, but anything that sparked for you in terms of something that you want to react to or build on or something in your initial opening that you wished to layer into?  Maybe a couple of minutes each if you would like to do that?
   >> STEPHANIE HANKEY:  Should I go again or just jump in?
   >> MARK HODGE:  Go for it.
   >> STEPHANIE HANKEY:  I just wanted to respond to what Philip was saying about states building their own technology, basically.  I think it's a really important question and it's so difficult to -- it's so ideal and we might even want it but it's such a difficult question to realize that the engineering power and money and expertise is not with the governments and what we've seen again and again in the pandemic and I think his part about learning lessons from COVID is a really interesting one, is that there are so many failures.  I think if you look at the news, it's literally littered with examples of applications, for example, contact tracing applications that were funded or developed by governments or governments in collaboration with small companies or academic institutions but failed, and failed because nobody used them or failed because they didn't work very well, or like in the case of the UK, they just the UK example, they failed to contact 15,000 people that had it.  So just massive, also there have been security breaches and so on, so it's a good idea and important question, but I think the reality is the people have engineering power and expertise and that poses a challenging question when you look through it and I'm sorry you asked at the beginning, but I think it's because these technologies we think about in the context of the pandemic, but actually they're the same technologies that will be used and are used in any other kind of disaster or crisis in terms of the underlying technology, obviously the application is different.
And so the precedent that you kind of set in this context, I think is really important and I think the problem, and it's really important to look at the questions that we've got here and in the context as well of your mark in terms of what principles we need, why is it that for example, this example I gave, why isn't there more transparency, where is the human rights impact assessment, all of these things that need to be there.  We have to acknowledge on top of that that the pandemic is not just about health or technology, but it's also a political issue, and the responses are political, and so in my view the choice even to use a technological solution is a political and ideological response, and which is a little bit, I understand outside the remit of this but not in the context of how it impacts human rights.
When you have states decides that it's okay to use surveillance companies to track whether or not people have coronavirus, is that okay, I'm not sure it is.  They could have chosen maybe a different company because you know the perception and precedent that that sets, and again these extraordinary relationships going on like the example Gary gave around the maps, not just only Apple but Google looking at the trends, and it's extraordinary thinking about a technology company telling a country where its people are.  You know, we're relying on these companies to tell us whether or not people are staying at home or not, it's an extraordinary relationship and power dynamic as well because governments need those insights they don't have them and don't know if people are staying home or not, the only thing they can do is put people on the streets which is no more effective than a Google trends map or Apple trends map and same for the citizens it's like they put 100 million pounds into the moonshop project which is the budget for the health system for the year these are political decisions.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thank you, Stephanie.  I knew we would want more than an hour on this panel, but I think it's helpful to layer in that complexity and the reality of the political nature of some of the views and choices that governments are making into the conversation.  We can't ignore that.
Gary and Phil, I'm going to give you guys an opportunity to come in next.  I'm also in the interest of time going to flag the question that we've had from the Q&A from the audience if you are able to weave it into your response, great.  If it's not possible, don't worry but I wanted to put it out in case anybody wants to comment.  It's really the question of how engaged are, you know, Asia sort of big tech platforms on these questions around sort of privacy, security, and developing ethical codes, right?  I mean some of these challenges are clearly, you know, the pandemic is global and these challenges are global as well and how much are we seeing movement, I suppose around governments there, but also companies?  But don't fall only to that kind of angle in your comments here.  I want to open it up to Phil, and Gary, I think you're with us on your phone now, but did you want to weigh in at this point if you can hear us?  I can see your lighting up.  Your name is lighting up but we can't hear you.  Phil?  Why don't you go next and then we'll see if we can get Gary back?
   >> PHILIP DAWSON:  Sure.  Well I just want to respond to Stephanie.  I think, you know, I definitely agree with all of that.  It's highly idealistic to imagine governments being able to in the near future maybe even ever rival the engineering power and resources of Apple and Google.  Especially with this type of speed and scale in the matter of months.
Thinking -- I think it's maybe a bit more realistic in the context of smart cities for governments to build simple applications that are, you know, that are, that they can control that the genesis and the governance of, I think that's probably more realistic.  To have relied upon governments to come up with this type of an app in the pandemic, you know, that would never have happened.
I know I've seen a lot of criticism globally, but especially in Canada that, you know, just like what you were saying that, you know, governments essentially allowed two of the biggest companies in the world to dictate the parameters of one of their responses, and I think I would say that while I agree with the points you were making in kind of a gentle pushback, I would just say that I think a lot of it also depends on how you are explaining what this tool is really going to achieve.  If it's being sold as like a critical solution for the pandemic and in like our best hope of reopening the economy, or if it's being -- if it's being described as one of, you know, a dozen approaches that the government is taking across many sectors and being transparent about the weaknesses of the app and the fact that without uptick it may never actually succeed, and if it doesn't succeed, they'll shut it down.  You know, one of the terms of -- one of the terms of reference in for the app in Canada is precisely that, that there will be advice from the external advisory council and public recommendation on if need be on winding down the operation of the app, whether there is no need for it or whether it just hasn't been useful.
So those things, at least, have made me feel that it's a bit more responsible of an approach to describing the real potential or opportunity or even value of the app and I understand that, you know, not everybody will internalize the message that way, and people might over-rely on it, and it's complex.  And I know we just have a few minutes, so I just want to respond briefly with that and see if anybody else has something.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thank you, Phil.  I'm going to add, in the interest of time as well, so I'm going to see if Gary and John if you want to comment on anything that you've heard and share any reflections?
   >> GARY DAVIS:  I have tried.  I'm not sure if you can hear me.
   >> MARK HODGE:  We can hear you.  You go, Gary.
   >> GARY DAVIS:  You can?
   >> MARK HODGE:  Yes.
   >> GARY DAVIS:  I think it's a bit delayed, but obviously I don't disagree with many of the points that were made.  I think in relation to the contact tracing initiative particularly, we weren't seeking to be involved there and there was no commercial imperative to be so involved.  It was a decision made by, and I can speak for Apple, obviously, in response to the level of contact that we were getting from public health authorities and the unique circumstances of that crisis, but we've never faced such a request before, actually, which I think tries to differentiate it from everything else.
And I hope, actually we never face the circumstances they would lead to a similar request because they were unique circumstances of a global pandemic, and I'm hoping it does not happen again.  But certainly, if the same circumstances arose, I believe we would be available to help again, but really, they were -- (lost audio).
   >> MARK HODGE:  Okay.  I'm going to -- I'm not sure Gary was quite finished but it seems like he's on mute suddenly, so I apologize, Gary, I'm not sure what's happening.
John, I would like to just give you, you know, just to maybe end with sort of one piece of advice around, you know, through the just capacity building, implicitly there is a question of resource but also capacity and knowledge within government, and I just wondered if you could speak to that quickly and whether the Safety Commissioner idea is focused on that idea of capacity within different agencies?  And then I'm going to have to I think draw us to a close and say thank you to everybody, but thank you, John, you can go next.
   >> JOHN HOWELL:  Sure, Mark.  Perhaps I might tie that question in with a couple of comments from the last questions on the panel.  For example, Stephanie's point about, you know, sort of new uses of technology being deployed or technology being deployed because there is a crisis and justification for it.  I think that is a comment that goes beyond technology.  I think governments are implementing all sorts of measures now under the rubric of, you know, there is a pandemic we need to deal with and they'll have longer lasting impacts.  For example, in Australia there is proposed legislation to enable the military to be called out domestic to assist in responding to the pandemic and other similar situations, and those will be increased out of the military but would survive well beyond the pandemic, indefinitely, and that has big civil rights implications.
But perhaps the way NHRI such as the Human Rights Commission can play a role in decision making is simply by monitoring proposals to respond to the pandemic and attempting to insert sort of human rights discourse into decision-making and reminding decision-makers of the need for necessity and proportionality in implementing measures.  We do need measures at the moment to respond to the pandemic, but we also need to make sure that we think about the broader human rights context, the NHRIs are generally independent but have a close role to government, and I think a place to be a voice in that decision-making.  That's a little separate of the question of capacity.  We like everyone else, you know, sometimes don't have the technical capacity to be experts on every tech question, and the safety commission might be a slightly different role for us but might be able to build our capacity as well.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Great.  Thank you, John.  We are at the end of our time.  Actually we're a few minutes over our time so I just wanted to end by saying, obviously, a huge thank you to John and Phil and Stephanie and Gary for leading and within an hour trying to unpack the complex space of where the state and private sector interfaces on these issues, and then how we both rely on expertise of the private sector, create oversight of it, build the capacity of states in that space.  I think the particularly interesting question of, in a moment of crisis, is that where we have opportunity to create more visibility and rigger versus the time where we're not paying attention maybe and it's sort of happening, and maybe it doesn't happen in just one go but maybe there are other many governments approaching companies in many ways day to day for different functions of government.  So, to sort of look at that I think is an interesting thing that we could reflect on as we move forward.  
Within the B-Tech Project, these types of sessions are really for us to begin to kind of hone our thinking and identify the questions that are particularly of interest that we should try and unpack.  So, we're going to be taking this away, and we'll probably do a small write-up with the help of the panelists as well to make sure we crossed the key angles.  We will be releasing quite shortly just a sort of foundational paper on this area of work that will point to, no doubt, riffing of today's conversation where the opportunities for deeper dialogue and longer than an hour are to unpack some of these questions but also opportunities to try and push for solutions, I think.  And in short term, long term, right, some of these things are going to take a while when we talk about government capacity because we know it's a long haul, often, and questions of resource, too.  That's my effort to quite badly sort of summarize things.
There will be a short summary report that will far more eloquent in that regard.  So just thank you all.  Please stay in touch with each other and also through the B-Tech Project we hope to really go deeper into this question over the years ahead.  Thank you and enjoy whatever time of day you are going to enter into now.  Thanks for joining.  Take care.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-6-342-people-vs-machines-collaborative-content-moderation-raw^^

    >> JAN GERLACH:  We are still missing one Panelist and we are still not at time yet.  So let's give it three minutes or so.
    (Standing by.)
    
    >> JAN GERLACH:  We are still waiting for one Panelist.  If you don't mind, we will start in two minutes or so.  Thank you.
    (Standing by.)
    
    >> JAN GERLACH:  All right.  I think, yes, we have a quorum.  Hello, Rob.  Wonderful to see you.
    Let's get this party started.
    Hello and good morning, afternoon, good evening, everyone.  Thanks for joining us at the workshop number 342, People versus machines, collaborative content moderation.  Due to the virtual format you are probably not in the wrong room.  If you are, welcome anyway, please stay.  It is my pleasure to welcome you all.  My name is Jan Gerlach, a lead public policy manager at the Wikimedia Foundation.  I'm today joined by Anna Mazgal, policy advisor representing the European Wikimedia communities in Brussels and Justus Dreyling who leads Deutsch land, the German Chapter of the Wikimedia movement.
    We will be joined by other speakers.
    In a nutshell today we aim to explore the spleksty of the stale and to pension implications for trust in the Internet, and easy task, right?  The longer version, of course, is that some Internet platforms deploy technology to automatically moderate information.  Others enable their users to participate in those moderation practices.
    We want to discuss the kind of support, architecture, norms, and other systems that will be needed for communities of Internet users to be able to engage in those content moderation efforts effectively and safely.
    Certain models of content moderation allow the users of the platform or a Forum to ensure the quality of content and enforce their social norms.  This means that community standards or rules in a collaborative manner can be enforced in a decentralized way.  This can be very effective.  Research on harmful content on Wikipedia, for instance, you'll hear shortly, has shown that content moderation by communities can work but also there are some aspects where platforms need to support them.
    Different kinds of communities, including from different regions and backgrounds, may apply different quality standards to information they want to see in the spaces where they meet online.  At the same time public policy such as intermediate I can't liability laws has a large impact on a platform's ability to hand over control to users.  This means to allow them to upload and moderate content in the first place.
    This workshop, this session explores this interplay of social, technical, and policy systems that enable a decentralized collaborative approach to content moderation.  In particular focus of the conversation will rely on harmful or potentially illegal content.  Misinformation, incitement to violence or terrorist content.  Many policy questions arise around all these issues.  The following questions seem especially pressing to me:
    From a trust and democracy perspective how can policy support participative content moderation that creates trust in platforms and in the Internet.  From a perspective of freedom of expression, vis-a-vis harmful content also, what kind of architectures promote people's ability to address disinformation, incitement to violence and other content that can harm society?
    From a perspective of safety, of user safety online, where do users need to be supported through tools to address harmful content without being harmed themselves?  I'm very excited about this conversation today and the perspectives that we'll hear from the various speakers.  With that I will hand over to my colleague Anna.  Thank you.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Jan.  Welcome, everyone.  I am also very excited about the session.  I feel that from this conversation there is so many things that can inspire us, that can provide practical responses or solutions to many problems that we exist on the Internet today.  But it is not up to our community only to solve those lessons.  Any occasion that can involve a conversation about this is great because we can collectively advance the thinking and collaboratively this but how to make the Internet a beers place.
    Today to talk about this we invited four wonderful speakers.  I'm excited to hear what they will tell us because also they present very different perspectives coming from different backgrounds.  First we will ask Robert Faris, public.  Affiliate of the birk Klein Centre for Internet and society to present the research that he coauthored with other wonderful researchers, exactly on the topic of collaborative content governance and moderation and the example of English Wikipedia.
    We will ask for contribution from Marwa Fatafta, who is an access now policy manager for a Middle East and northern Africa and advisory board member of the Arab centre for the advancement of social media and policy analyst at al Shabaka, and she will talk about access now's work on that issue and content governance, it is called, I believe, bull also hopefully bring some perspective from the Mina region on those issues, as she knows it very well.
    We will ask Mercedes Mateo Diaz, an educational summers at the inter-American development bank leading and contributing to the design of education projects and Mercedes will touch on aspects, different skills and Mira Milosevic, from the media base for media development will talk about architecture and influence.
    As you can see, it is a very multidimensional discussion and I hope we can just dive right into it.
    Just a question of to streamline because we also hope that this is interesting to you and you have questions and comments.  So if you have questions to Panelists please use the Q&A function in the Zoom and also there is chat available if you have any other points to be made.
    I will be looking into both.  But just to make sure that none of the questions is being lost or none of the contributions to the actual topic of our conversation, it will be great if you can put it there and we can also answer there or live depending on what sort of question it is.
    So that is enough, more than enough for me.  I would like to ask Rob to start his presentation.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Wonderful.  Thank you, Anna.  Thank you, Jan.  How is my audio?  Is it okay?
    >> JAN GERLACH:  Audio is great.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Yeah?  Super.  I am going to share my screen and describe very quickly.
    Summarize a study I did with colleagues at the Berkman Klein Center studying how we thought Wikipedia English language would be doing in moderating harmful speech.  Jan did a great job of explaining the stakes here.  This is one of the biggest challenges in Internet space on one of the most important platforms that we are very fortunate to be able to look at this.
    What we did is we wanted to understand how moderation worked and we used two approaches to this.  One was interviews with editors on the platform.  The other was a quantitative analysis.  Our conclusions from this is that Wikipedia is doing fairly well in removing the majority of harm Ul r full content from the platform but it is doing better on the Articles than it is on the talk pages and user pages associated with the platform.  I'll describe how we came to that conclusion RFA we started out by trying to understand what harmful speech is, which is almost I am possibly complicated.  This was an attempt to try to simplify it as much as possible.  You can see that we failed in that.
    But it does highlight that we focused on three principal types of harmful speech in this study.  One was various forms of harassment.  Another one is identity-based attacks.  So attacks based upon, for example, race or ethnicity.  The other was physical threats or incitement to violence.
    This is, trying to summarize how Wikipedia works.  An Article is written.  Someone creates a revision to the Article.  If everyone is happy with it, you have an addition to the Article.
    Most of what I'm going to talk about is in this range.  There are two ways in which revisions to Articles occur.  One is by human editors look at it.  They say this is not a productive edit and they revert the edit.  It goes back to what it was before.
    Or there are various machine tools that do the same thing.  The one listed here, clue bot NG does revisions automatically.
    Wikipedia, of course, is very transparent.  So this Article is the same as the original, but there is also a history of the edit that was made and the revision to the edit that is available to the public.
    There are two other layers.  One is when this history includes content that administrators feel is so harmful or for example egregious that they remove that from public view.  So it is still there.  Administrators can see it, but the public is no longer able to see it.  There is an even higher level where the content is suppressed so that even administrators on the platform can't see it.  But we are interested in this area here, how do machines, the combination of humans and machines do in removing harmful content.
    To give you an idea of scale, if each one of these dots is a revision, the amount of things that are reverted is fairly small.  Just this area.  That area where things are reverted but removed from public view is even smaller.  That highest level of editing where it is suppressed all together is even smaller.
    So Wikipedia, huge, a lot going on there.  But as a portion of that content, ring versions are fairly small.
    We looked at a sample of 100,000 revisions to Wikipedia to see how many of them using the machine learning tool were identified as being harmful in those three categories I mentioned before.
    And there the proportions are pretty small.  So in an Article space it is less than one in a thousand are the machine tools that we used said this is harmful speech.  Ninety-two out of 100,000.
    >> Rob, I'm sorry, but you keep fading away.  We wonder whether you might be a bit closer to your mic or maybe you are covering it?  I am so sorry to interrupt you.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Thank you for the interruption.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Now, it is good.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  I'm afraid there is nothing I can do.  I can slow down, I guess.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  No, it's perfect.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Unfortunately, I'm having Internet issues today.  I don't know why.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  I see, I see.  It is fine.  Sometimes the volume is a bit lower.  That's why I deliberated to step in.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Thank you, thank you for that, Anna.  If you lose me again, please do say so.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  I'll wave.
    (Chuckles.)
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Perfect.  I'll keep an eye out for you.
    In the sample of Articles we looked at, a very small proportion had harmful speech associated with them.  And where it did exist, this harmful speech was removed in a minute or less.  So an Article space, the performance between the editors and the automatic machine tools was very, very good.
    We see that in the Article talk space or on the user places that the performance was not as fast in removing it.  There was a very small number of what the machine tools had identified that we used for the analysis as harmful speech that remained on the platform.
    But in general very effective.
    We also looked at who was doing these edits amongst the editors.  It is a very distributed process.  The vast majority of people who had reverted harmful speech only did it once.  So Wikipedia working as Wikipedia is meant to work.
    When we talk to editors about the same process, what they said lined up very well with what our quantitative analysis said.  First of all, the process was more effective on Articles than it was on talk spaces.  One of the principal reasons for that is that the machine learning tool does not operate on talk spaces.
    They also said that fewer editors were focusing on talk spaces than the Article space, which also makes sense.  The primary objective of Wikipedia is to get the Articles right.  So most of the attention is paid there.
    It was also harder to moderate the talk spaces than the Article spaces because the conversation about the content is an important part of Wikipedia and it is much, much harder to distinguish between what is acceptable from a community standpoint from what is acceptable from an Article point of view, which has a cleaner line.  Is it accurate?  Is it productive or not?
    A key part that the editors confirmed is that the policy and guidelines are not necessarily interpreted and enforced the same way across the platform.  This is more of a feature than a bug.  Wikipedia has a decentralized model, which is very different from the large platforms.  The editors themselves have a lot of latitude in deciding what is appropriate or not.  And hence, there is necessarily less consistency in how this is applied on the platform.  We understand that.
    An important part of the Wikipedia model, of course, is keeping the community itself alive and well and nurturing the community.  This is a principal challenge for Wikipedia.
    There was no consensus among the editors whether there was enough editors and administrators to keep the thing afloat.  Anyway, we know that from talking to people that that is an issue.  There are other challenges within Wikipedia.  So the homegeneity of the editor pool is one of the central ones.  It is a known problem.
    The editors that we interviewed also said that the automated tools are very helpful and complement and support their activities.
    Another thing that we did is we looked at how media covered content moderation across platforms as a measure of how well can Wikipedia is doing.  This is a tool we developed with MIT called media clued.  There is a lot more public attention on content moderation on the commercial platforms than there is on Wikipedia.  We see that as a sign of it working well on Wikipedia as well.
    So the conclusions from this is that English Wikipedia seems to be doing a pretty good job.  This shouldn't take away from the damage and abuse that Wikipedians are feeling.  Those that are experiencing harassment on the platform, this is not going to be very helpful to them.  They probably don't feel that Wikipedia is doing that well, if you are on the receiving end of abuse.
    Again on the Article space, this is much more effective than on the user space.  But to say that as a high level conclusion which we believe to be true, it kind of glosses over the intense burden that editors are playing in carrying out this process.
    There is room for a lot more research in this space.  So how is content removal and account suspensions, how do they influence the incidence of harmful speech?  In an ideal world we would have participants in the community that do not want to contribute harmful speech, and that those incentives to keep people from doing it in first place would be most important.  We did not have visibility into that.
    Another question is what does good performance mean?  To really understand that we would need to compare how Wikipedia is doing to other platforms or in fact to compare it against how people are doing in real life.  How is Wikipedia any better or worse than communities in real life space?
    Another question which we are not able to answer is:  What is the overall trend lines of things?  Are things getting better or worse on Wikipedia itself?
    So I will turn it back over to you, Anna.  I very much look forward to the conversation and thank you for giving me the time to present this very quickly.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Rob.  If you have been following the presentation, you may also want to check, there are some questions in the Q&A session.  One of them was answered.
    I am wondering if we can maybe quickly answer the second one, ask Rob or you?  So Fran is asking what is the scale of the problem?  How many items per month or year need to be addressed as harmful?
    If any of you would like to take this?  We can also do it in writing if that is preferable.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  I would tell you what I know and others will have to help me with the other parts.
    The data we have is that harmful speech occurs at a ratio of roughly one in a thousand incidences of a revision.  I don't remember what the overall level of revisions is on Wikipedia.  It is very, very large.
    So we have to keep two things in our mind.  One is as a proportion of activity it is very, very small.  And we can take that as a sign of optimism.  But given the overall size of Wikipedia, it ends up being a lot of material.  That's a sign for essence.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Rob, very much.  Now we can move to the next presentation, Marwa, if we can ask you?
    >> MARWA FATAFTA:  Sure.  Thank you so much, Anna.  Jan and also Rob and others for inviting me to to this discussion.
    So I will start with how I think we as a global organisation, access now, our mission is to defend and extend the digital rights of users across the globe.  This includes working to ensure that at risk individuals and groups do not become Vic vims of censorship or online abuse whether through government regulations and laws or whether through corporations, practices.
    So one key question we focus on is how can we protect freedom of expression in the era of online content moderation, especially since there is so much pressure on governments and private companies to address illegal content and all sorts of harmful content that mirrors the ills of our society, hate speech, harassment, incitement to violence.
    This information which is unfortunately as we have seen in many countries and in many contexts is often done in a rushed and poorly crafted manner.  And through our work in the MENA region and many other regions in Latin America and the U.S. and the EU, in Asia-Pacific and Africa and also through the work of our digital security help line, we know first hand being in contact or in direct contact with human rights defenders, journalists, activists and members of press, marginalized groups and minorities such as women and members of the LGBTQ community, how decisions related to content moderation and curation are what we called content governance can affect the fundamental rights of those groups.
    The central question is:  How can we write the fundamental rights of users at risk aged all users to the debate today and also to the wider discussion around content moderation?  I want to highlight that of course content moderation is a very complex issue and there are no shortcuts or silver bullet solutions to them.  But one important principle for us when we are discussing content moderation content governance how decisions are made about content moderation and curation online, they have a duty to consider human rights and in their policies and decision making.
    Under international law and the human rights law framework, governments are obliged or obligated to protect those rights and companies have the responsibility for respecting them.
    So we, to assess in this process we published a number of reports.  Most recently a report on content governance providing recommendations on the issue for law makers, regulators and company policymakers.  I will drop the link for those interested in reading the reports in the chat later once I'm done.
    Basically what we are trying, as I said, like to bring or provide oi human rights or Eurocentric discussion to this discussion.  The way we divide content governance into three main categories:  One is state regulation.  So those regulations that are enforced by governments through legislation.  The second is self-regulation exercised by platforms, by social media platforms and others via their terms of services and content moderation curation and third co-regulation which is undertaken by governments and platforms together through either mandatory or voluntary agreements.
    One example of that is the price church hotel eliminates terrorist and violent extremist content and another is the Internet Governance Forum for counter terrorism.  For today I wanted to look at the state regulation and how that plays also with the self-regulation when we look at one specific region, in the MENA region.
    So when it comes to state regulation of online content there are of course risks associated with the government exercising state power.  And unfortunately, that is not re-restricted also to the MENA region but across the globe that governments often react to societal phenomenons like harassment or hate speech or disinformation by rushing to enact legs vaition without A, having sufficient debate, without consulting with different stakeholder groups and especially with civil society organisations or even users who at the end of the day are affected by those laws and policies.
    Which, of course, opens the door to not only to government abuse or not being able to tackle the issues efficiently, but they also put users at risk including activists, political dissidents and journalists.  For example, with the flood of disinformation to and misinformation during the COVID-19 pandemic, many countries in the MENA region thought, okay, we can tackle the issue of disinformation online through enacting an anti-fake legislation in Tunisia and Morocco and Algeria where basically this information and disinformation is criminalised and they tried to tackle it with online platforms, a bit similar to the German legislation which provides a notice and take-down approach.  So we have like a window of 24 hours to respond to government requests to take down disinformation.
    Luckily, through working with other civil society organisations, we managed to drop the bill in Morocco and Tunisia specifically because they have opened the door Wyatt open for all sorts of human rights abuses and they really restrict freedom of expression without being, taking into consideration the three components or tests, so to speak, or criteria in international law under which you can restrict freedom of expression which is legality.  It must be prescribed by law.  It must be necessary.  And it must be proportionate.  Unfortunately, the penalties in these legislations to tackle disinformation are quite disproportionate.
    In other countries like Jordan, Palestine, for example, where the government response to the pandemic was heavily securitized through the security agencies or even the Army in the case of Jordan was the one responsible for ensuring lockdown and so on.  The same forges or agencies were responsible for tackling the issue of disinformation online.
    Any individual who is suspected or found of sharing misinformation which is not necessarily malicious or disinformation, these people are often, have been detained or handed jail sentences without any due process.
    Of course, that infringes on people's fundamental right, especially their right to freedom of expression and free association and Assembly online.
    Moving on to self-regulation which I mentioned earlier is how platforms define what is permissible or acceptable in terms of content on their platforms through their terms of services.  Often those terms of services or community standards or rules, they are done in a unilateral manner in many cases and they lack remedy, they lack transparency.  They are often opaque, automated and fail to align with international human rights principles.
    So even there has been so many discussions around content moderation and also to be fair a lot of progress being made on that front.  But we still don't know much about how companies, especially the giant companies, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, we don't know how they apply and froap their terms and services especially when it comes to automated decision making.
    Unlike the research findings that Rob shared with us that explain how exactly content moderation is being implemented, unfortunately we don't have the same access to understand how the content moderation policies are being implemented in these platforms.
    I want to really underscore how important to take into consideration thorough and nuanced understanding of regional or local social, cultural, political, linguistic and legal context which automated solutions implemented by the platforms fail to grasp in many numerous cases, resulting in false positives and also arbitrary and discriminatory decisions.
    I'll give you one specific example to this.  Earlier this summer in June 2020, we received a few reports of Tunisian users being banned from Facebook.  They wake up, try to log into their accounts, receive a notification that they are not eligible to use the platform.  Some of those users have reached out to us through our help line and we tried to collect as many incidents or cases in possible.
    We thought in the beginning, okay, is it a take-down under government pressure?  Is it related to certain words?  For example, again the results of automated decision making.  And those users, some of them were well-known activists, high followers on, a high number of followers on Facebook.  Others were just ordinary users with private accounts, 400 followers or so.  There wasn't really, we couldn't understand why those individuals or users were banned all of a sudden from the platforms.
    Noting that, aside from that one notification, they haven't received any transparency from Facebook regarding what they have done or what rules have they violated in order for them to be banned from the platform.
    So we reach out to Facebook together with other civil society organisations and Tunisia and other, Article 19 and EFF and so on, to understand what content moderation policies were in place, whether this has been the result of automated decision making and so on.
    Later on what we realised, of course, is that they were taken down because of Facebook cleaning up a sophisticated disinformation campaign done by a digital communications company in Tunisia called your reputation to influence the Presidential elections in Tunisia in 2019 as well as other elections across the African continent.  So they removed hundreds of accounts and what they called assets, event pages, and other public pages as part of this campaign.
    Unfortunately, those individuals that were flagged by the automation and, of course, consequently banned, when we reach out to those individuals they denied any connection with this European station company.  Unfortunately what we can see is that many individuals, some were artists, musicians.  One specific example, an artist who invested so much time and energy in building his art page on the platform, that was taken down.  Another person who has lost access to photos and information of a disease, also that was government.  We can see clearly that the automating of decision making coupled with improper notification to the users can be far reaching.  Not only to the freedom of expression but enjoyment of other rights, social, cultural, and economic rights as well.  Especially if you are dependent on these economic platforms for your living.
    Some of those accounts were restored with our help.  And the help of others Tunisian organisations.
    One take-away from that is that our, how are platforms made by this platform eroded trust in the platform.  The sentiment that we got, and actually a direct quote is that I can't trust to rebuild everything that I have done throughout the years, for example, with the artist, I can't invest again to open up an account.  I can't trust that I won't be collateral damage to some other automated decision making by this platform.
    And another take-away is the imbalance of power between users, average users and the platforms.  Some of the people have reached out to us as civil society organisations.  But I want to note there are many individuals out there who don't necessarily have access to remedy or have access to the platform.  They can contact them using whatever processes are made available on these platforms, but in many cases their calls are being ignored.
    And this is really, really harmful.  Not only on the individual levels you as a user but also on the collective level.  These decisions that are taken single handedly by the platforms, especially the giant big ones, they have a cumulative impact.  In a way they do decide who gets to be part of a public discussion and who is not.  And it does potentially in some cases violent voices of entire communities.  One example is, well, just around the same time we were dealing with the Tunisian case, we received reports of Syrian reports of accounts being suspended, accounts of human rights activists, those documenting war crimes by the Syrian regime, all of these accounts -- I believe the number back then was something like 6,000 accounts or so.  But again, we don't have a number.  We just know through our networks and through our help line team.
    The result of this again the suspension of account belonging in this case to the Syrian activists led to the -- there is a sentiment by activists not only in Syrian but echoed in many parts of the region that we don't trust the platform.  We feel we are abandoned, especially in a context where the government legislations are extremely repress I have or they are used to sensor and clamp down on political dissent and human rights activism.  Therefore, the only space where people feel we can be present to active and advocate for human rights is the social media platforms.
    And not understanding the machine, what is the process, what rules have they violated, this again erodes their trust in these platforms.  So we've seen, for example, hashtags like Facebook sensors the Syrian revolution, Facebook sensors Palestine.  Many communities, especially those owe proceeded and marginalized feel that they are being silenced by those big platforms.
    And so what can be done about it?  I mean, sharing these two examples, the main red flags that come out is one of transparency.  So we need to properly understand how and what is automated, automation or automated decision making processes are taking place.  How exactly these social media platforms apply their rules in terms of services.
    When they take a decision, they have a responsibility to notify also the users in order for the users to understand what violations have taken place and we able to address them.  When it comes to automation as well it is extremely important to have a human review mechanism.  So when you are suspended or your content is being taken down, it is important at least to have a person, a human being that understands your local, regional language, political and social context to review and verify whether indeed that content violates the community standards or not.
    Another thing that is important for us is the context.  Understanding context is very crucial, as highlighted.  Having this one size fits all approach doesn't work.  Of course, as always, the need and pressure on platforms to act quickly, especially when there are, there is incitement to violence, when there is terrorist content.  They often decide toll err on the side of over censorship rather than approach those automated decisions later on with a more elaborate Complaint mechanism, when there is a person, a human who can review and make decisions.
    And the last point that I want to mention before I hand back over to you, Anna, is we talked about transparency.  We talked about importance of context.  Actually for those social media platforms to invest in non-English language content.  I can't highlight this enough.  The last thing I want to mention is access to remedy.  So users need a mechanism in place where they can, when the machine errs, which is often the case, that they are able to provide further information.  For example, if that counters the decision made by the platform.  Also when their rights, their fundamental rights are being violated to have access to proper remedy.
    I will end here.  I'm happy to hear your questions and comments and I will drop the link in the chat link shortly.  Thank you.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thanks very much, Marwa, for your very interesting and multifaceted presentation.
    There are three questions in the Q&A for the practical reasons of time that we want to also have for other speakers, I will not read.  But if you also and other Panelists could take a look, maybe you can answer them in writing.  If not, we can take them on after we let everybody speak in the Q&A part.
    So it is of course important as you mentioned to also think of the content moderation as something that users take part in, even if not on a regular basis.  This is where we would like to ask Mercedes for more perspective, what is needed for that part to work.
    Specifically we are interested also in how the good content moderation can actually -- or can it increase trust on Internet, which I think is also an important notion here.  Mercedes, over to you.
    >> MERCEDES MATEO DIAZ:  Great, thank you, Anna, thank you, Jan, thank you Rob and Marwa for your incite.
    I would like to place the discussion about content medicine racial in the context of the skills of the user.  So the broader question here would be what kind of profile do you need to create good online communities and to improve collective intelligence?
    And I want to go back a second to the People versus machine idea.  We are seeing a profound transformation of our society, the economic model.  Anna, I do believe that talking about People versus machines is kind of a false dichotomy because we might not realise it but all the digital transformation is not really about technology, but about people and talent.  And sometimes we cannot, kind of tend to focus attention too much on the machine side instead of the human side.
    So the question here is beyond regulations and specific architectures, content moderation depends ultimately on users' behavior.  This is something that we can work on from a policy perspective if we educate students to become digital, civic, global citizens.  Let me, to illustrate this let me use two pieces of evidence recently published.  The first, let's move for a second to the world of video games.  I am going to take you all outside of this kind of conversation and move into another world, another space, video games.
    We see a lot of antisocial behavior.  I want to talk briefly about the results of a study done by a team of researchers of riot games, the company of the game league of allegiance.  Many of you know about it, it has about 67 million players.  The team of scientists have been able to gather a lot of behavior and data.  What they found is that 1 percent of players are trolls who do about 5 percent of all toxic behavior.  Right?
    But a majority of the toxic behavior, so about 95 percent comes from normal or average players having a bad day.  They also did some experiments and they found that the combination between banning abusive players and at the same time giving them immediate feedback improved the behavior of about 92 percent of toxic players.  This is quite significant.
    Also very important.  Toxic behavior drives people away from that platform.  So it makes other players to quit and never play again.
    And listen to this number because if you encounter a toxic player in your first game, you are 320 percent more likely to quit and never play it.  This is the first piece of evidence that I want to discuss to make my point.
    The second one is together with Rob's research that he just presented, there is also an early call by green stein, Goo andzoo recently published in har ward business about business review looking at ideology and the type of content that different contributors and online communities produce through different platforms.  They actually examine evidence from Wikipedia.
    They look at Articles about U.S. politics and analyze the factors, what are the factors that actually contribute to content moderation.  There are basely two main contributors, lower barriers to extreme contributors and moderation of those biased contributors who start producing less biased content.
    They find that one shift in the composition of participants accounts for about 80 to 90 percent of the moderation.
    B, that collective intelligence becomes more trustworthy when the mechanisms in place encourage confrontation between distinct viewpoints.
    And C, that, and this is a suggestion that the authors make, that eventually if platforms, the managers of platforms would let the most biased contributors leave the collective conversation, if they can be relies placed with more moderate views, eventually the content will be better or more balanced.
    So let me just recap for a second because summarizing the pieces from the two pieces, we seem to know that A, toxic behavior in online communities is not network necessarily about a few trolls but the behavior of average people.  That when you have had a bad experience it is very unlikely that you come back to that online community.  And that avoiding this kind of behavior is a combination of a stick and carrot, banning plus providing feedback.
    And it is the composition of the participants that explains the majority of the content moderation.  And this last point is critical to the message I'm trying to convey here because current content moderation seals to be for large part a result of people.
    So now what are the skills that users need to avoid bias and radical content and the anti-social and toxic strags and provide good content for all?  What are the skills that we need to try in an interconnected world and contribute to create good online communities and content?
    And of course, the other one is -- obvious one is media literacy, digital literacy with the emphasis on the aspects that have to do with citizenship, but also the skills like collaboration, empathy, creativity, ethics, global citizenship, self regulation and critical thinking.
    And about that one, about critical thinking, critical thinking enables people to have informed and kind of leading to that in some context, to having informed ethical engagement with information, with digital technologies and with media content.
    And as we are discussing here, people are not only consumers of content but producers of content and critical thinking in that context is key to support individuals to contribute with very respectful and ethical fror.  Going to Marwa's point that she was making before, even if you have an automated decision, if you place a human at the end to review the mechanism in the end of the process, you still need that person to make a critical judgment of whether or not they are going to suppress the content or the information is going to be continued or not.
    So that is an important point.  Empathy, ethics, as we said before, how to treat each other, how to respect each other and how to recognize and respect the difference is also another critical factor in the equation.
    So now the question is how are we doing?  From an education perspective, training people at these skills and to be actually, to be good digital and media citizens.  Let me just briefly refer to the last piece assessment done in 2010, just released the report on global competence.  The oakd and team tried to measure for the first time what they called competence tense.  It is a first attempt to measure things like respect of the difference, sensitivity to other viewpoints, student's ability to distinguish between right and wrong and do they understand and critically analyze intercultural and global issues.
    The findings from this study showed that fewer than one in ten students in oakd countries was able to distinguish between fact and opinion, and that was based on information they were provided regarding the content or the source of the information.
    So quite significant.  One in ten students in oakd countries able to distinguish between those two different things, when they were presented with the content and source of that content.
    They also looked at things related to wellbeing of 15-year-old students and social and emotional outcomes.  They find that across oakd countries, just about two in three students reported that they are satisfied with their lives.  About 6 percent reported always feeling sad.  And almost a quarter of the students reported being bullied at least a few times a month.
    And this is not irrelevant because remember that we said before that in video games, about 95 percent of bad behavior is explained by average people having a bad day.
    So overall, -- has not been particularly good at training us for these kind of things.  They show us what computers are good at, repetitive work, accumulation of data and compliance with instructions where we as humans are much better at and cannot be replaced by a machine when we interconnect things that have not been linked before.  We are neighed with situations that could -- faced with situations that could not be predicted.  We have to use and understand our emotions to solve a problem or when there is a need for new ideas, et cetera.
    So they are actually creating second class robots instead of first class humans.  In this context, the context of the conversation that we are having today, this is of critical importance.
    So just to conclude, I want to emphasize this idea that content moderation is the ultimate responsibility of the user.  It is clear that platforms have a responsibility to contribute to create good online communities.
    In that context, it is important that online platform systematically and apply a set of rules and make sure that the content is good and acceptable, just as Marwa and Rob were explaining before.
    But we shouldn't arrive to the point where it is the machine that defines the relationships between humans in a virtual space.  Beyond the algorithms, it should be the humans using these platforms that define through their behaviors its final content.  Thank you, Anna.  I'll let you now continue with the moderation and with the next speakers and Panelists.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Mercedes.  Super interesting.  I love the phrase about second class robots and first class citizens.  I think it sums up the situation quite well and also thinking of the new IO perspective, whether this strategy of the having lots of second class robots isn't written in the architecture of the Internet or maybe that's just as good as we can get.  I'm wondering about, very curious about your credibility bowings.  Please go ahead.
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  I'll just take a second.  Thank you, Anna, and thanks everyone for inviting me to present here today.
    It is really interesting and I agree with so many points raised by Robert and Marwa and Mercedes.  And I have a couple of points around very small percentage of toxic players.  That is really interesting, especially in identifying malicious players in online platforms.  That is something to take a look at.
    It is, this interesting distinction between fostering good online communities and user being responsible for content was also interesting.
    But to go quickly to my presentation, I am manager of global Forum for media development, a network of over 200 organisations in 70 countries that work on promotion of freedom of expression, juniorism support and media development.  So I will give a quick perspective on what has been happening, especially in this period while the world seems to be closed, but there is actually a lot happening.
    And the results of this interesting contradiction between the way that we are addressing both content moderation, especially harmful and illegal content, but in general framing how the content is moderated on our platforms.  And the approach from most governments and private companies has been countering harmful and illegal content.  And there have been a very little investment into supporting something that we would define as ethical, especially from the journalism perspective, trustworthy and credible content.  That quote from Claire warden,.
    (Wardle, if you can see, is one of my favorites.  It has been taken from Twitter from the beginning of this pandemic.
    And the system thinks that global Forum for media development and a lot of our members are trying to emphasize as a message every time we talk about issues in online digital space.
    We have launched last year the dynamic coalition of stappibility news and the news media and journalism.  This year has been the first year where we launched a report around the main issues facing the media and journalism in the digital space.
    You can find it on the GFMD's website.  I'll share it later.  Also on the page of dynamic coalition.
    There are a couple of cases, all the Articles there are inning but local case studies, one from the Balkans by a Balkan investigator reporting from BIRN and SHARE foundation and they give examples of when media content has been removed from the platform especially by algorithmic decision making.
    These are some of their conclusions and Marwa has also indicated some of these.
    And as you can see, there is an increase in, this is from their website.  There is an increase in activity in terms of content take-downs.  As you can see these are countries in the western, Balkans and also central Europe.  So Bosnia, Romania, Serbia, hers gov that and others.
    As we have heard, human rights activists and civil society activists and especially general media organisations are the most targeted in every aspect of digital rights attacks and briefs.
    The next I'll try not to change the page.  Yes.
    Next a local case study that we have presented in this report is from the group or member, RNW media from Netherlands.  They have created this fantastic network of civil society and journalism organisations that are promoting reproductive and sexual health and relationship literacy and knowledge building.
    Unfortunately, in different countries different ADD.s are being removed or not authorized by Facebook on the assumption that this is adult content and suspect, foreign content, et cetera.  Similar in the BIRN review, this content has been unjust -- was not justified that it should be removed.  And some of the ADD.s you can see here.  Some of them have been classified as sex publications and have been somebody classified as porn.
    If didn't make any difference that these organisations have their own various policies in terms of ethics and strict policies in terms of transparency, ownership of the pages, et cetera.  It doesn't make any difference.  That is one of the points that I want to draw attention to, that the profile of the actor unlike in the video games that Mercedes was mentioning, the actor, mission statement, Article, content standards and practices, are not taken into account when content is moderated on many platforms.
    One of our members, Article 19 has started the campaign and is inviting human rights activists, journalists, media, artists to report content take-downs and problems they have in digital spaces.  There are a couple of really lovely videos that I recommend you take a look at.  And as some of you have mentioned, our content creators are invests a lot of time, energy, resources and sometimes their accounts are just being taken down.  Their content is removed.  And in the case of journalism and media organisations sometimes investigative reporting stories take months to make.  Are very expensive and platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube are very important distribution or promotion channels for the journalism organisations.
    So if the content is taken down and then it takes ten days to reinstate it, this is damage to the story.  This is very visible damage for their sustainability, et cetera.
    So this is from the Article 19 page that I recommend you take a look at.
    For journalism organisations and media organisations we have several layers of issues with content moderation.  We have content moderation in terms of moderating a single Article, single unit of content.
    We have content curation question, what content is being promoted, what is being demoted, what content is able to be shared.
    Then we have content monetization in many countries around the world, even with millions of likes, shares, subscribers, YouTube, journalism organisations do not have monetization opportunities.  In other countries even when they have monetization opportunities, these are disadvantaged in comparison with some other content that is not serious, in that it doesn't offer in depth engagement.  This is a question of architecture that Anna has mentioned.
    And then finally, who are the users?  What is the profile of the actors that places the content online?  So journalism organisations for human rights activists, civil society, this is the most important issue because they have invested years in adopting and practicing very high level of standards when it comes to their content.  And in the digital space this is not recognised.  In content moderation, but it is not recognised in content monetization either.  Their sustainability is seriously undermined by their inability to monetize highly engaging content.
    How much time do I have?
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  I guess not much.
    (Laughter.)
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Since we are nearing the threshold of 20 minutes left for Q&A.  I also wanted to ask Rob to comment.  So thanks for asking.
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  Okay.  Just a few minutes on this part.  A lot of decision making in online space takes us back to the architecture actually and the business and economic model of digital spaces.  It is basically advertising what we call the programmatic advertising, but it is actually billions of realtime advertising auctions that are bringing, as you can see, hundreds of billions to major digital platforms for interactions of three to ten seconds.  This is what they are making money on.  This is what the architecture of the platform optimizes for.
    We are not seeing some very negative trends in the cans that Marwa has mentioned.  Digital rights activists, journalism, media, staff is being treated as terrorists in many cases for spreading what is sometimes defined as terrorism content.
    On the other hand, we have advertisers that are now shying away from serious journalistic content.  This is the latest brand safety floor adopted.  You can see the medium area is breaking news, military content.  Even when you are reporting on COVID you are not monetized.  This requires more time to explain but basically up to 70 percent of all revenues in advertising and digital architecture actually goes to so-called middle men, which in this case is Google.
    And this system actually priority ices and gives advantage to very low level engagement that is not serious political content.
    Finally, just a couple of recommendations that are in line with everything that we have heard today.  Just to add looking at business model and looking at economic side of the platform.  And looking not only at content moderation but actually where the market power balance, which Mercedes mentioned is and how the markets are structured.  And where is the opportunity for market regulation so that we have more competition, more options, more debundling, more access, is something that we also need to look at when it comes to content moderation practices.
    I hope I didn't go above my ten minutes.  Thank you.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  It is always -- thank you, Mira.  It is always difficult to look at time when all the points made are important and they really add to the context.  Thank you for caring, but we are good here.  We have more or less 20 minutes for Q&A.
    We also wanted to ask Rob, what do you think of this all from the perspective of the study you did?  But I suggest maybe first we go to questions so we make sure that the inspiration that people have and questions are not lost.
    And then we will ask you, if that's okay, Rob, at the end.
    We have three questions in the Q&A.  And one that Mercedes already said marked as one you would like to answer live.  So maybe we can start with you, Mercedes and go to the questions in the Q&A and one question that I will read that is in the chat.  So after you, Mercedes.
    >> MERCEDES MATEO DIAZ:  I think it was a mistake, Anna.  I was trying to say I want to tag the answer and actually type it.  But then I said live, but I think I already answered.  I sent a reference, I sent -- some people asked for the reference to the studies and Articles that I mentioned.  I already sent them.
    And they were also asking about how you can develop those skills and, well, it would be a long answer but basically the short version would be that we need to work on that from the education and training systems.  There is a full transformation and disruption of how we educate and train people throughout their lives in the context of today's digital economy knowledge economy, et cetera.
    And I think basically the answer is we need to rethink and revamp our education systems.  That would be the short one.
    I sent a link where they can actually find more references and information about how it can be done, what kind of programmes come included, how to read do the curriculum and structure and how to change many disrupters that are in the market doing these things, from the outside of the formal education and training systems and so on.  But there is a lot of information there.  Thanks, Anna.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thanks, Mercedes.  That's great.  Of course, we probably can focus in the short time that we have, but let's try to answer at least some.  If I may I will read a question we have in the chat.  So it is as follows:  Content govenance and the centralized content of local, what are some of the challenges involved concerning digital inclusion in regard to policy framework.  This question was posted during Mira's intervention, so I guess it is to you.  Of course, anybody who has anything to adhere is invited to contribute on this as well.  Please go ahead.
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  Sorry, Anna, I was looking at questions.  I didn't hear the last bit.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Of course.  So shall I read the question again?
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Yes, because I can't see it.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Yes, it is in the chat but okay:  Content governance and decentralized content as local, what are some of the challenges involved considering digital inclusion and cultural differences in relation to policy framework?
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  Yes, the model mentioned that.  Marwa mentioned that.  She said it can't be expressed enough.  Big challenge there that big companies and the digital platforms do not invest in markets where they don't see potential return.
    And so you have a lot of countries where they, of course, exist.  There are a lot of users and some of these countries base their discourse base and open discussions on some of these platforms.  Unfortunately when something happens and there is an issue, there is rarely a person that you can address.  And again as Marwa said, it goes through international organisations mostly.  So there is not a consistent address model, notice of content take-down, et cetera.  This needs to be taken into account.
    The other layer, of course, for evidence-based policymaking, cultural and national differences in legal systems of course need to be taken into account.
    While at the same time respecting international human rights norms and standards.
    So all these things need to be balanced carefully together with the understanding the nature and the principles of so-called malicious actors.  What we have at the moment is that platform des do not invest enough.  This is an expensive thing.  They do not invest enough because it is not at the moment in their business interest.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Mira.
    Does anybody want to add something on this topic or can we go to some other question?
    (There is no response.)
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  I think we're okay here.  Let me try to take them from the order when they were appearing.
    The first one was, how prevalent are newspaper bots that are data gatherers from news source s and do these bots collect for harm?  I think Marwa, it was during your presentation.  Of course, again, anybody who feels like answers, please go ahead.
    >> MARWA FATAFTA:  Yes, thank you.  I actually am not sure I would be able to answer this question.  I don't know if other speakers can contribute to it.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  So we are at the very beginning stages of understanding bots and how effective pro social bots can be in a digital age.
    Part of it is understanding how people are nudged in the right direction by things and people are doing interesting experiments with bots.
    But I don't think it is ultimately going to be a solution to governance issues on the Internet, but I think well developed bots can help a little bit on the margins.
    We will know a lot more in ten years.  Please come back.  Great question.  Thank you for bringing that up.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  I hope we will be in a better place in ten years, but we cannot really know.
    All right.  Thank you, Rob.
    So there is another question from early in our conversation which is:  In all assessments and decisions we make as to content moderation, be it by way of designing an algorithm or attended decisions, certain degree of arbitrariness is inevitable.  How do present content moderation processes by Facebook Google and others, deal with the constitution of the content moderation team board?  What is the extent of variety of how the team is constituted? What are the innovations being contemplated?
    What do we know about the processes that are not always apparent or not always explained and whether we can somehow reverse engineer the system to understand better how they work?
    Go ahead anyone.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  That's a hard question.  Really good question.  I'm hoping that Mercedes, Marwa and Mira would take this because they understand it so much better than I do but given the silence I'm jumping from.
    This model of content moderation is fundamentally limit the by this factor.  Until we can find more effective mechanisms for decentralizing these decisions so that they fully reflect the interests and desires of the people being moderated, that it is going to be imperfect fect and Facebook can try.  I know they have efforts underway to try to improve the diversity of their efforts, to try to bring in more regional voices in making these decisions.
    But to do this at the scale that they are attempting to do is always going to be unsatisfactory in my view.  That's one perspective on that.  It is more opinion than fact-based, but there it is.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Rob.
    I think we also have a question that somehow follows up on this topic.  It is a question about what specific architectural interventions on non-collaborative platforms like Facebook could be beneficial to give more of the responsibility to intervene and reduce the toxicness in the community?  What can Facebook learn from Wikipedia?
    Great question.  What can Facebook learn from Wikipedia?
    >> MARWA FATAFTA:  Irk answer this.  I think one take-away from the Wikipedia experience and also one of the conclusions of Rob's study is, of course, what is the price of having a decentralized approach that is context dependent versus being consistent and having to moderate content with speed and at scale?
    I think when I was trying to think reading the paper and thinking how would that apply to other bigger platforms like Facebook and YouTube and Twitter, I think -- one thing is that of course Wikipedia is different than those platforms in terms of the content and also the pressures that they receive by, for example, government, legal requests to take down incitement to violence and terrorist content, and so on.
    I'm not sure exactly how that decentralized approach can be applicable to those huge platforms.  So does that mean, for example, that we breakdown those big platforms?  So communities have more contribution or are able to credibility to content moderation policies and the implementation of those policies such as Wikipedia model?  I'm not sure.  Of course, that is a huge policy question looking at how these companies will be regulated in the future.
    And I also want to note here that just to keep in mind building on Mira's presentation and the business model of those companies, users do have a, let's say, responsibility to share content and to interact with other users in an ethical manner.  But let's not also forget that the platforms have a business model that basically builds and profits off of sensational content including harmful content and hate speech and harassment.
    So in that case, I would be very cautious in placing the responsibility on users themselves.  But I think that these platforms do have a responsibility to invest resources.  Let's not forget they are one of the most profitable companies in humanity's history.  And the user base of those U.S. companies are 90 percent of their user basis outside of the U.S.  So they are making money off people's data through advertising.  The business model allows for the spread of harassment, disinformation, and hate speech.  And again looking at how they tackle these issues, for example, in the U.S., when you look at Facebook and Twitter's response to the U.S. elections versus other elections around the world, I think that speaks volumes on how they are investing, where they are investing.  And basically the investment in their policies and making changes to those policies often follow economic interests and fear of being regulated or being legally liable.
    Which, of course, in many parts of the world that is not the case.
    So again, you know, how to strike that balance between putting the responsibility on users and users becoming effectively part of the content moderation policies and implementation versus what is exactly the role of those giant companies.
    It is a difficult question.  And of course, there are no short answers to it.  There are different approaches and different opinions on this issue.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Marwa.
    If I may make a comment to that also, I very much agree with you in the fact that it is a complex issue.
    Also we have a comment that was sent -- sorry, it was received in chat that kind of follows up on this.  The question is that the common excuse to be moderated, has a lot of money and not enough on safe, this includes also moderation.  So on one hand we have this.  On the other we have the question of if we provide in any way when the person is not free labour to someone who is already very wealthy which of course is issuing the difference of the world which also brings us to the question that was asked again to all Panelists:  How do we engage the stakeholders to build local content in diverse languages at the community level to enhance -- sorry, I lost it.
    To enhance ecosystems as a platform?  How do engage stakeholders to build content in diverse languages to enhance the ecosystem as a platform?  If anyone would want to take that?
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  If I may, if no one else wants to go ahead with that?
    There are a couple of issues.  Would be also refers to that question about architectural interventions on platforms like Facebook.
    Depending on the tradition of shaping regulating, the journalism information ecosystems, we have at the moment different policy discussions around the world.  So at one end in the U.S. we have this new report from the Congress about the kind of monopoly position of big platforms.
    In Europe you have traditional freedom expression and media, but also media pluralism is a very important segment in the media policy.  And that supports the notion that a citizen needs to have credible information, but not only from one source but also from sources in different languages.
    Then we have also Australia that is at the moment considering new pieces of regulation in relation to platforms.
    So just to get back to Europe, in Europe there is a tradition of supporting content in different languages.  And at the moment, unfortunately, quality content and information, especially in digital spaces, is not commercially viable.
    So there are a lot of different models.  So you have the public service broadcasting and public service media model that funds a lot of these content around the world.
    At the moment it is the largest sum of money in the marketplace, so to say, around 35 billion that funds a diverse languages and content in different languages in a community, small communities.
    Unfortunately, this depends on which country they are based in, whether there are the systems for subsidies from the states and whether these are just transapparent and fair allocation.  And the final, of course, their countries develop philanthropy that is funding this kind of content and membership and philanthropic support for this public interest content especially in different languages is growing in importance.  So this is something also worth looking at from the policy perspective.  And finally, I am not going to speak anymore, our sector also has a very little capacity to participate in all these discussions.  And we are fortunate enough to cooperate with organisations such as Wikimedia and access now to do things together.  So there was a question how we can help as individuals.  Join maybe ten or 12 different mailing lists that deal with freedom of expression and media freedom advocacy around the world.  There are not many of us.  And help in any way you can because we are facing a lot of policy and regulatory decision making over the next couple of years.  And all these voices here today need to be heard.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thanks so much, Mira.  Since we are nearing the end of our session I would like Rob to add his observations and comments after the discussion.  And then we will quickly wrap up and we can continue this conversation online afterwards.
    Go ahead, Rob.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Thank you, Anna.  And thank you, everyone, for the conversation.  I learned so much today from Mercedes and Marwa and Mira, listening to you.
    I have two thoughts.  One is, I think that we should continue to consider what we want the Internet to be.  It is not an easy question.
    When we talk about content moderation, we are asking:  What do we want the collective spaces online to be?  I like to separate it into two buckets.  One is implementation.  So once we understand how we want it to be, how effective are we at actually putting these measures into place?  How transparent are we?  That's hard, particularly at scale.  But I don't think it is the hardest problem.
    The harder problem is defining the standards by which we are going to interact with one another and deciding who is going to decide.  So we've inherited this system that evolved over time.  It is a mix of platforms, a little bit of government and a little bit of users.  But ultimately we need standards that we can live by that work both at scale and at community levels.  Who is going to do that?
    I think we see one model in Wikipedia which works pretty well for Wikipedia.  It takes a lot of energy and a lot of people's time.  There's a lot of pain that goes into that and there are thousands of hours of people's time that go into that.
    How you use that on a commercial platform, I don't see.  It is like night and day.  I can't remember who said it, but there's probably not a lot of people who are going to be volunteering their time to help Facebook make more money than they are making now.  I don't know how we go about that.
    But we could and should be thinking about what a nonprofit alternative would be.  And how would we make that happen?  Who would contribute to that?
    So one of the things I really took away from the conversation today is how much we need the energy and efforts of individual users to actually make that happen.  And if not that, then we are going to have to live with the Facebook and Twitters and Instagrams that we have and how they do that, how they make those rules.
    So I take Marwa's point that we need to be cautious in not turning over the responsibility to users and that there will be a sharing of responsibility between governments and users and maybe platform owners, but that is the challenge before us and it is clear more than before.  Thanks so much for the great session.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thanks, Rob.  Justus is our rapporteur and will prepare a report.  I think it will be vaib, right?  If you want to go back to the summary of the session.  So if you could share a few words to just sum up the session and we're done.
    >> JUSTIN:  Yes, thank you to all the participants, Panelists.  It has been interesting listening to your interventions.
    I wanted to highlight four very quick points.  Rob already provided some excellent comments related to the presentation.  I think I want to highlight four take-aways.
    A mix of technological and community-based approaches can be somewhat successful as shown by Wikipedia.  At the same time as Rob has just said, this might not be applicable to commercial platforms.  However, it is an interesting approach.  So we can definitely learn something from that.
    Second take-away.  There needs to be some sort of quality standards or content consideration.  I took that from Marwa's rest tailings and access now's report on content governance.  You know, we can't just let platforms fully decide on how to do it.  We need some sort of quality standards for that.
    The third take-away for me was we need to think about ways of how to source the skills that promote positive interactions on the Internet.  That point I took very much from Mercedes' presentation.  It has been very interesting, very interesting to see obviously how those preconditions for engaging in more civic way with one another influence our interactions on the web.  That is also interesting.
    Fourth point and that one I took from Mira's presentation is we need to consider the economic incentive structure.  We need to take a look at the business model and the way the advertising model prioritizes certain kinds of engagement and what effect this has on content, but also on content moderation.
    So yeah, with that being said I think I conclude and those were my take-aways from the presentations.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Justus.
    So here we are.  This is the end.  Thank you so much for joining us.  Thank you for all your questions.  We hope this was inspiring to you and we hope we can continue this conversation.  Right now that we are in the domesticated way of doing conferences.  My constant regret is that we cannot go outside and get a cup of coffee and continue.  Hopefully we will be able to do that in other settings, either online or hopefully not in too long offline.  Thank you all.  Thank you for IGF volunteers for helping us with this and have a good winter.  And hope to see you soon.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-6-ws342-people-vs-machines-collaborative-content-moderation^^

 
    >> JAN GERLACH:  All right.  I think, yes, we have a quorum.  Hello, Rob.  Wonderful to see you.
    Let's get this party started.
    Hello and good morning, afternoon, good evening, everyone.  Thanks for joining us at the Workshop Number 342:  People versus machines:  Collaborative content moderation.  
    Due to the virtual format you are probably not in the wrong room.  If you are, welcome anyway, please stay.  
    It is my pleasure to welcome you all.  My name is Jan Gerlach, a lead public policy manager at the Wikimedia Foundation.  I'm today joined by Anna Mazgal, Policy Advisor representing the European Wikimedia Communities in Brussels; and Justus Dreyling who leads Wikimedia Deutschland, the German Chapter of the Wikimedia movement.
    We will be joined by other speakers.
    In a nutshell today we aim to explore the complexity of the Internet content and to explore implications for trust in the Internet.  An easy task, right?  The longer version, of course, is that some Internet platforms deploy technology to automatically moderate information.  Others enable their users to participate in those moderation practices.
    We want to discuss the kind of support, architecture, norms, and other systems that will be needed for communities of Internet users to be able to engage in those content moderation efforts effectively and safely.
    Certain models of content moderation allow the users of the platform or a Forum to ensure the quality of content and enforce their social norms.  This means that community standards or rules in a collaborative manner can be enforced in a decentralized way.  This can be very effective.  Research on harmful content on Wikipedia, for instance, you'll hear shortly, has shown that content moderation by communities can work but also there are some aspects where platforms need to support them.
    Different kinds of communities, including from different regions and backgrounds, may apply different quality standards to information they want to see in the spaces where they meet online.  At the same time public policy such as intermediate I can't liability laws has a large impact on a platform's ability to hand over control to users.  This means to allow them to upload and moderate content in the first place.
    This workshop, this session explores this interplay of social, technical, and policy systems that enable a decentralized collaborative approach to content moderation.  In particular focus of the conversation will rely on harmful or potentially illegal content.  Misinformation, incitement to violence or terrorist content.  Many policy questions arise around all these issues.  The following questions seem especially pressing to me:
    From a trust and democracy perspective how can policy support participative content moderation that creates trust in platforms and in the Internet.  From a perspective of freedom of expression, vis-a-vis harmful content also, what kind of architectures promote people's ability to address disinformation, incitement to violence and other content that can harm society?
    From a perspective of safety, of user safety online, where do users need to be supported through tools to address harmful content without being harmed themselves?  I'm very excited about this conversation today and the perspectives that we'll hear from the various speakers.  
    With that I will hand over to my colleague Anna.  Thank you.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Jan.  Welcome, everyone.  I am also very excited about this session.  I feel that from this conversation there is so many things that can inspire us but also can provide practical responses or solutions to many problems that we witness on the Internet today.  But it is not up to our community only to solve this or to see those lessons.  Any occasion that can involve us in the conversation about in is great because we can collectively advance this thinking and collaboratively think about how to make Internet the better place and today to talk about in we invited four wonderful speakers.  I'm very excited to hear what they will tell us here because also they present very different perspectives coming from different background.  
    First we will ask Robert Faris who is a Senior Researcher at the Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy at Harvard University and affiliate of the Berkman Klein Center for Internet and Society, to present the research that he coauthored with other wonderful researchers exactly on the topic of collaborative content governance and moderation and the example of English Wikipedia.
    Then we will ask for contribution from Marwa Fatafta, an AccessNow policy manager for the Middle East and Northern Africa; and Advisory Board member of the Arab Center for the Advancement of Social Media and Policy analyst at Al Shabaka, the Palestinian policy network.  Marwa will talk about both AccessNow's work on the issue of content governance, as it is called, I believe, but also hopefully bring some perspective from the MENA region on those issues as she knows it very well.
    Then we will ask Mercedes Mateo Diaz who is the lead educational specialist at the Inter-American Development Bank, leading and contributing to the research design and execution of innovative education project.  And Mercedes will touch on aspects that concerns skills.
    And Mira Milosevic, Director of the Brussels-based Global Forum for Media Development, will talk about architecture and influence of it.
    As you can see, it is a very multidimensional discussion and I hope we can just dive right into it.
    Just a question of to streamline because we also hope that this is interesting to you and you have questions and comments.  So if you have questions to Panelists please use the Q&A function in the Zoom and also there is chat available if you have any other points to be made.
    I will be looking into both.  But just to make sure that none of the questions is being lost or none of the contributions to the actual topic of our conversation, it will be great if you can put it there and we can also answer there or live depending on what sort of question it is.
    So that is enough, more than enough for me.  I would like to ask Rob to start his presentation.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Wonderful.  Thank you, Anna.  Thank you, Jan.  How is my audio?  Is it okay?
    >> JAN GERLACH:  Audio is great.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Yeah?  Super.  I am going to share my screen and describe very quickly.
    Summarize a study I did with colleagues at the Berkman Klein Center studying how we thought Wikipedia English language would be doing in moderating harmful speech.  Jan did a great job of explaining the stakes here.  This is one of the biggest challenges in Internet space on one of the most important platforms that we are very fortunate to be able to look at this.
    What we did is we wanted to understand how moderation worked and we used two approaches to this.  One was interviews with editors on the platform.  The other was a quantitative analysis.  Our conclusions from this is that Wikipedia is doing fairly well in removing the majority of harmful content from the platform but it is doing better on the articles than it is on the talk pages and user pages associated with the platform.  I'll describe how we came to that conclusion. 
    We started out by trying to understand what harmful speech is, which is almost I am possibly complicated.  This was an attempt to try to simplify it as much as possible.  You can see that we failed in that.
    But it does highlight that we focused on three principal types of harmful speech in this study.  One was various forms of harassment.  Another one is identity-based attacks.  So attacks based upon, for example, race or ethnicity.  The other was physical threats or incitement to violence.
    This is, trying to summarize how Wikipedia works.  An article is written.  Someone creates a revision to the article.  If everyone is happy with it, you have an addition to the article.
    Most of what I'm going to talk about is in this range.  There are two ways in which revisions to articles occur.  One is by human editors look at it.  They say this is not a productive edit and they revert the edit.  It goes back to what it was before.
    Or there are various machine tools that do the same thing.  The one listed here, clue bot NG does revisions automatically.
    Wikipedia, of course, is very transparent.  So this article is the same as the original, but there is also a history of the edit that was made and the revision to the edit that is available to the public.
    There are two other layers.  One is when this history includes content that administrators feel is so harmful or for example egregious that they remove that from public view.  So it is still there.  Administrators can see it, but the public is no longer able to see it.  There is an even higher level where the content is suppressed so that even administrators on the platform can't see it.  But we are interested in this area here, how do machines, the combination of humans and machines do in removing harmful content.
    To give you an idea of scale, if each one of these dots is a revision, the amount of things that are reverted is fairly small.  Just this area.  That area where things are reverted but removed from public view is even smaller.  That highest level of editing where it is suppressed all together is even smaller.
    So Wikipedia, huge, a lot going on there.  But as a portion of that content, ring versions are fairly small.
    We looked at a sample of 100,000 revisions to Wikipedia to see how many of them using the machine learning tool were identified as being harmful in those three categories I mentioned before.
    And there the proportions are pretty small.  So in an article space it is less than one in a thousand are the machine tools that we used said this is harmful speech.  Ninety-two out of 100,000.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Rob, I'm sorry, but you keep fading away.  We wonder whether you might be a bit closer to your mic or maybe you are covering it?  I am so sorry to interrupt you.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Thank you for the interruption.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Now, it is good.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  I'm afraid there is nothing I can do.  I can slow down, I guess.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  No, it's perfect.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Unfortunately, I'm having Internet issues today.  I don't know why.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  I see, I see.  It is fine.  Sometimes the volume is a bit lower.  That's why I deliberated to step in.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Thank you, thank you for that, Anna.  If you lose me again, please do say so.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  I'll wave.
    (Chuckles.)
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Perfect.  I'll keep an eye out for you.
    In the sample of articles we looked at, a very small proportion had harmful speech associated with them.  And where it did exist, this harmful speech was removed in a minute or less.  So an article space, the performance between the editors and the automatic machine tools was very, very good.
    We see that in the article talk space or on the user places that the performance was not as fast in removing it.  There was a very small number of what the machine tools had identified that we used for the analysis as harmful speech that remained on the platform.
    But in general very effective.
    We also looked at who was doing these edits amongst the editors.  It is a very distributed process.  The vast majority of people who had reverted harmful speech only did it once.  So Wikipedia working as Wikipedia is meant to work.
    When we talk to editors about the same process, what they said lined up very well with what our quantitative analysis said.  First of all, the process was more effective on articles than it was on talk spaces.  One of the principal reasons for that is that the machine learning tool does not operate on talk spaces.
    They also said that fewer editors were focusing on talk spaces than the article space, which also makes sense.  The primary objective of Wikipedia is to get the articles right.  So most of the attention is paid there.
    It was also harder to moderate the talk spaces than the article spaces because the conversation about the content is an important part of Wikipedia and it is much, much harder to distinguish between what is acceptable from a community standpoint from what is acceptable from an article point of view, which has a cleaner line.  Is it accurate?  Is it productive or not?
    A key part that the editors confirmed is that the policy and guidelines are not necessarily interpreted and enforced the same way across the platform.  This is more of a feature than a bug.  Wikipedia has a decentralized model, which is very different from the large platforms.  The editors themselves have a lot of latitude in deciding what is appropriate or not.  And hence, there is necessarily less consistency in how this is applied on the platform.  We understand that.
    An important part of the Wikipedia model, of course, is keeping the community itself alive and well and nurturing the community.  This is a principal challenge for Wikipedia.
    There was no consensus among the editors whether there was enough editors and administrators to keep the thing afloat.  Anyway, we know that from talking to people that that is an issue.  There are other challenges within Wikipedia.  So the homogeneity of the editor pool is one of the central ones.  It is a known problem.
    The editors that we interviewed also said that the automated tools are very helpful and complement and support their activities.
    Another thing that we did is we looked at how media covered content moderation across platforms as a measure of how well can Wikipedia is doing.  This is a tool we developed with MIT called Media Clued.  There is a lot more public attention on content moderation on the commercial platforms than there is on Wikipedia.  We see that as a sign of it working well on Wikipedia as well.
    So the conclusions from this is that English Wikipedia seems to be doing a pretty good job.  This shouldn't take away from the damage and abuse that Wikipedians are feeling.  Those that are experiencing harassment on the platform, this is not going to be very helpful to them.  They probably don't feel that Wikipedia is doing that well, if you are on the receiving end of abuse.
    Again on the article space, this is much more effective than on the user space.  But to say that as a high level conclusion which we believe to be true, it kind of glosses over the intense burden that editors are playing in carrying out this process.
    There is room for a lot more research in this space.  So how is content removal and account suspensions, how do they influence the incidence of harmful speech?  In an ideal world we would have participants in the community that do not want to contribute harmful speech, and that those incentives to keep people from doing it in first place would be most important.  We did not have visibility into that.
    Another question is what does good performance mean?  To really understand that we would need to compare how Wikipedia is doing to other platforms or in fact to compare it against how people are doing in real life.  How is Wikipedia any better or worse than communities in real life space?
    Another question which we are not able to answer is:  What is the overall trend lines of things?  Are things getting better or worse on Wikipedia itself?
    So I will turn it back over to you, Anna.  I very much look forward to the conversation and thank you for giving me the time to present this very quickly.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Rob.  If you have been following the presentation, you may also want to check, there are some questions in the Q&A session.  One of them was answered.
    I am wondering if we can maybe quickly answer the second one, ask Rob or you?  So Fran is asking what is the scale of the problem?  How many items per month or year need to be addressed as harmful?
    If any of you would like to take this?  We can also do it in writing if that is preferable.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  I would tell you what I know and others will have to help me with the other parts.
    The data we have is that harmful speech occurs at a ratio of roughly one in a thousand incidences of a revision.  I don't remember what the overall level of revisions is on Wikipedia.  It is very, very large.
    So we have to keep two things in our mind.  One is as a proportion of activity it is very, very small.  And we can take that as a sign of optimism.  But given the overall size of Wikipedia, it ends up being a lot of material.  That's a sign for essence.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Rob, very much.  Now we can move to the next presentation, Marwa, if we can ask you?
    >> MARWA FATAFTA:  Sure.  Thank you so much, Anna.  Jan and also Rob and others for inviting me to to this discussion.
    So I will start with how I think we as a global organisation, AccessNow, our mission is to defend and extend the digital rights of users across the globe.  This includes working to ensure that at risk individuals and groups do not become victims of censorship or online abuse whether through government regulations and laws or whether through corporations, practices.
    So one key question we focus on is how can we protect freedom of expression in the era of online content moderation, especially since there is so much pressure on governments and private companies to address illegal content and all sorts of harmful content that mirrors the ills of our society, hate speech, harassment, incitement to violence.
    This information which is unfortunately as we have seen in many countries and in many contexts is often done in a rushed and poorly crafted manner.  And through our work in the MENA region and many other regions in Latin America and the U.S. and the EU, in Asia-Pacific and Africa and also through the work of our digital security help line, we know first hand being in contact or in direct contact with human rights defenders, journalists, activists and members of press, marginalized groups and minorities such as women and members of the LGBTQ community, how decisions related to content moderation and curation are what we called content governance can affect the fundamental rights of those groups.
    The central question is:  How can we write the fundamental rights of users at risk and all users to the debate today and also to the wider discussion around content moderation?  I want to highlight that of course content moderation is a very complex issue and there are no shortcuts or silver bullet solutions to them.  But one important principle for us when we are discussing content moderation content governance how decisions are made about content moderation and curation online, they have a duty to consider human rights and in their policies and decision making.
    Under international law and the human rights law framework, governments are obliged or obligated to protect those rights and companies have the responsibility for respecting them.
    So we, to assess in this process we published a number of reports.  Most recently a report on content governance providing recommendations on the issue for law makers, regulators and company policymakers.  I will drop the link for those interested in reading the reports in the chat later once I'm done.
    Basically what we are trying, as I said, we would like to bring or provide a human rights or Eurocentric focus to this discussion.  The way we divide content governance into three main categories:  One is state regulation.  So those regulations that are enforced by governments through legislation.  The second is self-regulation exercised by platforms, by social media platforms and others via their terms of services and content moderation curation and third co-regulation which is undertaken by governments and platforms together through either mandatory or voluntary agreements.
    One example of that is the price church hotel eliminates terrorist and violent extremist content and another is the Internet Governance Forum for counter terrorism.  For today I wanted to look at the state regulation and how that plays also with the self-regulation when we look at one specific region, in the MENA region.
    So when it comes to state regulation of online content there are of course risks associated with the government exercising state power.  And unfortunately, that is not re-restricted also to the MENA region but across the globe that governments often react to societal phenomenons like harassment or hate speech or disinformation by rushing to enact legislation without, A, having sufficient debate, without consulting with different stakeholder groups and especially with civil society organisations or even users who at the end of the day are affected by those laws and policies.
    Which, of course, opens the door to not only to government abuse or not being able to tackle the issues efficiently, but they also put users at risk including activists, political dissidents and journalists.  For example, with the flood of disinformation to and misinformation during the COVID-19 pandemic, many countries in the MENA region thought, okay, we can tackle the issue of disinformation online through enacting an anti-fake legislation in Tunisia and Morocco and Algeria where basically this information and disinformation is criminalised and they tried to tackle it with online platforms, a bit similar to the German legislation which provides a notice and take-down approach.  So we have like a window of 24 hours to respond to government requests to take down disinformation.
    Luckily, through working with other civil society organisations, we managed to drop the bill in Morocco and Tunisia specifically because they have opened the door wide open for all sorts of human rights abuses and they really restrict freedom of expression without being, taking into consideration the three components or tests, so to speak, or criteria in international law under which you can restrict freedom of expression which is legality.  It must be prescribed by law.  It must be necessary.  And it must be proportionate.  Unfortunately, the penalties in these legislations to tackle disinformation are quite disproportionate.
    In other countries like Jordan, Palestine, for example, where the government response to the pandemic was heavily securitized through the security agencies or even the Army in the case of Jordan was the one responsible for ensuring lockdown and so on.  The same organizations or agencies were responsible for tackling the issue of disinformation online.
    Any individual who is suspected or found of sharing misinformation which is not necessarily malicious or disinformation, these people are often, have been detained or handed jail sentences without any due process.
    Of course, that infringes on people's fundamental right, especially their right to freedom of expression and free association and Assembly online.
    Moving on to self-regulation which I mentioned earlier is how platforms define what is permissible or acceptable in terms of content on their platforms through their terms of services.  Often those terms of services or community standards or rules, they are done in a unilateral manner in many cases and they lack remedy, they lack transparency.  They are often opaque, automated and fail to align with international human rights principles.
    So even there has been so many discussions around content moderation and also to be fair a lot of progress being made on that front.  But we still don't know much about how companies, especially the giant companies, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, we don't know how they apply and enforce their terms of services, especially when it comes to automated decision making.
    Unlike the research findings that Rob shared with us that explain how exactly content moderation is being implemented, unfortunately we don't have the same access to understand how the content moderation policies are being implemented in these platforms.
    I want to really underscore how important to take into consideration thorough and nuanced understanding of regional or local social, cultural, political, linguistic and legal context which automated solutions implemented by the platforms fail to grasp in many numerous cases, resulting in false positives and also arbitrary and discriminatory decisions.
    I'll give you one specific example to this.  Earlier this summer in June 2020, we received a few reports of Tunisian users being banned from Facebook.  They wake up, try to log into their accounts, receive a notification that they are not eligible to use the platform.  Some of those users have reached out to us through our help line and we tried to collect as many incidents or cases in possible.
    We thought in the beginning, okay, is it a take-down under government pressure?  Is it related to certain words?  For example, again the results of automated decision making.  And those users, some of them were well-known activists, high followers on, a high number of followers on Facebook.  Others were just ordinary users with private accounts, 400 followers or so.  There wasn't really, we couldn't understand why those individuals or users were banned all of a sudden from the platforms.
    Noting that, aside from that one notification, they haven't received any transparency from Facebook regarding what they have done or what rules have they violated in order for them to be banned from the platform.
    So we reach out to Facebook together with other civil society organisations and Tunisia and other, Article 19 and EFF and so on, to understand what content moderation policies were in place, whether this has been the result of automated decision making and so on.
    Later on what we realised, of course, is that they were taken down because of Facebook cleaning up a sophisticated disinformation campaign done by a digital communications company in Tunisia called your reputation to influence the Presidential elections in Tunisia in 2019 as well as other elections across the African continent.  So they removed hundreds of accounts and what they called assets, event pages, and other public pages as part of this campaign.
    Unfortunately, those individuals that were flagged by the automation and, of course, consequently banned, when we reach out to those individuals they denied any connection with this European station company.  Unfortunately what we can see is that many individuals, some were artists, musicians.  One specific example, an artist who invested so much time and energy in building his art page on the platform, that was taken down.  Another person who has lost access to photos and information of a disease, also that was government.  We can see clearly that the automating of decision making coupled with improper notification to the users can be far reaching.  Not only to the freedom of expression but enjoyment of other rights, social, cultural, and economic rights as well.  Especially if you are dependent on these economic platforms for your living.
    Some of those accounts were restored with our help.  And the help of others Tunisian organisations.
    One take-away from that is that our, how are platforms made by this platform eroded trust in the platform.  The sentiment that we got, and actually a direct quote is that I can't trust to rebuild everything that I have done throughout the years, for example, with the artist, I can't invest again to open up an account.  I can't trust that I won't be collateral damage to some other automated decision making by this platform.
    And another take-away is the imbalance of power between users, average users and the platforms.  Some of the people have reached out to us as civil society organisations.  But I want to note there are many individuals out there who don't necessarily have access to remedy or have access to the platform.  They can contact them using whatever processes are made available on these platforms, but in many cases their calls are being ignored.
    And this is really, really harmful.  Not only on the individual levels you as a user but also on the collective level.  These decisions that are taken single-handedly by the platforms, especially the giant big ones, they have a cumulative impact.  In a way they do decide who gets to be part of a public discussion and who is not.  And it does potentially in some cases violent voices of entire communities.  One example is, well, just around the same time we were dealing with the Tunisian case, we received reports of Syrian reports of accounts being suspended, accounts of human rights activists, those documenting war crimes by the Syrian regime, all of these accounts -- I believe the number back then was something like 6,000 accounts or so.  But again, we don't have a number.  We just know through our networks and through our help line team.
    The result of this again the suspension of account belonging in this case to the Syrian activists led to the -- there is a sentiment by activists not only in Syrian but echoed in many parts of the region that we don't trust the platform.  We feel we are abandoned, especially in a context where the government legislations are extremely repress I have or they are used to censor and clamp down on political dissent and human rights activism.  Therefore, the only space where people feel we can be present to active and advocate for human rights is the social media platforms.
    And not understanding the machine, what is the process, what rules have they violated, this again erodes their trust in these platforms.  So we've seen, for example, hashtags like Facebook censors the Syrian revolution, Facebook censors Palestine.  Many communities, especially those oppressed and marginalized, feel that they are being silenced by those big platforms.
    And so what can be done about it?  I mean, sharing these two examples, the main red flags that come out is one of transparency.  So we need to properly understand how and what is automated, automation or automated decision making processes are taking place.  How exactly these social media platforms apply their rules in terms of services.
    When they take a decision, they have a responsibility to notify also the users in order for the users to understand what violations have taken place and we able to address them.  When it comes to automation as well it is extremely important to have a human review mechanism.  So when you are suspended or your content is being taken down, it is important at least to have a person, a human being that understands your local, regional language, political and social context to review and verify whether indeed that content violates the community standards or not.
    Another thing that is important for us is the context.  Understanding context is very crucial, as highlighted.  Having this one size fits all approach doesn't work.  Of course, as always, the need and pressure on platforms to act quickly, especially when there are, there is incitement to violence, when there is terrorist content.  They often decide to err on the side of over censorship rather than approach those automated decisions later on with a more elaborate Complaint mechanism, when there is a person, a human who can review and make decisions.
    And the last point that I want to mention before I hand back over to you, Anna, is we talked about transparency.  We talked about importance of context.  Actually for those social media platforms to invest in non-English language content.  I can't highlight this enough.  The last thing I want to mention is access to remedy.  So users need a mechanism in place where they can, when the machine errs, which is often the case, that they are able to provide further information.  For example, if that counters the decision made by the platform.  Also when their rights, their fundamental rights are being violated to have access to proper remedy.
    I will end here.  I'm happy to hear your questions and comments and I will drop the link in the chat link shortly.  Thank you.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thanks very much, Marwa, for your very interesting and multifaceted presentation.
    There are three questions in the Q&A for the practical reasons of time that we want to also have for other speakers, I will not read.  But if you also and other Panelists could take a look, maybe you can answer them in writing.  If not, we can take them on after we let everybody speak in the Q&A part.
    So it is of course important as you mentioned to also think of the content moderation as something that users take part in, even if not on a regular basis.  This is where we would like to ask Mercedes for more perspective, what is needed for that part to work.
    Specifically we are interested also in how the good content moderation can actually -- or can it increase trust on Internet, which I think is also an important notion here.  Mercedes, over to you.
    >> MERCEDES MATEO DIAZ:  Great, thank you, Anna, thank you, Jan, thank you Rob and Marwa for your insights.
    I would like to place the discussion about content moderation in the context of the skills of the user.  So the broader question here would be what kind of profile do you need to create good online communities and to improve collective intelligence?
    And I want to go back a second to the people versus machine idea.  We are seeing a profound transformation of our society, the economic model.  Anna, I do believe that talking about people versus machines is kind of a false dichotomy because we might not realise it but all the digital transformation is not really about technology, but about people and talent.  And sometimes we cannot, kind of tend to focus attention too much on the machine side instead of the human side.
    So the question here is beyond regulations and specific architectures, content moderation depends ultimately on users' behavior.  This is something that we can work on from a policy perspective if we educate students to become digital, civic, global citizens.  Let me, to illustrate this let me use two pieces of evidence recently published.  The first, let's move for a second to the world of video games.  I am going to take you all outside of this kind of conversation and move into another world, another space, video games.
    We see a lot of antisocial behavior.  I want to talk briefly about the results of a study done by a team of researchers of riot games, the company of the game league of allegiance.  Many of you know about it, it has about 67 million players.  The team of scientists have been able to gather a lot of behavior and data.  What they found is that 1 percent of players are trolls who do about 5 percent of all toxic behavior.  Right?
    But a majority of the toxic behavior, so about 95 percent comes from normal or average players having a bad day.  They also did some experiments and they found that the combination between banning abusive players and at the same time giving them immediate feedback improved the behavior of about 92 percent of toxic players.  This is quite significant.
    Also very important.  Toxic behavior drives people away from that platform.  So it makes other players to quit and never play again.
    And listen to this number because if you encounter a toxic player in your first game, you are 320 percent more likely to quit and never play it.  This is the first piece of evidence that I want to discuss to make my point.
    The second one is together with Rob's research that he just presented, there is also an early call by Greenstein, Gu and Zhu recently published in Harvard Business Review looking at ideology and the type of content that different contributors and online communities produce through different platforms.  They actually examine evidence from Wikipedia.
    They look at articles about U.S. politics and analyze the factors, what are the factors that actually contribute to content moderation.  There are basely two main contributors, lower barriers to extreme contributors and moderation of those biased contributors who start producing less biased content.
    They find that one shift in the composition of participants accounts for about 80 to 90 percent of the moderation.
    B, that collective intelligence becomes more trustworthy when the mechanisms in place encourage confrontation between distinct viewpoints.
    And C, that, and this is a suggestion that the authors make, that eventually if platforms, the managers of platforms would let the most biased contributors leave the collective conversation, if they can be relies placed with more moderate views, eventually the content will be better or more balanced.
    So let me just recap for a second because summarizing the pieces from the two pieces, we seem to know that A, toxic behavior in online communities is not network necessarily about a few trolls but the behavior of average people.  That when you have had a bad experience it is very unlikely that you come back to that online community.  And that avoiding this kind of behavior is a combination of a stick and carrot, banning plus providing feedback.
    And it is the composition of the participants that explains the majority of the content moderation.  And this last point is critical to the message I'm trying to convey here because current content moderation seals to be for large part a result of people.
    So now what are the skills that users need to avoid bias and radical content and the anti-social and toxic content and provide good content for all?  What are the skills that we need to try in an interconnected world and contribute to create good online communities and content?
    And of course, the other one is -- obvious one is media literacy, digital literacy with the emphasis on the aspects that have to do with citizenship, but also the skills like collaboration, empathy, creativity, ethics, global citizenship, self regulation and critical thinking.
    And about that one, about critical thinking, critical thinking enables people to have informed and kind of leading to that in some context, to having informed ethical engagement with information, with digital technologies and with media content.
    And as we are discussing here, people are not only consumers of content but producers of content and critical thinking in that context is key to support individuals to contribute with very respectful and ethical responses.  Going to Marwa's point that she was making before, even if you have an automated decision, if you place a human at the end to review the mechanism in the end of the process, you still need that person to make a critical judgment of whether or not they are going to suppress the content or the information is going to be continued or not.
    So that is an important point.  Empathy, ethics, as we said before, how to treat each other, how to respect each other and how to recognize and respect the difference is also another critical factor in the equation.
    So now the question is how are we doing?  From an education perspective, training people at these skills and to be actually, to be good digital and media citizens.  Let me just briefly refer to the last piece assessment done in 2010, just released the report on global competence.  The OECD team tried to measure for the first time what they called competence tense.  It is a first attempt to measure things like respect of the difference, sensitivity to other viewpoints, student's ability to distinguish between right and wrong and do they understand and critically analyze intercultural and global issues.
    The findings from this study showed that fewer than one in ten students in OECD countries was able to distinguish between fact and opinion, and that was based on information they were provided regarding the content or the source of the information.
    So quite significant.  One in ten students in OECD countries able to distinguish between those two different things, when they were presented with the content and source of that content.
    They also looked at things related to wellbeing of 15-year-old students and social and emotional outcomes.  They find that across OECD countries, just about two in three students reported that they are satisfied with their lives.  About 6 percent reported always feeling sad.  And almost a quarter of the students reported being bullied at least a few times a month.
    And this is not irrelevant because remember that we said before that in video games, about 95 percent of bad behavior is explained by average people having a bad day.
    So overall, -- has not been particularly good at training us for these kind of things.  They show us what computers are good at, repetitive work, accumulation of data and compliance with instructions where we as humans are much better at and cannot be replaced by a machine when we interconnect things that have not been linked before.  We are faced with situations that could not be predicted.  We have to use and understand our emotions to solve a problem or when there is a need for new ideas, et cetera.
    So they are actually creating second class robots instead of first class humans.  In this context, the context of the conversation that we are having today, this is of critical importance.
    So just to conclude, I want to emphasize this idea that content moderation is the ultimate responsibility of the user.  It is clear that platforms have a responsibility to contribute to create good online communities.
    In that context, it is important that online platform systematically and apply a set of rules and make sure that the content is good and acceptable, just as Marwa and Rob were explaining before.
    But we shouldn't arrive to the point where it is the machine that defines the relationships between humans in a virtual space.  Beyond the algorithms, it should be the humans using these platforms that define through their behaviors its final content.  Thank you, Anna.  I'll let you now continue with the moderation and with the next speakers and Panelists.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Mercedes.  Super interesting.  I love the phrase about second class robots and first class citizens.  I think it sums up the situation quite well and also thinking of the new IO perspective, whether this strategy of the having lots of second class robots isn't written in the architecture of the Internet or maybe that's just as good as we can get.  I'm wondering about, very curious about your contribution.  Please go ahead.
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  I'll just take a second.  Thank you, Anna, and thanks everyone for inviting me to present here today.
    It is really interesting and I agree with so many points raised by Robert and Marwa and Mercedes.  And I have a couple of points around very small percentage of toxic players.  That is really interesting, especially in identifying malicious players in online platforms.  That is something to take a look at.
    It is, this interesting distinction between fostering good online communities and user being responsible for content was also interesting.
    But to go quickly to my presentation, I am manager of global Forum for media development, a network of over 200 organisations in 70 countries that work on promotion of freedom of expression, journalism support and media development.  So I will give a quick perspective on what has been happening, especially in this period while the world seems to be closed, but there is actually a lot happening.
    And the results of this interesting contradiction between the way that we are addressing both content moderation, especially harmful and illegal content, but in general framing how the content is moderated on our platforms.  And the approach from most governments and private companies has been countering harmful and illegal content.  And there have been a very little investment into supporting something that we would define as ethical, especially from the journalism perspective, trustworthy and credible content.  That quote from Claire Wardle, if you can see, is one of my favorites.  It has been taken from Twitter from the beginning of this pandemic.
    And the system thinks that global Forum for media development and a lot of our members are trying to emphasize as a message every time we talk about issues in online digital space.
    We have launched last year the dynamic coalition of sustainability news and the news media and journalism.  This year has been the first year where we launched a report around the main issues facing the media and journalism in the digital space.
    You can find it on the GFMD's website.  I'll share it later.  Also on the page of dynamic coalition.
    There are a couple of cases, all the articles there are inning but local case studies, one from the Balkans by a Balkan investigator reporting from BIRN and SHARE Foundation and they give examples of when media content has been removed from the platform especially by algorithmic decision making.
    These are some of their conclusions and Marwa has also indicated some of these.
    And as you can see, there is an increase in, this is from their website.  There is an increase in activity in terms of content take-downs.  As you can see these are countries in the western Balkans and also central Europe.  So Bosnia, Romania, Serbia, Herzegovina and others.
    As we have heard, human rights activists and civil society activists and especially general media organisations are the most targeted in every aspect of digital rights attacks and briefs.
    The next I'll try not to change the page.  Yes.
    Next a local case study that we have presented in this report is from the group or member, RNW media from Netherlands.  They have created this fantastic network of civil society and journalism organisations that are promoting reproductive and sexual health and relationship literacy and knowledge building.
    Unfortunately, in different countries different ADD.s are being removed or not authorized by Facebook on the assumption that this is adult content and suspect, foreign content, et cetera.  Similar in the BIRN review, this content has been unjust -- was not justified that it should be removed.  And some of the ADD.s you can see here.  Some of them have been classified as sex publications and have been somebody classified as porn.
    If didn't make any difference that these organisations have their own various policies in terms of ethics and strict policies in terms of transparency, ownership of the pages, et cetera.  It doesn't make any difference.  That is one of the points that I want to draw attention to, that the profile of the actor unlike in the video games that Mercedes was mentioning, the actor, mission statement, article, content standards and practices, are not taken into account when content is moderated on many platforms.
    One of our members, Article 19 has started the campaign and is inviting human rights activists, journalists, media, artists to report content take-downs and problems they have in digital spaces.  There are a couple of really lovely videos that I recommend you take a look at.  And as some of you have mentioned, our content creators are invests a lot of time, energy, resources and sometimes their accounts are just being taken down.  Their content is removed.  And in the case of journalism and media organisations sometimes investigative reporting stories take months to make.  Are very expensive and platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube are very important distribution or promotion channels for the journalism organisations.
    So if the content is taken down and then it takes ten days to reinstate it, this is damage to the story.  This is very visible damage for their sustainability, et cetera.
    So this is from the Article 19 page that I recommend you take a look at.
    For journalism organisations and media organisations we have several layers of issues with content moderation.  We have content moderation in terms of moderating a single article, single unit of content.
    We have content curation question, what content is being promoted, what is being demoted, what content is able to be shared.
    Then we have content monetization in many countries around the world, even with millions of likes, shares, subscribers, YouTube, journalism organisations do not have monetization opportunities.  In other countries even when they have monetization opportunities, these are disadvantaged in comparison with some other content that is not serious, in that it doesn't offer in depth engagement.  This is a question of architecture that Anna has mentioned.
    And then finally, who are the users?  What is the profile of the actors that places the content online?  So journalism organisations for human rights activists, civil society, this is the most important issue because they have invested years in adopting and practicing very high level of standards when it comes to their content.  And in the digital space this is not recognised.  In content moderation, but it is not recognised in content monetization either.  Their sustainability is seriously undermined by their inability to monetize highly engaging content.
    How much time do I have?
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  I guess not much.
    (Laughter.)
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Since we are nearing the threshold of 20 minutes left for Q&A.  I also wanted to ask Rob to comment.  So thanks for asking.
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  Okay.  Just a few minutes on this part.  A lot of decision making in online space takes us back to the architecture actually and the business and economic model of digital spaces.  It is basically advertising what we call the programmatic advertising, but it is actually billions of realtime advertising auctions that are bringing, as you can see, hundreds of billions to major digital platforms for interactions of three to ten seconds.  This is what they are making money on.  This is what the architecture of the platform optimizes for.
    We are not seeing some very negative trends in the cans that Marwa has mentioned.  Digital rights activists, journalism, media, staff is being treated as terrorists in many cases for spreading what is sometimes defined as terrorism content.
    On the other hand, we have advertisers that are now shying away from serious journalistic content.  This is the latest brand safety floor adopted.  You can see the medium area is breaking news, military content.  Even when you are reporting on COVID you are not monetized.  This requires more time to explain but basically up to 70 percent of all revenues in advertising and digital architecture actually goes to so-called middle men, which in this case is Google.
    And this system actually priority ices and gives advantage to very low level engagement that is not serious political content.
    Finally, just a couple of recommendations that are in line with everything that we have heard today.  Just to add looking at business model and looking at economic side of the platform.  And looking not only at content moderation but actually where the market power balance, which Mercedes mentioned is and how the markets are structured.  And where is the opportunity for market regulation so that we have more competition, more options, more debundling, more access, is something that we also need to look at when it comes to content moderation practices.
    I hope I didn't go above my ten minutes.  Thank you.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  It is always -- thank you, Mira.  It is always difficult to look at time when all the points made are important and they really add to the context.  Thank you for caring, but we are good here.  We have more or less 20 minutes for Q&A.
    We also wanted to ask Rob, what do you think of this all from the perspective of the study you did?  But I suggest maybe first we go to questions so we make sure that the inspiration that people have and questions are not lost.
    And then we will ask you, if that's okay, Rob, at the end.
    We have three questions in the Q&A.  And one that Mercedes already said marked as one you would like to answer live.  So maybe we can start with you, Mercedes and go to the questions in the Q&A and one question that I will read that is in the chat.  So after you, Mercedes.
    >> MERCEDES MATEO DIAZ:  I think it was a mistake, Anna.  I was trying to say I want to tag the answer and actually type it.  But then I said live, but I think I already answered.  I sent a reference, I sent -- some people asked for the reference to the studies and articles that I mentioned.  I already sent them.
    And they were also asking about how you can develop those skills and, well, it would be a long answer but basically the short version would be that we need to work on that from the education and training systems.  There is a full transformation and disruption of how we educate and train people throughout their lives in the context of today's digital economy knowledge economy, et cetera.
    And I think basically the answer is we need to rethink and revamp our education systems.  That would be the short one.
    I sent a link where they can actually find more references and information about how it can be done, what kind of programmes come included, how to read do the curriculum and structure and how to change many disrupters that are in the market doing these things, from the outside of the formal education and training systems and so on.  But there is a lot of information there.  Thanks, Anna.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thanks, Mercedes.  That's great.  Of course, we probably can focus in the short time that we have, but let's try to answer at least some.  If I may I will read a question we have in the chat.  So it is as follows:  Content governance and decentralized content as local, what are some of the challenges involved considering digital inclusion and cultural differences in relation to policy framework?
    This question was posted during Mira's intervention, so I guess it is to you.  Of course, anybody who has anything to adhere is invited to contribute on this as well.  Please go ahead.
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  Sorry, Anna, I was looking at questions.  I didn't hear the last bit.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Of course.  So shall I read the question again?
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  Yes, because I can't see it.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Yes, it is in the chat but okay:  Content governance and decentralized content as local, what are some of the challenges involved considering digital inclusion and cultural differences in relation to policy framework?
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  Yes, the model mentioned that.  Marwa mentioned that.  She said it can't be expressed enough.  Big challenge there that big companies and the digital platforms do not invest in markets where they don't see potential return.
    And so you have a lot of countries where they, of course, exist.  There are a lot of users and some of these countries base their discourse base and open discussions on some of these platforms.  Unfortunately when something happens and there is an issue, there is rarely a person that you can address.  And again as Marwa said, it goes through international organisations mostly.  So there is not a consistent address model, notice of content take-down, et cetera.  This needs to be taken into account.
    The other layer, of course, for evidence-based policymaking, cultural and national differences in legal systems of course need to be taken into account.
    While at the same time respecting international human rights norms and standards.
    So all these things need to be balanced carefully together with the understanding the nature and the principles of so-called malicious actors.  What we have at the moment is that platforms do not invest enough.  This is an expensive thing.  They do not invest enough because it is not at the moment in their business interest.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Mira.
    Does anybody want to add something on this topic or can we go to some other question?
    (There is no response.)
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  I think we're okay here.  Let me try to take them from the order when they were appearing.
    The first one was, how prevalent are newspaper bots that are data gatherers from news sources and do these bots collect for harm?  I think Marwa, it was during your presentation.  Of course, again, anybody who feels like answers, please go ahead.
    >> MARWA FATAFTA:  Yes, thank you.  I actually am not sure I would be able to answer this question.  I don't know if other speakers can contribute to it.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  So we are at the very beginning stages of understanding bots and how effective pro social bots can be in a digital age.
    Part of it is understanding how people are nudged in the right direction by things and people are doing interesting experiments with bots.
    But I don't think it is ultimately going to be a solution to governance issues on the Internet, but I think well developed bots can help a little bit on the margins.
    We will know a lot more in ten years.  Please come back.  Great question.  Thank you for bringing that up.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  I hope we will be in a better place in ten years, but we cannot really know.
    All right.  Thank you, Rob.
    So there is another question from early in our conversation which is:  In all assessments and decisions we make as to content moderation, be it by way of designing an algorithm or attended decisions, certain degree of arbitrariness is inevitable.  How do present content moderation processes by Facebook Google and others, deal with the constitution of the content moderation team board?  What is the extent of variety of how the team is constituted?  What are the innovations being contemplated?
    What do we know about the processes that are not always apparent or not always explained and whether we can somehow reverse engineer the system to understand better how they work?
    Go ahead anyone.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  That's a hard question.  Really good question.  I'm hoping that Mercedes, Marwa and Mira would take this because they understand it so much better than I do but given the silence I'm jumping from.
    This model of content moderation is fundamentally limit the by this factor.  Until we can find more effective mechanisms for decentralizing these decisions so that they fully reflect the interests and desires of the people being moderated, that it is going to be imperfect and Facebook can try.  I know they have efforts underway to try to improve the diversity of their efforts, to try to bring in more regional voices in making these decisions.
    But to do this at the scale that they are attempting to do is always going to be unsatisfactory in my view.  That's one perspective on that.  It is more opinion than fact-based, but there it is.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Rob.
    I think we also have a question that somehow follows up on this topic.  It is a question about what specific architectural interventions on non-collaborative platforms like Facebook could be beneficial to give more of the responsibility to intervene and reduce the toxicness in the community?  What can Facebook learn from Wikipedia?
    Great question.  What can Facebook learn from Wikipedia?
    >> MARWA FATAFTA:  I can answer this.  I think one take-away from the Wikipedia experience and also one of the conclusions of Rob's study is, of course, what is the price of having a decentralized approach that is context dependent versus being consistent and having to moderate content with speed and at scale?
    I think when I was trying to think reading the paper and thinking how would that apply to other bigger platforms like Facebook and YouTube and Twitter, I think -- one thing is that of course Wikipedia is different than those platforms in terms of the content and also the pressures that they receive by, for example, government, legal requests to take down incitement to violence and terrorist content, and so on.
    I'm not sure exactly how that decentralized approach can be applicable to those huge platforms.  So does that mean, for example, that we breakdown those big platforms?  So communities have more contribution or are able to credibility to content moderation policies and the implementation of those policies such as Wikipedia model?  I'm not sure.  Of course, that is a huge policy question looking at how these companies will be regulated in the future.
    And I also want to note here that just to keep in mind building on Mira's presentation and the business model of those companies, users do have a, let's say, responsibility to share content and to interact with other users in an ethical manner.  But let's not also forget that the platforms have a business model that basically builds and profits off of sensational content including harmful content and hate speech and harassment.
    So in that case, I would be very cautious in placing the responsibility on users themselves.  But I think that these platforms do have a responsibility to invest resources.  Let's not forget they are one of the most profitable companies in humanity's history.  And the user base of those U.S. companies are 90 percent of their user basis outside of the U.S.  So they are making money off people's data through advertising.  The business model allows for the spread of harassment, disinformation, and hate speech.  And again looking at how they tackle these issues, for example, in the U.S., when you look at Facebook and Twitter's response to the U.S. elections versus other elections around the world, I think that speaks volumes on how they are investing, where they are investing.  And basically the investment in their policies and making changes to those policies often follow economic interests and fear of being regulated or being legally liable.
    Which, of course, in many parts of the world that is not the case.
    So again, you know, how to strike that balance between putting the responsibility on users and users becoming effectively part of the content moderation policies and implementation versus what is exactly the role of those giant companies.
    It is a difficult question.  And of course, there are no short answers to it.  There are different approaches and different opinions on this issue.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Marwa.
    If I may make a comment to that also, I very much agree with you in the fact that it is a complex issue.
    Also we have a comment that was sent -- sorry, it was received in chat that kind of follows up on this.  The question is that the common excuse to be moderated, has a lot of money and not enough on safe, this includes also moderation.  So on one hand we have this.  On the other we have the question of if we provide in any way when the person is not free labour to someone who is already very wealthy which of course is issuing the difference of the world which also brings us to the question that was asked again to all Panelists:  How do we engage the stakeholders to build local content in diverse languages at the community level to enhance -- sorry, I lost it.
    To enhance ecosystems as a platform?  How do engage stakeholders to build content in diverse languages to enhance the ecosystem as a platform?  If anyone would want to take that?
    >> MIRA MILOSEVIC:  If I may, if no one else wants to go ahead with that?
    There are a couple of issues.  Would be also refers to that question about architectural interventions on platforms like Facebook.
    Depending on the tradition of shaping regulating, the journalism information ecosystems, we have at the moment different policy discussions around the world.  So at one end in the U.S. we have this new report from the Congress about the kind of monopoly position of big platforms.
    In Europe you have traditional freedom expression and media, but also media pluralism is a very important segment in the media policy.  And that supports the notion that a citizen needs to have credible information, but not only from one source but also from sources in different languages.
    Then we have also Australia that is at the moment considering new pieces of regulation in relation to platforms.
    So just to get back to Europe, in Europe there is a tradition of supporting content in different languages.  And at the moment, unfortunately, quality content and information, especially in digital spaces, is not commercially viable.
    So there are a lot of different models.  So you have the public service broadcasting and public service media model that funds a lot of these content around the world.
    At the moment it is the largest sum of money in the marketplace, so to say, around 35 billion that funds a diverse languages and content in different languages in a community, small communities.
    Unfortunately, this depends on which country they are based in, whether there are the systems for subsidies from the states and whether these are just transparent and fair allocation.  And the final, of course, their countries develop philanthropy that is funding this kind of content and membership and philanthropic support for this public interest content especially in different languages is growing in importance.  So this is something also worth looking at from the policy perspective.  
    And finally, I am not going to speak anymore, our sector also has a very little capacity to participate in all these discussions.  And we are fortunate enough to cooperate with organisations such as Wikimedia and AccessNow to do things together.  So there was a question how we can help as individuals.  Join maybe ten or 12 different mailing lists that deal with freedom of expression and media freedom advocacy around the world.  There are not many of us.  And help in any way you can because we are facing a lot of policy and regulatory decision making over the next couple of years.  And all these voices here today need to be heard.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thanks so much, Mira.  Since we are nearing the end of our session I would like Rob to add his observations and comments after the discussion.  And then we will quickly wrap up and we can continue this conversation online afterwards.
    Go ahead, Rob.
    >> ROBERT FARIS:  Thank you, Anna.  And thank you, everyone, for the conversation.  I learned so much today from Mercedes and Marwa and Mira, listening to you.
    I have two thoughts.  One is, I think that we should continue to consider what we want the Internet to be.  It is not an easy question.
    When we talk about content moderation, we are asking:  What do we want the collective spaces online to be?  I like to separate it into two buckets.  One is implementation.  So once we understand how we want it to be, how effective are we at actually putting these measures into place?  How transparent are we?  That's hard, particularly at scale.  But I don't think it is the hardest problem.
    The harder problem is defining the standards by which we are going to interact with one another and deciding who is going to decide.  So we've inherited this system that evolved over time.  It is a mix of platforms, a little bit of government and a little bit of users.  But ultimately we need standards that we can live by that work both at scale and at community levels.  Who is going to do that?
    I think we see one model in Wikipedia which works pretty well for Wikipedia.  It takes a lot of energy and a lot of people's time.  There's a lot of pain that goes into that and there are thousands of hours of people's time that go into that.
    How you use that on a commercial platform, I don't see.  It is like night and day.  I can't remember who said it, but there's probably not a lot of people who are going to be volunteering their time to help Facebook make more money than they are making now.  I don't know how we go about that.
    But we could and should be thinking about what a nonprofit alternative would be.  And how would we make that happen?  Who would contribute to that?
    So one of the things I really took away from the conversation today is how much we need the energy and efforts of individual users to actually make that happen.  And if not that, then we are going to have to live with the Facebook and Twitters and Instagrams that we have and how they do that, how they make those rules.
    So I take Marwa's point that we need to be cautious in not turning over the responsibility to users and that there will be a sharing of responsibility between governments and users and maybe platform owners, but that is the challenge before us and it is clear more than before.  Thanks so much for the great session.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thanks, Rob.  Justus is our rapporteur and will prepare a report.  I think it will be available, right?  If you want to go back to the summary of the session.  So if you could share a few words to just sum up the session and we're done.
    >> JUSTUS DREYLING:  Yes, thank you to all the participants, Panelists.  It has been interesting listening to your interventions.
    I wanted to highlight four very quick points.  Rob already provided some excellent comments related to the presentation.  I think I want to highlight four take-aways.
    A mix of technological and community-based approaches can be somewhat successful as shown by Wikipedia.  At the same time as Rob has just said, this might not be applicable to commercial platforms.  However, it is an interesting approach.  So we can definitely learn something from that.
    Second take-away.  There needs to be some sort of quality standards or content consideration.  I took that from Marwa's rest tailings and AccessNow's report on content governance.  You know, we can't just let platforms fully decide on how to do it.  We need some sort of quality standards for that.
    The third take-away for me was we need to think about ways of how to source the skills that promote positive interactions on the Internet.  That point I took very much from Mercedes' presentation.  It has been very interesting, very interesting to see obviously how those preconditions for engaging in more civic way with one another influence our interactions on the web.  That is also interesting.
    Fourth point and that one I took from Mira's presentation is we need to consider the economic incentive structure.  We need to take a look at the business model and the way the advertising model prioritizes certain kinds of engagement and what effect this has on content, but also on content moderation.
    So yeah, with that being said I think I conclude and those were my take-aways from the presentations.
    >> ANNA MAZGAL:  Thank you, Justus.
    So here we are.  This is the end.  Thank you so much for joining us.  Thank you for all your questions.  We hope this was inspiring to you and we hope we can continue this conversation.  Right now that we are in the domesticated way of doing conferences.  My constant regret is that we cannot go outside and get a cup of coffee and continue.  Hopefully we will be able to do that in other settings, either online or hopefully not in too long offline.  Thank you all.  Thank you for IGF volunteers for helping us with this and have a good winter.  And hope to see you soon.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-6-ws317-dns-abuse-in-the-age-of-covid-19-lessons-learned^^

     >> MODERATOR: We are on time.  Good morning and good afternoon, good evening, everyone joining this session.  All of the panelists are already here, and we will start on time, I guess, in about two minutes so.
     We'll wait for the go from the IGF host.
     >> MODERATOR: Good morning, everyone.  Nobody is speaking for now, so we are just getting ready to start the session today.
     Welcome, everyone.  And good morning, good afternoon, good evening, depending on where you are joining this session from.
     So this is Section 317, organized and coordinated by ICANN on the DNS abuse during the COVID-19 era.  This is going to be a panel.  And we'll be joining the panel by our colleague from iThreat, Jeff Bedser.  Ashley Heineman, who is the Director of Global Policy at GoDaddy.  And John Crain, the Chief Security and Resiliency Officer at ICANN.  And Merike Kaeo who is the DNS Security Facilitate, initiative by ICANN.  She will be talking about DSFI and the technical study group that was put in place.
     As some of you may remember, a few days ago, we had a session which is the pre-event 47 where we talk about observation related to DNS abuse during the COVID-19 era, what we have observed and so on.  So this session will particularly focus on the lesson learned and what is being suggested going forward in this session.  Before I give the floor to the panelists, I will just remind the participants that we have a Q&A pod.  If you have questions, feel free to write that down in the Q&A pod.
     But if you prefer to speak out your question, just raise your hand or let the host know by putting it in the chat and you will be unmuted and be able to ask your question.
     On that note, I will give the floor to Jeff.  Jeff, share a little bit with us on what has been observed from this period.  Jeff?
     >> JEFF BEDSER: Thank you.  Is someone going to be starting the PowerPoint presentation?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes. 
     >> JEFF BEDSER: Because I'll acknowledge it is the early morning hours on the east coast of the United States and without the slide deck, I will have a difficult time following my own presentation.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  I am trying to share from here  because --
     >> JEFF BEDSER: There we are.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.
     >> JEFF BEDSER: Thank you.  So thank you all for joining us this morning, this afternoon, this evening, this day.  Appreciate you taking the time to listen to this talk about DNS abuse.
     What I will be talking about is basically the realities of DNS abuse and as I put in quotes here, it is not about the volume.
     So next slide, please.  So you know, what is DNS abuse?  DNS abuse is measurable.  You can quantify it.  You can look up sums and quantities.  It is detectable at multiple stages when it is created and thus when it is launched and used.  It can be addressed and it can be reduced.
     And I do mean addressed in the form of resolving or dealing with it.  The problem is we use the term address and resolve differently in the technical community.  I don't mean it in a technical sense.  It is not something that can be eradicated.  I don't think there will be an end to DNS abuse soon.  It needs constant attention and focus to keep in check and one of the most persistent topics over the DNS communities in the last two years, that is certain.  Next slide, please.
     So how is it measurable?  Well, you can measure it through questionable registration.
     You can measure it by phishing attempts and malware distributed by the DNS and the number of bot net domains and by the amount of spam and cyber squatting and typo attacks and child exploitation and human trafficking.  These are groups out there tracking and measuring this and the accounts and domains associated.  Next slide, please.
     So how is it detectable?  Well, commercial entities that detect and report domain abuse and IP abuse for block list abusers such Spamhaus or Surbi or Abusix, they are not-for-profit services but they provide names.  Keeping your e-mail inbox clear of abuse.  So they have a particular measurement which is they try and detect it to stop it from getting to your mailbox.  There are commercial entities that detect and report abuse for the defensive systems and companies.  Sometimes against phishing attacks.  They exist to help their clients protect their networks and thus they have lists of domains detected for those purposes.  Academic institutions and some NGOs and governments and CERTs.  All involved in some form of doing research on detecting patterns and use of the DNS for abuse.  
Passive DNS providers.  Passive DNS providers are constantly tracking the data and logging the data of outbound DNS requests. And you can use that to determine if the domain has been used for a particular purpose or has a particular format that might include a name or a term. And then there is the infrastructure reputation where the pattern of the abuse such as the name of a bank but with a certain letter switched out or a number switched out are bluntly the infrastructure reputation.  IP addresses or name severs that are used -- servers used by those that perpetuate abuse on a regular basis and look at the reputation of the underlying infrastructure.
     Let's talk in the context of COVID-19 and what happened.  Egret provides registry to Donuts in regards to volumes and sources of abuse for the system to try and resolve the abuse in the Donuts Tlds.  This is the data in January to February, March to April, May to June and June to July.  There a is massive spike at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic when basically the businesses shut down and the countries shut their borders.  There was a large spike of registrations of domains that had both the term corona and COVID, and you can see where corona had the lead because it was the bigger term. At the end of the day, the volume tracked down after the initial spike.  Next slide, please.  
For Donut statistics breakdown, there were 4900 roughly reports by clean DNS.  There were zero reports sourced via abuse e-mails and forms.  The formal process through two Donuts, none came in that way and no reports from law enforcement requesting action or escalations.  53 domains reached the basic threshold for abuse escalation and had evidence or corroboration and ability to indicate that it was tending to support the blacklisting.  And then 50 domains flagged for ordinary DNS abuse unconnected to content.  Most were flagged for spam.  Next slide, please.
Three domains were noted for allegations related to the content of websites associated with the domain.  As of October 1, zero domains required escalation at the registry level.  The  total positive reports as a percentage of flagged domains was 0.11% and the total positive reports as a percentage of total registered domains containing COVID or corona was .08% of all domains registered in that period of time.  Next slide, please. 
What does this tell us?  There was a spike in registrations associated with the pandemic.  But most were speculative, people that were buying domains for setting up a business or buying domains and thought about setting up a business.  Buying a domain to hopefully sell to someone else setting up a business.  But there was very little fraud amongst the volume of domains.  But in the anti-abuse community, I can tell you that this is a very common occurrence.  During the Christchurch shootings there were domains at that time.  Every natural disaster has a massive spike and political hot topics and if there is immediate frenzy on any topic there is speculation and purchasing of domains as people think about how to do something with the particular topic.  Sometimes for fraud and sometimes speculation.  But every time there is a major event there is a spike and leads to it. 
So let’s talk about volume versus life cycle.  DNS abuse can be measured.  Was the domain in the zone on the day the domain was reported as abuse?  And you could have the type of abuse.  Was it phishing or spam or malware?  How long was it live with abuse is an important metric.  Sometimes a domain registration for abuse can be done within a 24-hour window between the publications of the file so there is no record of that abuse or the abuse could have occurred.  Particularly important in phishing attacks.  How long can that take to acknowledge, act upon, and take action from the domain?
     Who took the action to resolve the abuse?  At the registry level, clear indications including removal from the zone at registrar level and the registrar reseller level is clear indication that the domain could be put into hold or put into a validation or registrar data validation process.  Sometimes the hosting company if it is content that took the action.
     The CDNs, content delivery networks, can also take action at their level and, of course, at the IP address, at the original internet providing entity or even where the e-mail server resides at the MM level can take action against a domain.  Next slide, please.
     So the patterns of abuse, as I mentioned earlier, you can talk about associations with the IP addresses that have previously been used for abuse and how recently the IP addresses were associated with abuse.  You can talk about association with name servers used for abuse.  Batch registrations of domains.  Large volumes at the same time.  And you can measure how many of the domains in the batch showed up on abuse lists.
     You can talk about the associations with large discount programs.  If there is a large discount and a large batch purchase, was the price of that domain indicative of a use for cyber criminal use for abuse or fraud.  Purely analysis of the domain string itself.  You can find phishing with the company being put into the domain string in some way.  And, of course, passive DNS activity is looking for patterns not the first level the TLD and not the second level the domain but passive DNS can catch the bank name or e-commerce name.  
The best model is to combine both.  Take the data from as many sources as possible that people are working on trying to determine what is going on.  But also to research on and try and determine patterns of activity that would show you what the abusers are doing and what infrastructure they are apt to use.  Next slide, please.
     In military terms, they call this signal detection.  You are filtering the noise from the signal.  And once you have determined what the signal is, it is signal intelligence where you take the signal and try to determine what it means and is it a pattern that indicates fraud or DNS abuse.  Next slide, please.  What are the next steps to reduce victimization by domain abuse?  It is the term we are looking at here is it is about reducing victimization of consumers, right.  Next slide.
     So a lot of the conversation around DNS abuse tends to reside on how much is there?  Has it gone up?  Has it gone down?  And is there an indication -- a lot of early indicators for COVID-19 was a huge spike in fraud because of the registrations that happened across the DNS of terms like corona and COVID and domains, but the volume was not indicative of the problem.  But to me, how long the domains live and are live is a bigger indication of the fraud and victimization.  Next slide, please.
     There we go.  So both are relevant to reducing DNS abuse.  Understanding volume of course is important because you can look for patterns and trends.  Of course, reducing DNS abuse is about reducing victimization.  To me, again, reducing the lifetime of the domain has a bigger impact on reducing DNS abuse to the victims than the volume of DNS -- than the volumes of domains registered.  Next slide, please.
     So I guess I have said that already for the last two slides but I will say it again with a nice picture of the family.  The majority of DNS abuse targets consumers.  Yes,  there is some that targets companies and spear phishing attacks and go against corporations to steal money and do ransomware attacks on banks, but the majority of the victimization is against consumers to steal personally identifiable information or their credentials or steal their money or their identity itself.  Next slide, please.
     This is a stat that just came out in the last couple of months from the European Commission.  Basically that the global cost of cybercrime is estimated to be about 530 billion Euros which translates to $630 billion or 480 billion Pounds Sterling.  Next slide, please.
     So focus on reducing the life cycle of a domain used for abuse is a really good vector to take to reduce DNS abuse.  Strategizing on early patterns of abuse protection and can get used for abuse reduction in the volumes of domains used for abuse.  The battle for the last 20 years for DNS and cyber crime is to stay ahead of the curve.  Every time you come up with a solution the people looking to do cyber crime found a way around it and a new mechanism to do it.  But you can stay ahead of the new vectors they use to do fraud and crime.  There are always people trying to steal from them.  Next slide, please.
     So some recommendations.  And this is from an upcoming paper put up on Security and Stability Advisory Committee at ICANN that I'm a member and Merike Kaeo is as well.  Adopt standard definitions of abuse.  All of the different players from the companies and mail providers and CDNs and registry and registrars define abuse differently.  The coordination between the different parties would be difficult.  Determine and assign the primary points of responsibility for abuse resolution.  The big registries and registrars have done that effectively.  But there is a lot of smaller players out there that don't have the effective point of contact and it is much more structured in the registry and registrar community than it is in the hosting world which is significantly larger in the number of players involved.  Identifying the best practices for evidentiary standards.  If you present this bit of malware happened on this domain at this time, what is required to prove that as far as evidence that will allow the company taking an action to take that action?
     You have to prove what has happened and evidentiary standards is the best way to do that.  Especially if all of the parties can agree to do that.  Utilizing standard escalation paths for abuse resolution.  We would love to be in an ecosystem where all of the players are good people who are always trying to do their best to stop problems but there are players in the ecosystem not designed to, do not intend to, or even purposely sell to criminals.
     If the party that should be responsible doesn't respond, what is the escalation path?  Who is the next party in the chain of partners that can run the DNS and take the action if the party responsible does not respond or refuses to respond?  Utilizing reasonable time frames for reporting.  If each party gives the next party in the ecosystem 72 hours to respond and takes three levels to get to, you have a domain that is now victimizing people for over a week.  It would be lovely to have a reasonable time frame for how long a domain can exist before someone takes action against it.  Next slide, please.
     There is an opportunity to identify notifier programs and make more efficient abuse handling in certain parts of the ecosystem.  And I'm not talking about GDPR and registrant data.  I'm talking about the different parties that have a part in running the DNS from registry operator down to the hosting company having mechanisms whereby it is straightforward to get the contact information of the infrastructure provider so it can be resolved.  And if you do that, you need a mechanism to ensure reasonable quality that it is kept updated and available so the people reporting the abuse can be assured they are getting ahold of the right people at the right time.
     Next slide, please.  And then that is the end of the presentation.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Jeff, for this very well-explained situation and observation from your perspective.
     We will move now to the next presentation from Ashley Heineman from GoDaddy.  You are next.
     >> ASHLEY HEINEMAN: Go to the next slide.  This is Ashley Heineman.  I'm the Director of Global Policy at GoDaddy, and I will be talking about our experiences in the age of COVID-19 but also DNS abuse in particular.
     And just a little bit about GoDaddy for those who aren’t familiar.  We are the world's large registrar and web hosting provider and do a number of other things as well.  I will be speaking primarily today from the registrar perspective and our experiences working within ICANN but as well as our efforts working within the registrar community and as a company.
     So if you could go to the next slide, please.  So just a quick introduction and I think something that we all know, is that abuse is a problem for the industry, and it is a priority for GoDaddy.  As Jeff said, this is something that will never go away.  Hopefully, we will get to a point where we are able to successfully mitigate abuse to the extent possible.  But I think it is an unrealistic station that we will eradicate DNS abuse or abuse in general.  That is just not how the world works, unfortunately.
     But something that I wanted to stress is the importance to recognizing the distinction between DNS abuse and other types such as content specific.  Particularly when you are looking at those companies that are contracted with ICANN.  There is kind of a limit as to what we can do, particularly in the remit of ICANN and this is limited to DNS abuse.  Next slide, please.
     And I think we are all familiar with ICANN and I won't do their job here.  We have John on the queue as well.
     But part of the primary part of the mission is to preserve the security and stability of the DNS.  But that does not go into content moderation.  And that extends to its contracted parties, the registrars, and registries.  We are limited to what we can do to the DNS.  People think that we can do more than that, but we can't.  Looking at the DNS and taking actions at the level it is somewhat equated to a nuclear option.  There is a lot of collateral damage that could potentially go along with that and usually should be kind of the last resort.
     And when people have to have a domain taken down or locked, we need to really make sure that we are taking the appropriate action.  And that is why we ask for a lot of information to make sure and confirm that taking that action is appropriate.
     But outside of ICANN, and industry including GoDaddy because we do more than providing registrations, we are organizing and taking efforts to mitigate not only DNS abuse as we define it but also content-specific abuse.  Next slide, please.
     So to talk a bit about some of the non-ICANN industry specific.  Most notably in registries and registrars in September of 2019, 11 of us got together and launched a framework on DNS abuse to standardize definitions and set expectations for action.  Touches on what Jeff was pointing to earlier in terms of the need to have a common definition.
     As part of the effort, we defined DNS abuse as malware, bot ware, phishing and farming and spam.  It can provide a vector that way, not necessarily the spam itself but provide a space for doing the other bad stuff listed here.
     Since our launch in 2019, we are up to 50 signatories from surveillance and just issued the one-year update and you can see that the link provided here.  But I think what we have seen mostly through the effort is one, an attempt to come up with a definition.  There is -- there are definitions out there.  We like our definition.  We think it's pretty straightforward and makes the appropriate distinction between the different kinds of abuse but provides benchmarks for us to live up to and hopefully bring all of the industry up to the same standards.  For companies like GoDaddy, we are doing this so we don't need to create from the bottom up a new structure to deal with DNS abuse.  It is more or less living up to the standards we already created for ourselves.
     Another area there is industry efforts is the internet and jurisdiction project.  They are doing a lot of great work and bringing in all stakeholders, so it is multi-stakeholder in nature, representing different perspectives and they are developing outputs that are educational for the most part and I think are really good in terms of socializing what is happening out there.  It also has a definition for DNS abuse, very similar to that of the framework on DNS abuse.
     But it also is getting into the workflow for how registries and registrars deal with DNS abuse.  So it is kind of explaining in better detail how we are handling things.  And there will be work continuing in the future on this.
     There is also a range of other industry alliances and coalitions that are dealing specifically with this.  In the U.S., we're dealing with a lot of upcoming and proposed legislation.  So this is a constant area of focus for this industry.  Next, please.
     So the focus here today, COVID and how we are dealing with it, I -- once the pandemic really started to take hold as with most of these type of events, unfortunately, you have the bad guys come out and take advantage of the situation.
     And this has really I think impacted all of us.  We had to change the way we do a lot of things, not necessarily in response to the fraud that is associated with it, but just living our lives, being at home and being online much more than we ever were, conducting business online and having to adjust to this environment and protect ourselves at the same time.
     I think -- well, I think it is fair to say that our industry did a lot to help in this sense in terms of helping companies get online.  Those sorts of activities.  But also in dealing with the bad guys that came out as a result.  The good news is that the sky was not falling, did not fall and I think that is evident in a lot of what Jeff said.  Next slide, please.
     So what we were seeing or are seeing as an industry is yes, there was an uptick in phishing reports in line with what ICANN has seen as well.  But we have seen a modest year on year growth of 15% and there really was not this surge of abuse.
     It was more or less, you know, a lot of the same that we have seen just kind of different wrapper.  So right now GoDaddy processes about 2,000 phishing reports per day.  The majority are not actionable or duplicates.  Either there was not enough information or there was really nothing wrong to deal with.  Next slide, please.
     So yeah, COVID scams.  This was, you now, something that was featured prominently in the news.  And it continues to be.  And there are internet related.  What we have seen is that there was a peak in late March and early April.  Mostly content focused and weren't novel.  A lot of the same type of abuse, just using the COVID moniker.  And a lot was not at the registry or registrar level.  Next slide, please.
     So before I get into this on the bottom line, I want to go in a little more detail about our experiences and what we found through this process.  And that right off the market we had a lot of folks whether they were in a position of political power or companies, advising us to basically not allow registrations of names like -- that included words like COVID or corona.  And what we found is that that was really not the way to address this situation.  And I think Jeff touched on this a bit is that there is actually, you know, good use of these terms as well.  You can't assume just because they have COVID in the name of the domain that it is going to be used for abusive purposes.  Whether there are hospitals or advocacy groups just trying to get out good information, it just really did not make sense to block those names or to otherwise not allow registration of those names.
     Also, when block lists.  We had some issues there.  We got lots and lots of requests to take down names in the hundreds.  And most of them were not actionable.
     Either because they just did not provide us enough information.  An example being we think there is suspicious activity.  That is not really helpful if you are a registrar.  We need more information to take action.  Or we go and look at the domains and they were not -- nothing was going on.  There were a lot of speculative registrations, as Jeff noted.  By and large, we did not see a lot of abuse associated with the registrations of these names.
     We also weren't that -- we could get a lot done with our partners either through the cyber security community or law enforcement and it was a useful exercise to build the relationships and strengthen them and I think we learned a lot from each other in terms of what is the information we need to take action.  The time frames, the point of contact.
     So that was a really good learning experience.  And I think there is a lot of room to build from that and you can continue to improve relationships as well as what is it we need to take action? And that was a real useful opportunity through all of this.
     But I think moving forward, we identified a number of areas where we could make things more efficient.  We don't need to recreate anything or create anything new.  It is a matter of I think building on what we have.  Getting the message out there in terms of building of relationships and what information we need and going from there.
     So the bottom line, DNS abuse obviously is extremely important.  But it is also equally important to recognize the limited role of registrars in my case but also registries and ICANN.
     It is our view that ICANN, their role is best spent facilitating community discussions, exchange of views, research, and statistics, like John Crain is involved in.  We do not think that new policies are in order especially.  In fact, it could actually make things more difficult.  And that it is time consuming to deal with new policy and it is not clear what more is necessary.  I think the best use of our time is like I said previously, is building on what we already have.  Because what we have found is that we have the tools.
     It is just a matter of using them, making sure people understand that we have them so they know how to use them and making improvements where we can.
     Next slide, please.  And that is it.  I think I have covered all my major points.  I hope so.  It is very early for me so I apologize.  And that cup of coffee did not help with my speed of speech.  Apologies to those of you having a hard time following me.  Happy to answer questions later.  Thanks.
     >> MODERATOR: You did very well, Ashley.  Thank you very much.  And thank you for sharing that perspective from contracting party and operator of DNS service perspective.  Thank you very much.  It was a good.  Nobody noticed that it was early for you, don't worry.
     The next speaker now is our own John Crain.  John Crain is Chief Security Stability and Resiliency Official at ICANN and he and his team have done some measurement during this period and he will be -- we will be happy to hear from him his observation and the lesson learned.  John?
     >> JOHN CRAIN: Thank you.  Next slide, please.  Actually, let's go one more.  Okay.
     Well, thank you, everybody.  Good morning, good afternoon, evening, whatever it may be wherever you are.
     So, hopefully some of you followed the talk we did early in the week where my colleague talked about the statistics that we measured and I will give the credit to my staff.  I didn't really do any measure.  They did all of the work. I just get to talk about it every now and again.
     So, COVID is, of course, a massive event in everybody's life.  But in many ways, it is not really any different to -- as Jeff already said, many other events that occur in the couple of decades that I have been working on DNS issues and security issues we have seen a multitude of events and the bad guys will always go towards them.
     Just like the ticket scalpers go to the big events to do fraudulent tickets, et cetera.  The bad guys online, they reflect reality and they will go after wherever they see opportunity.
     Of course, COVID is a little different in that we all got sent home and we are all working on the internet.  It looks like I'm sitting on a beach but I'm in a trailer in my driveway.  A little less exotic than the background.  Everybody is living with a little bit more stress.  A lot of people, especially people outside our industry because many of us are used to working online and from home.  They are not used to this so this makes them extremely susceptible.  Almost the perfect storm for the bad guys.  Next slide, please.
     So, we have all seen graphs.  This is not an ICANN graph.  This is from a company called The Main Tolls.  We have all seen dozens and dozens of articles out there about the massive increase in abuse related to COVID, et cetera.  And most of the charts look something like this with a peak in the March/April, early May time frame.
     Next slide, please.  So many of those sources that you have seen out there one of the things I realized is that there often a fundamental disconnect between what people are saying and what people are hearing.  So when you see somebody like Domain Tolls going out and saying there are names registered with suspicious COVID-like strings, they identified them as being a possible security threat.  There are many companies that provide lists to networks to protect networks.
     And these lists are often a little bit more expansive than what is choosing to be bad.  If you have a large list, one of the users can phone you up or the IT department up and say I wanted to get to the website but you seem to be blocking it.  That is different to what is often asked to occur in the DNS abuse realm and DNS realm where people say let's stop these names from resolving.
     Once a name doesn't resolve in the DNS it doesn't resolve for anybody.  I think it was Ashley that said it is a bit of a nuclear options.  Sometimes it is the correct option and the right thing to do for certain cases.  Many of the names you were seeing when we saw these, there are 600,000 or 500,000 registered names were, in fact, speculative registrations.  They looked risky, they were suspicious maybe because of the string in them.  But they actually -- many of them never turned out to be malicious. So although they were a perceived threat and a risk, they weren't actually causing harm to anybody.  Next slide, please.
     Now we had our own project and we talked about this earlier in the week.  And we looked at many different strings.  And I will come to that on the following slide.  But just like the people over at domain and everybody else measuring this, we were seeing thousands of names every day with COVID-like strings in them.
     It could be COVID, could be facemask, it could be anything like that.  But when we started looking for evidence by looking for that signal and the noise that Jeff was talking about, those numbers are much, much smaller.  We were actually finding hundreds of names every day that looked like they might have some signal in there, some intelligence, but when we actually then went and looked even further, the numbers were actually much, much smaller.  Next slide, please.
     So we actually looked at many, many different keywords.  You know, we did things like obviously using other languages.  Looking at names that were representing other scripts or internationalized domain names as we call them.  We were also looking at things that weren't quite that same name.  So COVID with a one.  COVID with a zero.  And all of the various variations you can come up with.  It turned out that it was mainly just the big sort of names that were in the press that really made a difference.
     You could add all kinds of strings and it didn't actually make a large change to the numbers.  And I'm not going to go into these.  If you are interested in more detail in this, I suggest you go and look at some of the recordings of the previous message.  But you can do this sort of string pattern recognition against Zone files and come up with names that are suspicious. It's not hard to do.  Next slide, please.
     But it is important to go beyond that.  Just having suspicious names, as I said earlier, it's not enough.  You really need that signal.  You really need evidence that you can pass on.  And what we found out is that if we -- and we do this at ICANN, actually went that extra step and went and dug to see how much evidence can we find and can we present that?  Then, people in the industry actually can and they did act.  We didn't actually have to make many reports.  What we actually found is that by the time we were looking at the data, which was often 12 to 24 hours after the zone file was published, many of the names that looked problematic were already gone.
     Somebody had taken action.  Now, it is not always easy after the fact to see who took action, but somebody took action.  So if you get actionable data and intelligence to somebody in the industry, be that a registry or registrar or even hosting providers and other people in the industry, they will take action.  The majority of the industry or the internet industry does not want this on their infrastructure.  And that was very clear.
     Now, by the time we got around to looking at a lot of this data people had already acted.  Next slide, please.
     As I said, we were looking at the gateway and going through and trying to find intelligence.  We could find reports that something happened on a name for a few hundred, but over the six to I guess it is now almost nine months, I think somebody said the other day in the presentation, one of our colleagues from a registry it was March the 285th or something like that.  We are long into the COVID name.  We still only have seen that were still problematic that we could report maybe between 100 and 200 in total.  Next slide, please.
     And, of course, there is always more that can be done.  Right?  This is not going to go away, as Jeff said.  There will always be bad guys doing stuff and there is always more we can do.  But what I found we were spending a lot of time doing and we joined many of these forums for collaboration, you know, you will have heard of the various alliances where industry got together with law enforcement to attack all of the COVID abuse is that we spent a lot of time on education explaining to people little things like if you come with actual evidence, something that could be acted on, people will act.  This is the kind of evidence you need to put forward.  Simple things like please use white lists.  Not only are there lists of things out there that are bad, but in many ways more importantly, during something like a pandemic, there are lists of names out there that are good.  And we absolutely do not want to cause any harm to those names.
     Those are the names that people are relying on for information, and medical advice et cetera, et cetera.  The good news is that there are efforts underway, Ashley already alluded to this.  But the industry themselves put out a DNS abuse framework.  This is not an ICANN or policy thing or ICANN community policy thing, this was an industry-led thing and it is what we actually used when we did what we call DNS sticker which is our measurements and we went and read the document and made sense to us.  It is okay, they are looking for evidence.  They don't want the noise, they want the signal.
     We actually used that document to develop our reports and then passed those reports on and lo and behold it worked.  When we pass a name on to a registry or registrar and provide them with evidence, they take action, which is really good news.  Next slide, please.
     As I said, there have been in the past and there will be in the future other events.  This is not unique.  It is going to happen again.  I think though, that the collaboration that occurred during this event and the processes that various industry players put in place really gives me hope.  That we will be in a better position each time something like this happens.  I see progress around me.  I see discussions in the community.  I see interaction between what we call the operational security community and the DNS industry.  And that is occurring more and more.  
And I think this kind of collaborative effort at the industry level, at the level of people who can actually take action and the level of the people that can actually deliver evidence is a really good thing that has been happening over these -- well, it has been happening for many years but has really been shown to work during COVID.
     So I'm hopeful that we will like do even better going forward and that as people learn to interact with each other between the various security and operational communities, that we will actually see more and more improvements going forward and that this will get easier and not harder for us.  I think that was my last slide.  And it was.
     >> MODERATOR: Yes.  And it is your last slide.  Thank you very much, John.  And that message of hope of yours stays on collaboration is a good segue to the next presentation with Merike Kaeo.  That will take us through an initiative that is actually trying to help around that more collaboration aspect so the DSFI-TSG and there is a study group set up to try to build the initiative and Merike is trying to coordinate that effort.  The floor that is yours.
     >> MERIKE KAEO: Thank you, I love that John is optimistic and I share his optimism.  And by the end of my presentation some comments on why you will be able to see why.  So next slide, please.
     So why initiate a technical study group to look at how DNS security issues can be facilitated by ICANN?  Well, we have had many, many attacks that impact the security and stability of DNS over at least 15 years.  And they come in a variety of formats.
     One of the very earliest one that had very wide visibility was called DNS Changer where there was a takedown in 2011.  And this particular attack was extremely sophisticated and did target the home user.  It was a very clever, clever campaign that ran for many years where a home user's either router or device was infected with malware through a variety of mechanisms.
     And the main intent was just to change where the queries go to.  So there was a nefarious infrastructure set up.  Fast forward a couple of years in 2017-2018, you had other more sophisticated attacks that impacted or made use of DNS infrastructure in various ways.  And one of the things that has become very clear as of last year is that some of the solutions that would improve the security and stability of the overall DNS ecosystem are not yet a hundred percent clear and really there might be new levels of coordination and understanding that need to happen.
     And so the ICANN CEO initiated a project and actually last fall so this was prior to COVID-19 to start looking at a variety of aspects and primarily the intent is what can and should ICANN be doing to improve the DNS security profile?  But even more importantly, what should ICANN not be doing?  And for this technical study group, the recommendation that it will be creating are really to look at, you know, where and how to promote best practices, whether or not new ones should be created where more facilitation of communications and strengthening of collaboration can happen.  Next slide, please.
     One of the things that was extremely critical was to get cross-functional expertise.  So it wasn't just membership of the typical ICANN community, but also to look outside of the ICANN community, and what you will see on the right are the nine members that make up the technical study group.  We are all volunteers.  And I very much am grateful to everybody that is volunteering in this cross-functional effort.
     The members that make up the technical study group have very extensive cross-functional expertise.  And this includes expertise in incident response handling.  Some were members of the first community.  And then also working with large-scale DNS operations and architectures, working with just general network account texture and design because routing -- architecture and design because routing is also a factor of things that you want to explore because sometimes route hijacks become a vector for subverting DNS.
     The members also have experience with registry and registrar operations and also some very in-depth and deep DNS protocol technical experience.  So they are members that contribute to the internet engineering task force to continue enhancing the DNS protocol.
     And the technical study group has a very extensive staff support.  John is part of the group as a technical expert and then we have other staff support that help with administration and documentation and so forth.  And that is greatly appreciated.
     Next slide, please.  So one of the first milestones that was reached after assembling the group in the spring of this year was to create their charter and the milestone.  That took a little bit of time primarily because you have COVID and you had people in a lot of different time zones.
     But we managed to have biweekly meetings consistently since June.  And the charter creation was a very big milestone because we knew that we had a broad scope but needed to have a narrow focus so that the recommendations that we would come up with would actually be actionable.  None of us wanted to be in these meetings and discuss things where it would be yet another discussion where nothing happens, right?  So we're very clear in that while there is the scope is quite broad, right, the actual recommendations and the focus will be fairly narrow to really look at what should ICANN not do, but where does ICANN have a role to help with facilitation and collaboration?
     And the initial discussions are focusing on a number of different attacks that various members have known about, know about that might be currently happening and so some of the discussion cannot necessarily be public because these are -- these are some of the attacks may not yet be public.
     But we are focusing on the mechanisms by which the attack is carried out, not the content of the attacks.  So if I look into the overall scope of everything that is included, identity management is related to the threats that rely on asserting identity through any kind of means.  Commercial management, life cycle and then looking at availability where many threats have an impact to provide reliable responses to the word DNS queries will fail in some way, shape or form.
     And also looking at where does route impact or DDOS that leverage DNS infrastructure or are attacks against the DNS infrastructure. Looking at infrastructure impersonate, and these are threats that impersonate the DNS infrastructure.  For us, that means the DNS servers for DNS forwarder.
     Also vulnerabilities that may exist and how are they handled and what are the threats and flaws in software that might be avoidable in some way, shape or form.
     We are looking at fate sharing.  And these are threats that create any kind of areas of weakness due to the homogeneity of the systems.  And we are looking at a scope where we are looking at security threats that utilize the DNS.  And this would take into account forms of malware that redirect queries, that falsify queries, and create means of utilizing the DNS for the ex-filtration of private and confidence data.
     We are also including in the scope verify and validating trust in the DNS infrastructure and data.  Some threats that are realizable due to a lack of focus on validation deployment, architectures and configurations and we decided to include in the scope cryptographic nuances because they are more utilized for integrity and validation purposes. So how does that fit into the overall discussions?  As you can see, the scope is quite broad.  But we feel pretty confident by at least focusing first on the attacks that we know about and looking at how they tie into the different scope and what are the different vectors of attacks we can then continue to the next aspect.  Next slide, please.
     And that next aspect is really to try to answer the following questions.  And by answering the questions it can inform us how to formulate the recommendations that will go to the ICANN CEO.  One of the questions is what are the ways currently that exist to address DNS security?  What are the best practices?  What are the technologies available?
     And then can we identify any gaps that currently exist either in processes and technology and operations, what have you.  And then looking at the entire ecosystem, who is best suited to fill those gaps?  Right?  The other panelists have discussed that, you know, there is many different stakeholders that are in communities that are discussing overall DNS-related abuse or DNS-related threats or attacks that impact the DNS, right, as part of their whole campaign.
     And so which players play where?  Right?  Who is best suited for what?  And then we are also thinking about looking at what are the risks associated with those gaps that may not be well understood?  And one of the things that I always hear is well, teach users to do X, Y, Z.  I have to laugh because a colleague of mine sent me an e-mail and click on a link.  I sent him a text message and said did you send me an e-mail to click on something because it wasn't something that he would really do.  I was like wow, this is fascinating, we are teaching people not to click on something yet everybody is having links to click on things.  So what gaps are there that may not be understood that may need a little more thought behind it.
     And then also does the DNS have unique characteristics that attract security problems which other internet services do not have?  Why reinvent the wheel, you know, if you don't have to?  But what is so different about DNS or what is similar to maybe something that another industry is seeing that we can also learn from.
     So next slide, please.  So we have already been talking about how COVID impacts everybody.  I came across this cartoon and I fell in love with it.  Because it absolutely speaks to how, you know, a lot of us have virtual backgrounds and they really took off.  Why?  Because you have no idea what is going on in the background, right?  Somebody might be going hey, shhh.  Shhh.  Or the cat jumped on their lap or the dog is barking so you are putting yourself on mute.  So many distractions going on in some environments and the criminals love it, right?
     But I mean for the working people, right, and as Jeff was saying earlier, right, it is people that get targeted, right.  And the criminals are getting much smarter at looking at well, you know, what are they actually -- they play on somebody's weakness, right.  And right now there is so much increased stress, right, because you don't know like what's happening, can you go out?  You can't go out.  Maybe you have elderly parents or who knows what is going on.  You have a lot less privacy.  There is multiple demands on you, and you are sharing devices and networks and there is no physical security.
     So if you go to the next slide.  You know, the primary thing that attackers are really playing on is if I look at the phishing scams, and I do.  I have a folder and I take a look at them.  I have an e-mail account where I have no filtering because this way I kind of get a look at hmm, what are the phishing scams and how are they changing.  And they are so clever.
     When I look at what I got 10 years ago to what I got today.  A lot of very short and very sweet.  Hey, I didn't get your e-mail, can you resend.  And they very much look like something that you might need.  Hey, your child, you know, couldn't log in yesterday, you know, can you click on this so that, you know, whatever magic will happen.
     And really, I mean right now the environment is ripe just for a lot of new nuances and a lot of different attack vectors.  And also as my other panelists were alluding to in their conversations, is that physical crime has not gone away.  Right?  It will never 100% go away, right?  But you keep putting up deterrents and trying to create mitigations.  And the same is true in the virtual world.
     So as the technical study group is starting to look at its work and its known attacks one of the things we also know is that as the work continues throughout next year we are going to take a look at the evolving landscape to see what are new mechanisms that attack campaigns are utilizing that will also affect the security and stability of the DNS overall.  Next slide, please.
     So for anyone that wants to track the progress, you know, please go to community.ICANN.org on the left-hand side of the screen you will find a whole bunch of different projects and things that relate to ICANN and you will find the DSFI-TSG and you can get and read the project charter and scope and follow the work plan and timelines which are still getting finalized and also the meeting agendas and notes. So that is it for my presentation.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Merike.  And that is an illustration of concrete action being taken to make the collaboration and the understanding as well of the role that different parties can play to improve the overall security of the DNS in general.  Thank you all for those brilliant, brilliant presentations.
     I can see that there are a few questions in the Q&A pod.  A few of them have already been answered.
     I don't know if there is anyone that is still pending that we need.  Jeff, there is somebody asking a link to be shared.  I don't know which link it is specifically.  If Mark -- that is -- if you can provide the link, I think Jeff will be happy to share the link.
     But back to the preparation, I think throughout all of the presentation there is two things that I would like to highlight.  The first is what we have learned from the first two presentations that during the COVID era we have seen a lot of new domain names registered, but the observation picked up from all of the presentation is that there hasn't been any significant surge in abusive domain name registration during that period of time.
     And the fact that a lot of fact checking has been put in place has, you know, bring us to the conclusion that not many of them were actually in the domain name registration.  The other interesting thing is that the community and the actor and the DNS environment have been collaborative and, you know, responsive to those abusive name and take action when and where needed.
     I do have one question for the panelists.  And particularly to you, Ashley, on the -- if we agree that the COVID period has not, you know, impact specifically the domain name registration and the abuse specifically, the aspect of abuse, can we then conclude that abuse is something constant?  It is something that follow, you know, that follow the normal registration process and any measure that we put in place should be applicable continuously and not specific to an event or specific event or something that is happening? Is it something that we can be confident saying now?
     >> ASHLEY HEINEMAN: This is Ashley again from GoDaddy.  I think I don't want to minimize the bad stuff that we saw as a result of COVID.  There was a lot of bad stuff, and I think to maybe be a little more precise is that what we found with the existing tools we have and the existing requirements we have is that they provide us enough flexibility to do what we need to do.
     Sometimes it will change depending on the situation.  We were able to be nimble and do what we needed to do and that was provided to us in our terms of use and what we were required to do through our contacts with ICANN.  I don't think this proves that things are at a static rate or you don't need to adapt or change anything.  I think that is not at all the situation.  I think we learned a lot of lessons through the process and a lot of different areas we can improve.  So for what that is worth, that's my two cents.  Thanks.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Jeff, anything specific in that area as well when we start digging into looking more closely at the lesson learned?  Although we haven't seen, you know, big impact, what could you say you can take out from that period?
     >> JEFF BEDSER: I would echo what Ashley said as far as there certainly were plenty of domains that were used for fraud and abuse and just like John Crain said in the panel here, there is always abuse.  Ongoing volume but, of course, there is money to be made by defrauding people and victimizing people and there will always be spikes around big events.
     So diligence and understanding how that happens.  I think John Crain also mentioned there were a couple of different groups that sprung up to look at the surge.  And it turned out that that were a lot of false positives early on.  Just using one factor such as the name, the name COVID being in a name was not enough to demonstrate badness.  There had to be content, there had to be on infrastructure demonstrated to be bad in the past or recent past to show some other indicator was going on there.
     I do think there is opportunities moving forward when a big surge event like this happens to monitor.  You monitor them to see if this they do go live what type of content is on there.  Not just measuring that it shows up but keep measuring it so we can catch it as early as possible.
     >> MODERATOR: Which means six months down the road we can come back to this and see if there is any abuse of the domain name later on for abusive use because there is not something specific in in the time.
     One question, John, for you and based on the conclusion of your presentation which is that probably with the COVID situation we have seen more collaboration and cooperation among different actors because of the situation which is giving hope.  How do you think that initiative by ICANN and specifically your team like the -- the measurement of the threat that we are seeing this year initiative can help build more momentum from different actors and also help the discussion that is going on right now within the community, the ICANN community around the abuse?
     >> JOHN CRAIN: Thanks for that, Adiel.  One of the things I learned over and over again and then forgotten we need to have better acronyms for one of our tools.  We have some of the most horrible names for tools that we make up.
     I think ICANN is in an interesting situation here.  I mean we are known very much as a policy forum making the policy around how the DNS works.  But we also have a lot of technical capability at ICANN and I think the role specifically in the office of the CTO and SSR group that I run is that hopefully we have provide neutral data, sit in a neutral place and put together data that can be used to assess whether or not there are new policies needed.  To assess whether policies are working, et cetera.
     I mean we will continue to do research.  We have research projects.  We have DAR which is looking at abuse rates for very specific types of abuse.  Looking at the reputation data.  We have DNS Sticker which is the one we used for COVID which is looking about evidentiary material.
     Going forward, I think we are also very interested in looking at some of the predictive technologies and to see whether or not, you know, predictions are accurate.  There is a lot of work out there being done where people are predicting ahead of the game and saying well, these are all going to be bad but there is not much research occurring around whether or not that actually comes to pass.
     So I think we can be a resource to both the industry and the community at large and provide neutral data.  The other thing is the world changes, the bad guys change, Merike said this and Jeff and Ashley, too.
     So looking at new attack vectors, and seeing just, you know, how bad are they really?  Or you know, we are seeing a lot of reports of phishing.  SMS phishing where people are using domain names, et cetera.  ICANN have not done a lot of research into that.  There is a lot of space as an industry to keep learning.  And as Jeff said, trying to keep ahead of the curve.
     Our main goal here or my main goal here is to be a partner to the industry and to the community and provide assistance and aid wherever we can.
     >> MODERATOR: Yep.  Thank you.  Definitely.  And I think ICANN is showing that as well to a different initiative in the area.  And the engagement of the community will be key for the success of those initiative.
     Merike, if I may, talking about the DSFI.  This is a direct question to you based on your experience.
     What would you say would be your big hope of expectation of the work that the technical study group is going to do in order to add one additional tool or layer to this work to mitigate abuse in general?
     >> MERIKE KAEO: Thank you, Adiel, for that.  My hope is that we can actually come to some conclusions in terms of what gaps there exist either in knowledge or in collaboration to more effectively mitigate some of these more advanced DNS or I should say attack campaigns that really have an issue with or sorry, that impact the security and stability of the DNS.
     And so the cross-collaboration and the -- you know, the multi-faceted expertise that exists in this group I think is really well positioned to holistically look at problems and then really give some very definitive recommendation to the ICANN CEO that will then be actioned.
     >> MODERATOR: Great.  I think that will be very much useful because as John mentioned, the office of the CTO is also actively, you know, working to support the community and provide the community as that work is evolving, you know, tools and knowledge and information to actually continue to protect I will say the DNS in general to mitigate abuse.
     And in that vein, we have another initiative that we just looking at from ICANN perspective which we are calling kindness, which is an initiative to try to better, you know, define the documents and help the community to implement some DNS best practices.  The most common one and make it easy for us to implement.
     And some of the things that we are seeing in our engagement generally that the weakest link are the one that pose the most bigger challenge because they are small and they don't have all of the resources they need to follow everything happening globally. But at the same time they are the one who because of their weakness poses a global threat to the DNS and how to help those to implement best practices and be up to deliver.  That is another initiative I think that will be informed by the outcome of the work of the DSFI in general.
     I don't know if you have other question in the Q&A pod?  I think all of them now answered.  In writing.  Thank you, John.  You took a few of them.  And Jeffrey.
     As we are heading to the end of the time allocated to us, I will give the floor to each of you.  One minute for last word in this.  And your hope for the future work for mitigating DNS abuse.  And we will start with Merike.
     >> MERIKE KAEO: Great, thank you.  It is my hope that before there is too much hype with information that hasn't yet been vetted that really we start looking at more realistic, how realistic overall attacks campaigns are.  So there is a not of lot of fear and uncertainty and doubt, but really we are working with facts to really then figure out where the real big problems are and what needs to be mitigated and where we will work needs to be ton.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  John?
     >> JOHN CRAIN: I just look forward to more collaboration and working with industry.  I have always enjoyed working with all parts of the industry.  So anything that helps us work together and collaborate is always good.
     >> MODERATOR: Wonderful.  Ashley?
     >> ASHLEY HEINEMAN: I hope and I hope we are better at tooting our horn and I think sharing the knowledge with other companies that perhaps aren't at the same level as we are I think will go a long way.  I think we are past the point of finger pointing and it is time to recognize what is happening and improve on that and get down to brass tacks and stop making it what I think it has been largely to date.  I think we are at a point now where we all recognize there is a problem and let's be constructive.  And I'm looking forward to participating in that.  Thanks.
     >> MODERATOR: Wonderful, I like that.  Jeff?
     >> JEFF BEDSER: So we are all here.  We are all on this call and all in the industry because we came up with protocols to allow everyone to work together and talk together because there are common protocols.  I think it is time to address the abuse the same way.  We could work out ways to use the same type of protocol approaches to collaboration to address it.  And I think to the point Ashley and John have made that the industry, the ICANN stakeholder, particularly the registrars have done a lot in the last couple of years to move the ball forward.
     It is time to get the whole ecosystem from the registries to the hosting companies moving together across the different levels and that is one way to move this ball forward.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, everyone.  The message is loud and clear we all agree on where the problems are, and we are already going to work together and seeing the diverse part.  And I agree that is an important step going forward, and I think this discussion is going to continue in other forum and specifically in the ICANN forum.  Thank you all very much for sharing all of this information and keeping this live discussion around the forum.
     We will then close.  And if there are any other questions on this topic, I think feel free to contact us at ICANN.  You can write directly to us in the office of the [email protected].  We will be happy to either answer or direct your question to the right people within the organization or the community to address your question.
     Thank you very much.  And I will see you probably on another panel of the IGF somewhere tonight or tomorrow.  Thank you very much.  We're going to bed.  Me, too.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-6-ws37-community-network-electricity-and-digital-inclusion^^

 
   >> MODERATOR: Good morning.  It is 7:40 and welcome to the Internet Governance Forum Workshop Number 37.  And this is a workshop on Community Networks, Electricity, and Digital Inclusion.  One of our main or the main objectives on this workshop, talking beyond our COVID-19 context in which we have been affected, but also concentrating on community networks and moving the unconnected through community initiatives and also not forgetting electricity has been an important part of connecting persons who are not connected and also digital inclusion to be able to bring everybody together.
     My name is Kwaku and I will be moderating the session.  I am working with Lily.  I don't know if Lily Edinam Botsyoe is here with me.  She will be my emcee.  Good morning once again and welcome.  Thank you for joining us.
     On the panel today, we have a cross-section of very seasoned personalities who have been working with us.  And in the meantime, I would like to acknowledge my co-organizers, Wisdom Donkor, Salanieta Tamanikaiwaimaro, Zeina Bou Harb, Lily Edinam Botsyoe. And we have a set of very seasoned persons as I was talking about and it would be good to have a brief introduction since they are here.  What I would like to do is I will call on you and you introduce yourself, and your organization and the great role you are playing in our world.
     Without much ado, and I can see – Gisa, can you hear me?  Can you introduce yourself and your organization?  Can you hear me?  I see you are on, but you need to unmute.  Gisa?  Hello?
     >> GISA FUATAI PURCELL: Okay, so can you hear me now?
     >> MODERATOR:  Yes, loud and clear, please go ahead.
     >> GISA FUATAI PURCELL:  Okay. My name is Gisa Fuatai Purcell, and I'm the CEO for the Office of the Regulator in Samoa.                
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you for joining us, Gisa, thank you so much.  Without much ado, I’ll go to Michuki Mwangi for Internet Society.  Can you introduce yourself and your institution?
     >> MICHUKI MWANGI: Thank you, Kwaku.  Good morning, good afternoon, and good evening, depending on where you are.  My name is Michuki Mwangi.  I work for the Internet Society as a Senior Director, Internet Technology and Development, and I’m based out of Nairobi, Kenya. I have been working on internet development areas specifically on access looking after community networks in Africa and the development of community networks.  And also internet exchange points and related issues.  Thank you very much.  I'm happy to be here this morning.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  I see Stephanie on the line.  Stephanie, can you please introduce yourself?
     >> STEPHANIE PERRIN: Yes, hello, Stephanie Perrin.  I'm from Canada.  And I'm the past chair of the noncommercial stakeholders group at ICANN where I worked largely on policy retired issues in the domain system.  I'm a retired public servant from Canada and I worked for many years in the telecommunications department the industry Canada.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Stephanie.  Stanley, can you go ahead and introduce yourself.
     >> STANLEY KWAKYE DANKYIRA: Good morning.  Hi, can you hear me?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, please go ahead.
     >> STANLEY KWAKYE DANKYIRA: My name is Stanley Kwakye Dankyira.  I'm the Director of Maxim Nyansa where we assist the communities with computer accessories and make sure that they can connect to the world. Yeah.
     >> MODERATOR: For the last 20 years, we have been talking about the internet and connectivity.  And one of the most important aspect has been able to connect persons who are in remote and unconnected communities.  One of the biggest concept which has come up has been community networks which is -- in which persons who are in rural communities are able to connect themselves.  It is important that we are able to bring stakeholders together to talk on the points and policy questions which -- (break in audio).
     >> He will come back soon.  So we will we be continuing soon.  Thank you.  Thank you so much.  
     >> MODERATOR: I was giving the brief introduction about the community networks, electricity and being able to include persons on the networks.  Before we start, I would like to introduce and bring back again Gisa for a keynote address and I give the floor to Gisa.  Please go ahead, Gisa, if you can hear me.
     >> GISA FUATAI PURCELL: Can you hear me?  
     >> MODERATOR:  Yes, please.
     >> GISA FUATAI PURCELL:  Thank you very much, Mr. Moderator.
     My name is Gisa, that is how you pronounce it, Nee-sah.  And I'm the former Acting Secretary General and the Director of ICT development at the Commonwealth Telecommunication Organization.  And prior to that, I was the head of ICT development for the ITU, focusing on small and developing states and landlocked states and developing countries.  
Let me start.  Honorable ministers, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, it is my utmost pleasure to be your keynote speaker tonight or this morning, wherever you are attending from.
     During these trying times of COVID-19 we and the whole world have seen the importance of the internet and therefore the critical role of the Internet Governance Forum.
     Now, let me cast our eyes back to the road that leads to today's IGF because it is important that we look back in order to go forward.  On 21st of December 2001, the UN General Assembly endorsed by Resolution 56183, the holding of the world summit of the information society, and appointed the ITU the managerial role to organize the event with other UN bodies with the first summit in Geneva 2003, and the second summit in Tunis 2005.  During the first summit in 2003, the working group on the internet governance presented its report.  And the second summit in Tunis where over 19,000 participants from 174 countries endorsed the establishment of the Internet Governance Forum.
     This is a multi-stakeholder governance group.  The UN General Assembly approved funding and approved the establishment in March 2006 and recruited fellows and interns to help the Executive Director establish the office and set up the Multi-stakeholder Advisory Group.  And furthermore, to plan the first IGF that was held in Athens, Greece in 2006.  And I'm pleased to say that some more participated throughout the whole process that led to the establishment of the IGF.
     I was the first fellow recruited along with other interns for this job, hence my utmost pleasure to address you tonight, or this morning, wherever you are participating from.
     And remember, it took 50 years for the telephone to reach the four corners of the world.  And it took only five years for the internet.  And while the internet was a new phenomenon then, much was needed to be done in order to understand the modalities of the internet, especially the benefits and challenges.
     Ladies and gentlemen, we are living in a truly digital era during this fourth industrial revolution.  The IGF therefore is an excellent platform for us to come together and continue to show progress of the multi-stakeholder group of diverse and unifying approach from government, private sector, and society.
     And therefore, we must continue to develop strategic goals and review the role of IGF and its achievements that can help our countries achieve the sustainable development goals of 2030.  Now, ladies and gentlemen, there are three issues that I will touch briefly on and then I will let the workshop, this session continue.
     I wish to address these issues which are very important for Samoa and other small island developing States.  And these are electricity, connectivity, and legal frameworks.
     As we all know, electricity is vital and plays a major role for the digital transformation and it is crucial for nations to ensure that electricity is affordable with an optimal coverage.  It is impossible for digital technology equipment to work without electricity.
     When we come to connectivity, it is true that while hundred percent coverage is important, and it is the goal that every country and every government would like to achieve, it is also equally important that the quality of service must be provided by all service providers.
     There is an -- there is an idea of community of networks that must be conceded in due course.  When we come to legal frameworks, as we all know, ICTs and telecommunications is in the fast pace.  It's so -- it is changing so quickly, and therefore we must focus on the need to amend our acts and make sure that they are suitable to the current time and the current situation in each of our countries.
     And incorporating these three key challenges we must also consider capacity building, capacity building is very important in each of our countries, especially the developing countries.  We need our people to understand every single aspect of ICT development, especially of internet governance and that covers the cyber security.  That covers cooperation and deliberations among partners.  This is important that we work together instead of working in silos.  There is so much to be learned by everyone pooling their fingers and sharing their knowledge of what went well, what didn't go well, and the lessons learned from all those.
     Ladies and gentlemen, I wish everybody an excellent time during this session.  And I wish you well when we finish and look forward to an excellent list of outcomes.
     For Samoa, we shall provide any voluntary assistance that we can come up with as requested as part of this session.  I thank you very much, and God bless.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Gisa.  Thank you for the charge, and also we will have fruitful deliberations looking at the panel and the question session.  Thank you so much.  
So for the workshop for the first segment I will begin shortly, it is about electricity and digital inclusion and the second part would be about the regulatory frameworks and how we are able to cross create the spectrum management that would enable networks to be able to connect.
     So Michuki, from the Internet Society, we know you have been doing a lot of work on expanding and developing the internet.  What do you have to say about development of the internet in terms of community networks and expanded and development?
     >> MICHUKI MWANGI: It is a pleasure once again to be here.
So I would like to talk about two key things.  First and foremost, with respect to community networks, for those who are not aware this community owned and developed telecommunications infrastructure that is established mostly by the communities in the areas that they live in, rural areas.  It has a unique model in that it is built in own appreciation by the community, for the community and to serve that specific community.  In many cases, it is a non-profit approach.  
One of the challenges that the community networks do have is access to back infrastructure.  If you look at a couple of studies that have been done in the region, at least 50% or more than 50% of the population in Africa lives within 25-kilometers to a fiber node as is done by the Huntington Group. And this could be both a private or public.  And often the way the fiber is built, it is built towards the edge of the commercial viability boundaries.  And that means that it is not possible to extend it beyond this point through the current commercial models that are used to put down the fiber.
     And therefore to extend the fiber beyond this point, we need to sort of integrate alternative and complementary approaches that have been demonstrated by community networks so this infrastructure can reach those communities that live beyond this commercial viability boundaries.
     And this actually requires working through collaboration and partnerships with stakeholders that exists.  It could be the managers of the national backbone fiber project or other institutions and policy makers and so on that are responsible or have an interest or in the way community networks are developed as an alternative way of connecting.
     The second thing I wanted to talk about is public funding for community network deployments.  This will certainly need to start from recognizing community networks as serving a special purpose.  This will be key from policy makers and regulators to do so because after they are able to recognize them is when they can become institutions that can apply for special type of funding from public authorities or public institutions or regulators that manage universal fiber lines, et cetera. So it will be one of those important conversations that we need to have with respect to public funding for community networks, and we hope that through the conversations that will take place maybe here and in other forums we will find a framework that can actually be adopted globally for supporting community networks to deploy around the world.  I would like to stop there. And thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much for putting that in context for us in terms of the community itself and also the backbone infrastructure.  
I would like to move on to Andre.  You have a vast experience across various industries and also across various institutions.  In terms of looking at technology and -- in terms of looking at technology and electricity we were talking about and I will ask you specifically to agriculture, what do you see as being an enabler or helping us to be able to achieve the kind of things we want to see happening in our agricultural center as a case in point to be able to elaborate?  Andre, I will go to you.
     >> ANDRE LAPERRIERE: Good morning, good afternoon, good evening depending where you are.  For those less familiar with GODAN, we are Global Open Data Initiative for Agriculture and Nutrition.  The goal is to stimulate production in the agri-food structure and the main tool that we use to do that is data so hence the internet and importance of reaching farmers in particular up to the last mile and to have the full digital inclusion in that process.
     So what I would like to share with you this morning is, one, a general overview what is the landscape in terms of access to data.  And second, I would like to just briefly speak about obstacles or things that prevent vulnerable groups of having their full access to these resources that are available now.
     Yet, it is not all bad news.  There is some driving forces that are really helping propel the internet in particular.  And finally, I have just a few recommendations.
     First, on the landscape.  There is a lot of statistics going on these days about internet access and so on.  But some need to be a little bit clarified.  For instance, we are seeing now that about 50% of the world's population does not have internet access.  So if you read it the other way around, 50% does have internet access.  That is what the statistics say. And the same is true in Sub-Saharan Africa.  However, if you look at it in even closer detail, you will find that even though 50% of the population technically have some -- have the possibility to access the internet, less than one-third of that does in fact connect to the internet.  That means that for two people out of three where the availability is there, they don't prevail themselves from it because of cost, content and other reasons.
     One other interesting statistic is smartphones.  In Sub-Saharan Africa, 39% of the phones are smartphones which means that 60% are not.  So we are still dealing with older technology, 2G and 3G in particular which one of the constraints that we have now.  One thing positive is that between 2014 and 2017 the number of people with accounts, mostly mobile banking accounts, has doubled. So now it reaches a little less than 25% of people with accounts.  Yet, there is a long way to do ways to make that. In Sub-Saharan Africa, more than 400 million people that could and should have access to actual financial tools available through the internet don't.  So 400 million.  So there is a lot of space there.
     And more specifically, the gender gap.  Worldwide, the gender gap there is a difference between male access to internet versus female access to internet.  Worldwide, it is 10% the gap.  So men have 10% more access to the internet than women do.  However, in Sub-Saharan Africa, contrary to the world, that unfortunate trend has increased over the last decade or so.  Now they estimate that 37% -- we estimate that 37% a gender gap in Sub-Saharan Africa.  Said in other ways, it means that if you are a man you are twice as likely to have access to internet than if you are a woman.
     So that is some of the elements of the bigger picture.  Now, obstacles.  How can we make sure those in the last mile and remote villages and women gain better access to the internet and the environment its tools and data provides?
     There are three categories of obstacles.  First, there are social obstacles.  We know that in many, most countries women are concentrated in low wage jobs, for instance, and because of this they lack real household power in making decisions in access and use of technology and tools.  And women in particular have competing demands for the women's time to take care of the kids and the house and do different things, which tend to fall on their shoulders. For cultural and other reasons also, there is often a reduced mobility of opportunities for women.  They just can't just leave and go get a better job somewhere else as easily as men do. And finally, there is a lower digital literacy among women.  That is a general social difficulty challenges.
     On the supply side, we find that a lot of people don't access the internet because they don't find themselves in it.  They don't find the content relevant to their specific situation.  So that is, this content part is very important and it is a known constraint that we have.  And the third one is legal and regulatory environment, which is not necessarily always conducive to the expansion of the internet and access to it.
     For example, there are barriers to obtain formal identification.  Many people still don't have IDs or there is no uniform ID system, especially across the region.  Similarly, there is a lack of intra-operability and even in mobile banking between the different operators.  So these are some examples of the legal and regulatory situation which can also help but right now is oftentimes a problem.
     Forces that are driving the internet and progression of access to the internet are many.  One of them is the emergence of 4G and soon 5G, but the percentage of mobile phones that can access 4G in Sub-Saharan Africa has been very rapidly increasing.  When the demand for better services like 4G over 3 or 2G, when that increases it motivates the internet providers to beef up the capacity to improve the service and improve the capacity to have data for the network.  So 4G is very much a driving force and not just a consequence of the internet.
     Second, mobile banking.  Mobile banking is exploding right now.  It is extremely popular. And, in fact, 10 countries, now 10 countries in the world now that have more where the population has more virtual accounts than physical accounts in the bank. So, there are 10 countries in the world.  And it so happens that all 10 of them are in Sub-Saharan Africa. Just to show the benefits of that, when Kenya embarked in the mobile banking in a very short time we estimate that a little less than 200,000 women found jobs in business and retail as a result of them having access to these financial tools for the first time.
     Another driving force is the cost of technology falling rapidly nowadays so it is making internet access gradually -- slowly but gradually more accessible. At the metro level, the economic integration efforts in Africa in particular are also driving interoperability and data integration and therefore access to data.
     Five recommendations.  How should we focus on tackling these problems?  Recommendation one is something simple that governments can do is to implement mobile banking standards across operators.  Because nowadays, a lot of mobile banking is not necessarily compatible between one operator and another. That means if your operator is different from mine, I can't send you money or receive money from you so that needs to be corrected.
     Second, expand unique digital ID.  In many places, there is still a large segment of the population that has no official ID.  So which prevents minorities, women in particular, women tend to be more vulnerable and have less access to digital ID so therefore excludes them from participating in the internet.
     Third, we need our governments to create enabling policies and regulatory framework that will help stimulate demand for the internet.  Just one example, I was saying that only 39% of the mobile phones in Sub-Saharan Africa are smartphones and we need to increase the percentage.  Increasing content will again stimulate demand and infrastructure investments.  Among the things that governments can do, for instance, is they can reduce taxes on smartphones.  Again, to help make them more affordable.  And find other instances.
     I know some company like Safara-Com, for example, has a program in which subscribers can benefit from a smartphone against a very small only symbolic daily fee.  So that is the kind of initiatives that will help.
     Four, we need countries to do a proper digital readiness assessment.  Now that we are working on implementing these different measures it is important to know if they are making a difference or not.  So a constant monitoring of the digital readiness of the countries is necessary.  And finally, especially for women, we need countries to perform more gender-specific research to better understand what are the constraints that generate this digital divide between genders and ways to overcome them.  So these are my five recommendations for now.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Andre.  We will move to Stanley.  Stanley, the floor is yours, speak as appropriate.
     >> STANLEY KWAKYE DANKYIRA: Thank you.  And good morning, everyone.  Yes, can you hear me?
     >> MODERATOR: Loud and clear.
     >> STANLEY KWAKYE DANKYIRA: My comments is all about inclusion in terms of the digital divide.  What we realize over the years, if you realize that first here especially in Ghana access to the technology improvements itself is key in order for people to know exactly what we are talking about, yes.  Because when you mention each phase in terms of what are you talking about, the person is talking about the rest of the items, you realize that the access to the equipment in terms of the technology and just talking about mobile devices where we have a lot of people in Ghana having a lot of people using two or three mobile phones.  But the question was with the technology itself regarding the app in terms of 3G or 4G.
     A few from the point of view in terms of Andre’s slides.  We made mention of talking about the GSM and all that, but one of the things that I realized or came across in terms of that is the ability to use things like your own GSM phone and solar systems in the sector.  I don't know maybe later Andre will talk about that for us to see.
     But one of the key things, for example, my organization decided to do in terms of bridging the digital divide is to first try to let people have access to the technology itself in terms of the computers right in terms of the schooling aspect.  We decided to have much computers across the country.
     And we are doing this with the government together to assist in this aspect to send computers to deprived communities.  And we wish to get out in the community itself.  Talking about not just going to communities to just take computers there for them to say we have computers or we have ICT equipment.
     But in the ability for them to be able to have it and be able to know how to use the system.  Even though there are certain areas where there is no internet connection.  One of the key things that we are doing here is affordability.  We realize that whether there is internet there are not, what we are talking about is affordability.  One of the key things here is to make internet affordable to the various communities.
     Apart from that, I believe that this infrastructure in terms of electricity and something that the government is still doing in the area there are few place where it is no electric -- there are a few places we have been where there is no electricity at all.  With public-private partnerships some organizations will have systems in the areas even though it is quite expensive.  So maybe it is expense to have -- is the affordable of the solar equipment in the various communities.
     It is easier for us to be able to send these ICT equipment to the areas and also reach these technology.  This is my comments.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  And thank you so much to our panelists.  So I would just like to point out that I will highlight a few points.  
Mwangi was speaking from the Internet Society aspect in which he highlighted one of the key ingredients being in the capacity.  Andre has also talked about the special the gender gaps in terms of the data.  And Stanley was also talking about how we also apart from being inclusive, we are thinking about infrastructure itself in terms of the managing levels and how to mix in our energy.  And I know that in most small island and developing countries, the energy payment and the cost of energy also can be a factor because if you have to look at your household income and get it on to the internet and the electricity, there is a fine balancing act that has to kind of be assessed to be able to do it.  It is important that we are thinking on the broad spectrum of things.  And one central in the conversation the skills itself.
     We know that, for example, the Internet Society also helps in terms of the community networks and capacity building. One thing that I think Andre has highlighted in terms of our aspect is the case in point of agriculture.  You know, and in terms of having access to data.  A lot of data and understanding what is going on will not be able to really capture and seek to help the persons or where the real issues are.
     At this point in time, I don't know if some of our discussants in the room would like to comment.  I would like to acknowledge Professor Allison.  I see her in the attendees.  Hello.  And particularly Carlos, are there any points you want to make before we go to the next session?  Carlos is our discussant.  Carlos Rey-Moreno, can you hear me?
     >> CARLOS REY-MORENO: Yeah, I do.  Thanks, Kwaku.  Some interesting points were in relation to I think something that Stanley mentioned and also Andre.  I mean it was all connected, right?  
Like mobile connectivity as a driving force to connect the unconnected in a way.  The issue of devices and extension of ability and also affordability as Stanley was mentioning, and Michuki mentioned at the beginning that traditional models have the asset to extend the spectrum yet they are not doing so for different reasons.  Among them, they are not able to find a profitable connectivity there.  Yet we are not being to find ways for that spectrum that they have with the national footprint to be used by other actors in rural areas that might be able to extend the connectivity affordably, right, as community networks in different would parts of the world have proven.
     So I wonder if that is going to be part of the discussion going forward. But there is an interesting tension about how much we need mobile connectivity and how much of a driving force it is, but also how little those are doing those who have the asset now at spectrum to those deprived communities that we were talking about, and how much they were doing for blocking others like ISPs and community networks.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Carlos.  So I would like to move to the other section so we can have a transition.  Is the Honorable Judge from Ghana's parliament with us?  If not, I would like to start with Stephanie on the spectrum session so that we can merge with that session as we have a fluid conversation.  Stephanie, can you hear me?
     >> STEPHANIE PERRIN: Yes, I do.  Would you like me to start now?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, please go ahead.
     >> STEPHANIE PERRIN: I just wanted to give you folks a few statistics from Canada.  Canada, as you probably know, is a pretty big country and we have very good internet availability statistically, apparently.  But in reality, it is expensive in some of the hard to reach areas.  And by hard to reach areas, may I say that personally I'm working with a community group to try to get better speed 45 minutes outside the nation's capital.  That's how soon you get from the -- into this kind of digital divide between the urban centers, which are very well served, and the rural centers, farming communities and in particular Indigenous communities, the First Nations who tend to be further up north where accessibility is really a problem. Even satellite does not work as well up north.
     So here are a few of the statistics.  And in the absence of slides, let me just say that if you are interested in the Canadian stats, the Canadian Radio Television Commission has very good internet surveys based on data that was gathered 2017-2018 they participated with Statistics Canada.  RCRTC, that’s our telecom regulator, set the goal for internet speeds at 50 mgs per second down and 10 up back in 2016.  That is just a dream for most of rural Canada still.
     So this survey in 2018 checked on where we were.  And there is a fund, the Telecom Regulatory Fund that the CRTC has established to try to promote improvement in the services.  I would say that it is not working well, but there have been significant improvements.  To aid in this lowering of the cost, they also came up with the decision recently to lower the wholesale prices that the telecom providers are required to charge for the smaller internet service providers. So that assisted in bringing some of the rates down.  
So the statistics I'm citing for you here are availability.  Please note that.  That is not necessarily usage because of cost. So there was an improvement in broadband availability that went from about 65% to 72% for 25 megabits, and 39 to 43 for 55 -- 50 rather.  That was in rural areas. So that is only 43% having access to the goal.  That is access, not usage.  Urban, however, 97.7% of Canadians that are living in urban communities have access to 50 mgs or better.  The stat for the rural areas is only 40.  First Nations, only 31.3.
     So what this means, in fact, is, of course, that businesses operating in rural areas.  So we’re talking mining and in particular farming, farming has become very modern now.  And farmers need access to the internet not just used to be for weather, Canadians love to talk about weather.  I will try to resist.
     But it is now the manual for your tractor is going to be online and online only.  Farmers have shifted to robotic cattle milking.  So if you are running a dairy farm, you are going to need access to the internet for a lot more than just basic information. So these are factors that are pushing fiber out to rural areas.
     Now in Canada, fiber delivery to rural areas means basically digging a trench along the road and burying a fiber cable.  That can be problematic in areas where that is going to interfere with the snow removal.  In urban centers they are going underground through larger cable channels.
     So in terms of tracking what is -- so in terms of tracking what is happening in consumer advocacy, the Public Interest Advocacy Center is running a blog that follows this problem in the availability and pricing.  So if you are interested in finding partners in Canada, I would recommend the Public Interest Advocacy Center.  
The Canadian Internet Registration Authority, so CIRA, the folks who bring you the dot-ca domain publish following the broadband issue, and publish the Canadian internet fact book for 2020 which will give a good picture of all of these stats.  CIRA also runs a line speed testing service for Canadians so people across the nation can log in and check the line speed so they have compiled statistics on this.  There is some discussion and argument among the advocates around how the actual line speed availabilities are calculated with the Public Interest Advocacy critical of the methods that are used that are showing great improvement.  So CIRA I think has a more accurate test.
     I know when I'm on my rural property I frequently go, you know, this shaking hands phenomenon of low speed and lines dropping, I have looked up my speed on the CIRA service.  Always very handy.
     In terms of post-COVID, at the moment 54% of the Canadians according to the CIRA survey are working at home because we are self-isolating as a result of the COVID lockdown.  And, of course, we are moving towards a Canadian winter and expecting to be in something approaching a lockdown all winter possibly into the spring because rates in Canada are going up and we are all moving indoors. So we expect them to go up even further if we don't increase the self-isolation.  That, of course, is driving a whole lot of services and business. 
Restaurants are closed in many areas and only doing takeout food delivery.  That is a service that is facilitated by the internet.  So I won't go on and on about how much more we are using the services.  I don't think I have seen a really good stat for how much the broadband usage has gone up due to the fact that more people are working from home and therefore not getting out.  But it is bound to be much more significant.  We probably will have good stats after Christmas in January on that use, possibly earlier.  So I hope that is helpful.
     And I would be happy to try to facilitate linkages to Canadian consumer advocates to the extent that I can.  I'm not actually myself very active in that particular activity right now, but I certainly know who is.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Stephanie, for giving us the Canadian point of view.  Thank you so much.
Wisdom, are you here with us?  Thanks for joining.  Hello.  It is great to see you.  You are going to be going in a few.  
There is a question and answer session and there is a question and answer text.  I have seen that some of you have asked questions.  It is a bit late on the floor for our panelists to be able to talk. 
Allison, your text didn't come through so if you can send the question again.  Meantime as we talk about the aspects we can see that the issues about connectivity is good at least to talk because our countries and noting rural communities and we need to be able to give incentives in terms of connectivity and skills development for people to be able to connect.  I mean COVID-19 has taught us that these initiatives and especially the Internet Governance Forum that we always have is an avenue for us to be able to push people to be able to come together and achieve a common purpose.  When the lockdowns ensued, it was only through connectivity that we were able to actually get work going even to be able to get in contact with our families. So I think it is important that we recognize that our initiatives and conversations have to move forward beyond what we are talking about.
     A little breather.  I mean as the conversations have gone on, we can see that there is so much work to do.  And a good example is from the grassroots approach and also the internet approach and joining forces with the big people.
     I don't know, Wisdom, you just joined us, are there any points you would like to highlight before we go to Onica for her session?
     >> WISDOM DONKOR: I apologize for coming in late.  I had to attend an important meeting so I'm here.  So just --
     >> MODERATOR: All right.
     >> WISDOM DONKOR: So just continue the program.
     >> MODERATOR: Before I go, Peter.  And also recognized as our emcee moving forward, our Rapporteur, thank you so much.
     Is there any youth perspective to point out to us before we go on.
     >> LILY EDINAM BOTSYOE: So sorry.  Not entirely, but I agree with what has been discussed so far.  I came in for Andre's point and what he submitted the five recommendations and I thought that was really encompassing for youth, too. And listened to Mr. Stanley, and I'm impressed with the work he has been doing with inclusion and access to technologies.  It has been helpful.  I see that the trend continues.
     We are talking about inclusion like he said, one part that we miss out aside having data literacy and access online is technologies.  You have access to online but the things that enable you to connect.  That is the point that I think aside advocating for affordability in our part of the world, how about think through innovation and creativity.  Where we are able to have young people and we work on staff that can help us build devices maybe at cheaper prices.  Probably are -- and that is why it is expensive.  And see if the youth unit for creativity and innovation.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Lily Edinam.  Onica Nonhlanhla Makwakwa, are you ready?  Onica, can you hear me?
     >> ONICA NONHLANHLA MAKWAKWA: Yes, I can.
     >> MODERATOR: Great. Great for you to join us.  Onica will have the floor.  I believe you had one of the plans going on.  And one of the main arguments now is affordability aspect, and we know you do have lot of work on that from organization.  And also you have been involved in some aspects of internet community networks on which front.  So can you please have the floor, thank you.
     >> ONICA NONHLANHLA MAKWAKWA: Thank you so much.  And good morning, good afternoon, and evening to everyone.
     It is truly great to be here with everyone and it is really great to hear everyone speak earlier this morning.  Especially Andre's points that really hone in to give us a really good way forward in terms of what we now need to focus on and invest in to be able to get us to that point of going beyond digital service for everyone, especially in this region.
     So you know, my thinking around community networks so far is that we had some really great pilots of community networks.  I think that the initiative that Carlos supported in the Eastern Cape in South Africa remains a really great example of how using community networks begins to bring in the kind of affordability and access that we are looking for in communities where private sectors deemed as not viable to fully invest in.  And their the frustration in the sense that while we agree the reason why the areas continue to be unconnected may largely be because of the commercial nonviability of them. It is also quite frustrating that there also seems to not have been I'm going to call it political will at this point to enable the creation of community network and the support of community network as an alternative to making sure that these communities are able to remain connected in a way that is also affordable and meaningful.
     However, I want to believe that the experience that we have all just gone through with COVID-19 has really articulated how connecting everyone is no longer a choice, a luxury, but an absolute necessity.
     What I would like to see going forward, and I'm not going to go through the affordability statistics.  But I think we all know it is pretty damn expensive to connect to the internet especially here in this region.  And even if countries that met the affordability target, it is affordable for people at the top income quantiles for the most part, but at the lower and middle quantile are still paying more than they should be for it to be available in a way that we would really say it is meeting the affordability test.
     For me, think that there is a real opportunity here or perhaps a fight also for us to really work on policy and regulation reform that begins to pave the way for community networks to be in -- an option that is considered similarly when we, you know, deploy electricity, for example, to the rural and far away communities that we also immediately think of other ways of being able to make sure that they are also connected to the internet through -- and how to enable community networks in those communities.
     So that requires really looking at, you know, our laws, our legislation, the national ICT policies and digital strategies to make sure that they incorporate this alternative way of connecting those communities. Because as long as community networks are kind of seen as the pilot, the child, the thing you do out there in this remote place and that one, I feel like we will not get to the point where they automatically become an option in communities where it may not be viable to bring in the big networks.
     But also, I mean I really question also this notion that community networks can only be successful in those communities only.  The issues around quality of service in some of the urban communities that already have connectivity are quite real.
     This seems to be comfort in our operators to service what they call business centers very well, charge poor communities around the business centers the same amount that they charge in the business center but not give them the similar quality.  And so for me, you know, we need a disruption in just also how we have looked at this from an economy point of view to empower communities so that they are able to take lead in that connectivity.  But also the issue around funding.  I mean I just really don't think we will get our way out of poverty in every corner of the continent.
     I think that it is a point as we talk about policy and regulation that begins to mainstream community networks as a viable operation, we need to really talk about public funding for community networks.  If we agree that connecting every citizen is for public good.  A basic right that even governments depend on people being connected to manage a pandemic they are dealing with right now.  So why are we not able to advocate for special allocation, you know, adjustment of some of the right-of-way policies to enable community networks to be able to reach where we are not reaching or where even universal were supposed to close the gap.
     But that gap continues to exist even with the universal service and access funds.  So how do we begin to shift radically to really prioritize connecting everyone and change the, you know, the economy view that we have had in terms of everyone being connected and in terms of mainstreaming our community networks for those communities where private sector has not been able to get to. So that we actually not just pay lip service to these gaps, but really demonstrating that we can bring connectivity to everyone, indeed.  
And I'm really curious to hear about even this notion of, you know, I don't see community networks as synonymous with rural areas only.  Because if we look at operations such as the public wi-fi, for example, in New York City that is major metropolitan where a community has come together and created a network to make sure that everyone is connected.  I think we sort of need that radical thinking.  But that is a good example of success of community networks that can go beyond just connecting individuals.  I mean if you look at the Eastern Cape project alone, you not only just have connectivity, but you also are creating jobs and slowing down migration in an area where the only option for the people used to be to move to the next big town.
     And so, you know, how are we beginning to take a look at that in a way that you know, merits the kind of public funding that should be acquired by everyone working in that area.  And just to wrap up a little bit, Andre also mentioned the issue around content.  We need to really begin to invest on the demand side issues in order to continuously justify why everyone needs to be online.
     And so the issue of content, not just content, but local content, how are we supporting entrepreneurs in the region to provide that local content that is relevant?  But also that goes beyond the language of image so that we truly also are looking at community networks as well as this expansion of connectivity as a space that we can also begin to have information so that people are able to create content, consume content, and benefit from content that goes just beyond the usual content that they with find watching the international channels on television.
     Thank you very much. I think that is all the comments I have.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much to our panelist and Onica.  This is a very fluid conversation and there is a lot of interesting going on.
     I would like to recognize the questions on -- I don't know if you would want to ask your question again so we can -- Alison, I don't can know if you want to ask your question again so we can put it out there.  Are you able to hear?  Please go ahead.
     >> ALISON GILLWALD: I don't want to take you back at all.  I have eventually posted my long comment.  I was just to build on what Onica was saying and the people before her, I was pointing out as I think is my absolute duty to point out that we just simply don't have the information we require to make proper analysis of what we are facing and for the policy interventions that are required.
     But I think what COVID-19 has revealed is the compounding effect of digital inequality on the structural inequality that we always knew digital inequality represented.  And a small number of peoples, a small tiny elite in Africa that move the school and working online and digitally supplement the effects of COVID.
     So the figures that have often been quoted, aggregated figures at the continental level or even a national level mask the extreme inequalities that we have in our economies and societies. And really the kind of interventions that you need in certain areas around about digital inequality are around actual connectivity.  But in fact what we see from COVID-19 is that your digital inequality, this paradox that as we connect more people we actually get increased inequality between people. And now not only between those who are connected and not connected as we had with the digital divide and with voice services, but actually the differences between those people just passively connected consuming small bits of data at the high costs spoken about and those who are actually productively able to even create businesses and work online and bank online and reduce the costs.
     As we have been able to see 2018 surveys done only across 10 African countries this time, sadly, that there is no future funding for to try and get an understanding of the demand side limitations highlighted in Andre and other people's spoke about the stimulation needed from a content point of view and security and privacy point of view and frameworks and et cetera.  And then really creating opportunities that Carlos spoke about with temporary spectrum that has been granted with new spectrum that has been granted.  5G spectrum linking that to making available other spectrum that other people can use.
     Moving away from effectively, you know, licensing systems and supply side commercial valuation of licenses and business models that have not delivered the kind of, you know, connectivity that we need in Africa.  Africans by and large simply cannot afford the current licensing and models that we have.  We have to create complementary opportunities for more people to get into these networks and microbusinesses and community networks, dynamic spectrum and operators that can use a much lower cost in a rural spectrum that’s underutilized in rural areas. We need a new digital deal for Africa.
     We have to look back and say these things aren't working and we have to have alternative ways of connecting the people of Africa for the next pandemic and also for the social and economic reconstruction that is essential now from a government point of view but also from industry and private point of view as well.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Alison.  So I will go to the questions and taking it from the last, the immediate one.  So what I’m just going to do is pose to our panel.  
So Ibrahim Cisse is asking about community networks appearing as a threat to traditional ISP business.  I think that is a good question there from Ibrahim.  And I will go to the other two or three questions and do it in wrap-up.  
And Jabhera Matogoro is asking if ISOC and APC has been the forefront to push for community network’s complimentary approach around the world.  What are the recommendations on sustainable models? Okay. So he is looking more at sustainable models in a cooperative society.  
     And the last but one is from Herman Ramos.  He is asking what are the best and most used models that have successfully met the needs of community areas, the long-term community sustainability consents? And the last one is an example given from Chrysov Vasileios in the community network in Greece which have signed an MOU with an a local university who provide us with the back haul capacity.  Are there any similar initiatives elsewhere?  How could we see this practice being standardized across many different countries?
     I would like to pass this to the panel, as appropriate. And anyone can take any of these questions.  Please go ahead.
     >> CARLOS REY-MORENO: Again, trying to bring all our comments together to the questions from Ibrahim around a threat to existing operators.  Where Michuki was advocating for political will and Gisa was asking for finding ways to enable community networks, and Onica as well was talking about political will and maybe we need to consider what is the point of the regulators and policy makers?  Are they there to protect the private sector against the threat or policy makers and regulators are there to actually enact affordable access for everyone, right?
     So if they are seen as a threat by the private sector or some actors in the private sector, well, that is part of the discussion but it is also part of the role of the policy makers, right?  If the sector is not working well, if the sector is not providing the goal or is not achieving the goal that it should be achieving because of the actors within that sector not being able to do so, maybe there is something to doing that sector that is not giving more money and giving more resources to those that are not able to achieve that goal but maybe to enable complementary models that might be able to do so.
     And community networks even in a pilot phase, although I'll not sure I agree with the pilot concept when some of them have been in operation and sustainable for more seven or eight years and scaling and reaching other communities.
     I think that they are proving to be so.  I think the problem is even from that concept is maybe the comfort zone that someone was talking about before and how the communications sector was seen as a sector where very few actors with only national footprint were able to deploy services affordably, or not even affordably but just to provide communications services. And as Michuki was saying with the granularity of the fiber, how fiber is becoming more and more pervasive, how the cost of telecommunication equipment is going down and going down, there are many more actors that could do so and the regulatory frameworks and the policy frameworks are not allowing those actors to actually engage in the sector because there is no political will, as Onica was saying.  
So more actors, the only thing that are going to do is to enrich the sector, is complementing where the sector is not able to attain its goal. And it is beneficial for everyone because there is more wholesale agreements.  If the demand goes up, everyone benefits because there are intersection agreements and traffic and network effects and maybe things that they will favor everyone.  Blocking as it is happening and having the political will not to enable all of the actors just because they are seen as a threat to the private sector seems to me a weak argument not to enable actors like in this case community network or microenterprises or competitors that could have an important net effect into the sector, into the society and to those communities that are severely deprived from many other things as Alison was talking about.  I think that entry point might not be the right one, but more thinking about how can we make the telecoms operator ecosystem richer.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Carlos.  So my question has always been what is the incentive?  I know that due to the industry standards and operations and how things flow we tend to be in silos and work in our open kind of little space.
     But looking at the work of the sphere and ecosystem with which we work with the internet we are supposed to be more inclusive.  I know Andre, you have been working with a number of entities creating more of a convergent idea in bringing people onboard.  I would like to start from Andre to the rest of the panel members really to be able to highlight the inclusivity in about let's say a minute or so.  And then we have some closing argument from the rest of the panel members before we see if we have any more questions to answer.
     >> ANDRE LAPERRIERE: Thank you very much, Kwaku.  As I mentioned earlier, as far as GODAN is concerned, one of our targets is SDG number two, combatting hunger.  So hence the importance of anything that deals with the process, production, and distribution of food. But I was going to say that the -- in agriculture in general, between 70 and 90% of all of the jobs related to food are held by women.  Over 70%.
     So that is one more reason to go for inclusivity.  Not just because it is the right thing to do, but also because of the industry.  Most of the workers in that industry tend to be women.  Because of the digital divide, they tend to be less equipped to deal with the industry as they could be because of available technology.
     So that is one reason why we are pushing very much to include women and emphasize the role of women in that industry.  And then in the eliminating eventually the digital divide.
     One last point.  We should not think of connectivity in a binary way like whether you are connected or you are not.  Because there is different levels in there.  As I mentioned earlier, 50% -- in theory, 50% of people in Africa can have access to internet but less than one-third of them do because it is too expensive or they don't know how it works.  There is all kinds of restrictions that I will not repeat here.
     But there is also the quality of access.  Even for the one-third of 50%, the 15% that really do connect to the internet when it is available, a lot of those that connect don't have what they call a meaningful internet connection which means it’s so slow or the quality so poor even though they are connected they make very little use of the full potential that could be there if the quality would improve.  These are some efforts that hamper our efforts in terms of increasing absorption and penetration of internet.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Andre. Stanley?
     >> STANLEY KWAKYE DANKYIRA: Thank you very much.  Alright, I will touch on one particular talking about an aspect especially SDG4. The key to every step of the way not afford us to work on this, especially the community involved.  Information every step of the way we are part of it.
     I realize in certain cities we do some of the things in isolation.  What I realize is what about what you are doing in terms of making sure that you are appreciating -- if you isolate or just go in and dump it on them or just try to do it, they don't see exactly what you are doing.  You need to get the stakeholders involved.  As part of our work that we do in the bridging the digital divide and getting the people involved, we make sure that the people are involved right from the infrastructure even if they haven't any in the money we make sure they are part of it.  Even if they are not bringing in the money.
     You look at it in framework that aspect and you can tackle it.  Even though we cannot understand and one may not understand what is happening in terms of technology, they wish to be part of it.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: All right.  We can go to -- let's go to Michuki.
     >> MICHUKI MWANGI: Thank you.  I will talk about something to do with the sustainability of community networks.  This has been brought up as a question, but I would like to just draw your attention to something which has happened but is never criticized as much or looked at in the way that community networks are looked at with respect to sustainability.
     I have seen mobile operators investments in licensing in hundreds of millions of dollars, but it fails. Are there questions like oh, how sustainable is a mobile network operator?  No, in fact, there are more auctions going up for spectrum and licensing but there is no question about sustainability.  So why is it that traditional business models for telecoms are not questioned on their sustainability?  Yet alternatives that are trying to cover areas that are not well covered by the traditional operators are actually being questioned about sustainability?
     Or maybe just to build on that, the fact that we have not invested in these areas.  We have not developed the markets in these areas for there to be a business case is one of the underlying factors of why we see community networks as not a potential for sustainability, they don't have the potential for being sustainable.
     I would argue that if we make the same investment we do with commercial areas where mobile operators and other networks, the traditional operators go to, if we make the same type of investment and development in these underserved areas, the market is there.  It will not be the same way we invest and develop commercial viable areas.  It is a different way.  And that is why only community networks can actually do that.  Because they live there, they will do their market assessment and analysis and understand where the gaps are and what the content issues are, you know, what solutions they should be provided.  It will be a very different approach, but that is the only way they can develop.  When I see the question around how sustainable are community networks, then they are actually very sustainable but we have not had the opportunity to develop them to be sustainable.  And that is what is needed.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you all.  So Stephanie and Onica, and then we will have Carlos.
     >> ONICA NONHLANHLA MAKWAKWA: Totally I agree with everything that has been said.  We have seen the success of community networks.  And I think that what we now need to focus on is how do we develop the kind of policies and regulations that can continue to enable this type of development.  Because it works.  You know, in a way that we did for mobile operators without necessarily testing how well they were at delivering their services.  We have a product that works very well at connecting the unconnected and providing services to those who are not easily reachable.
     So how do we support them with the right policies and regulations in order for them -- I don't think an issue of whether they are sustainable or not. An issue of how to have the government for them to be recognized for the gap that they are filling.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Stephanie?
     >> STEPHANIE PERRIN: Yes, hi, it’s Stephanie. I may be being nostalgic, but Canada connected all of its schools back in roughly the year 2000. That was quite a task because some of them are remote and had to be connected on islands and remote areas. But that took a major incentive of the cost to promote community networks and it was a coalition with money.
     And my sense is with the broadband deployment that is what is missing.  I'm glad to see smaller funds of money such as CIRA made available.  But I'm very worried that the large funds that we need to actually bring deployment to the north, for instance, and to the rural areas, which are many, many miles from urban centers, it requires government support which is going to be in short supply because of the financial crisis that most countries are going through and certainly Canada will be as a result of COVID.
     So we don't seem to have the infrastructure knitting together our communities to work together to push the government, if you see what I mean. And I think that that would definitely help.  Sorry, that is not really a community networking response.  It is more of a push the government response.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Stephanie.  Carlos.  I see the arguments and conversations have been going back and forth and one important aspect has been the missing point we should have had a government person.  I think in the aftermath, I think one aspect we see very important is putting -- it is important to bring people to the table to talk.
     Regulation, policy making, institutions and other works, how do we -- what is the charge?  I mean what are your closing points?
     >> CARLOS REY-MORENO: Thanks, Kwaku, and thank you, everyone.  I want to close with two points, right.
     The first one is related to what everyone has been saying in the closing remarks that especially Stephanie now in relation to public funding, right? It is true that providing services in remote areas require public expenditure in any other public service.  The thing is that communications has been left to the private sector or to the big private sector. And at the moment and despite the big private sector have been among the top most profitable companies in any stock market that you look at for any investor and without -- you are not using those fundings for their own profit, now there is a constant trend during this year and because of COVID to say well, if you give us more money, we will do it, right?
     Again, public money for big private sector that could have saved and could have done something different in the sector was looked at as a public service delivery sector rather than as a pure commercial profitable sector.
     Something we will see happening in the next couple of years, I would say, is a big public fight to expend the money in the rural areas whether it goes for private interest or public interest?  Do we want to expand the service provision that it is not affordable and it is not of quality as Onica was saying and saying in remote rural areas? Do we want to put public money in to that for them not having affordable services for them to be subsidized and going again to entrench private sector interest?  Or be bold and support other alternatives that may have and do have another public service delivery in mind.  
Talking about the local content and affordability and rural development and other things that definitely the traditional private sector do not have into account.  That would be one thing.  
The other side of the coin or the positive side of the coin, and that is probably what I want to end my contribution is in relation to some changes that we are already seeing.  We see a lot of development in Latin America around how these complementary access models can be enabled and more and more governments are looking into that, more public consultations around spectrum sharing and looking at the right reform for the operator licensing and so on and so forth.  And we are starting to see in Africa, right?
     We saw last year the African European Commission being requested with by the members to promote community networks in the continent and other recommendation from the Member States. And we see Uganda taking on the declaration and creating a community network license.  We know that Ethiopia is going to do something similar soon and other countries are looking into that and we are providing direct technical assistance to them to so.  There are changes and trends and needs to be more bold, I don't know if within the audience and elsewhere, more bold public service, public servants and government officials and regulators that look at the sector as a public service sector and not as a private service sector that has been in the last 20 or 30 years.  That is my concluding remarks and all of the panelists talked on the different points that could make this happen.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much for those important points. Thank you for the panelists and for our participants.  It has been a very fulfilling discussion on this IGF workshop Number 37 on Community Networks, Electricity and Digital Inclusion.  I hope that we can keep the conversations going on and with some critical policy recommendations from other sectors.  I want to thank all for your participation.
     And if we missed any questions, please consider it as part of the conversations that we have been having, but I believe that in the context of our framework we are working it has been a very fluid and active discussion in which we needed to keep the conversations going on.  It has been our pleasure to serve you, and I hope that we can keep all of these momentum and the activities going forward in each sector of our series of life as we push internet governance forward.
     Thank you so much and have a good Internet Governance Forum 2020.  Bye for now.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-7-42-personal-sovereignty-digital-trust-in-the-algorithmic-age-raw^^

 
>> Moira Patterson: I'm going get started now.  As we are just a few minutes into our slot.  So, let's get started.  Hello, everybody.  My name is Moira Patterson.  I'm the global market affairs and community engagement Director for The IEEE standards association.  I'll be moderating the Open Forum today and I'm very happy that you all joined us.
IEEE is the world's largest technical professional organization dedicated to advancing technology for the benefit of humanity.  And we are honored to be here with you today as part of this IGF event.
First I want to thank the IGF organizers for organizing the timely and impactful IGF under difficult circumstances, no doubt.  So, we are very happy to be part of it as well.
I also want to thank the IEEE team supporting this session for all the great supports and inputs.  So we would like to welcome and thank you for joining us today.  In a few minutes we'll start this session but I have a few housekeeping items to mention before we get started.
So first off, we will have all of the attendees muted and we will be taking questions using the chat features.  And Q&A features in your Zoom application.  So click on the relevant buttons in the bottom bar of your interface.  Also the Open Forum is being recorded and will be available on the IGF events page and it should be available as soon as the session ends.
We hope this session will be interactive.  We know we have a lot of great attendee whose have highly-relevant experiences and insights to share or questions to ask from different environments and we encourage such interactions.
So please again, mute the Q&A function -- use the Q&A function along in this session and we'll try to answer as many questions or have as many discussion points as we can accommodate.
So, to learn a bit more about our audience today, and also to get familiar with the chat function, we just want to put a question in the chat and we ask all of you to type in your answers.  So the question is, what stakeholder group do you represent?  So industry, government, Civil Society, what type of organization are you with?  And what country are you joining us from today?
Just give your answer and we'll read a few of them so we can get a sense of who is on the call with us today.
I am seeing we have someone from Australia today.  Ontario, I believe.  Thank you and welcome.
>> Salma Abbasi:  And there is another gentleman from Consueloa.
>> Moira Patterson: Civil Society, et cetera.  U.K.
One of our speakers is from the U.K. but we'll get to that in just a minute.  Excellent.  Thank you for sharing.  And there I see someone from Kenya, Civil Society as well.  Excellent.  Well, thank you all.
As I said, we have one speaker, Dr. Salma in the U.K., and John and I are both based in the U.S.
So we have people from around the world here and we are happy to be here.  So let's get started.  Today we have two other distinguished Panelists and I would like to just give a brief introduction before we start the discussions.  First off we have Dr. Salma Abbasi, and she is a technologist, philanthropist and social activist with a proven track record of visionary leader with dynamic drive and positive other in.  She motivates professionals and Civil Society.  She is the CEO of e-worldwide group, International company focusing on developments and securities.  She is also former Senior Vice President for technologies and has over 35 years experience in the field of technology, innovation for sustainable development and policy development for economic empowerment (?) also with us is John Havens he is Executive Director of the IEEE global initiative on Essex and autonomous and intelligent systems.  Helped defined guidelines for beneficial relationships between humans and their increasingly clever machine counterparts.  His mission is to educate, train and empower people involved with developing these future technologies in order to implement ethically aligned design and improve outcomes for all.  In addition to that, John is also Executive Director of the council on extended learning and interdisciplinary group of experts founded by IEEE standards association and MIT.  They Champion responsible participant design data agency and metrics on economic disparity that prioritizes people and the planet over profit and productivity.  So you see, these two very highly-accomplished experts participants.  I myself, I'm Moira Patterson, and I'm in the IEEE standards association.  I oversee some key initiatives related to digital inclusion, identity, data governance as well as looking at children's on line, off line experiences.  I also managed strategic initiative and policy engagement a focus on Europe and Africa and engaged in capacity building activities and strategic engagement national standardization organizations.
So this is the team who you will be hearing from today.  And I also want to say that while we are here for this session, the IEEE, the views expressed during the discussion may be our own, the speaker's own and not necessarily those of IEEE.  Keep that in mind.
And with that, I do want to again thank you for being part of this discussion and get started with the context.  So, in the wake of COVID-19, there has been a dialogue and we would like to say erroneous dialogue, that has emerged that talks about the tensions between privacy and protection around addressing and addressing the COVID-19 pandemic.
So there is an assumption that people need to give up information such as location, biometric, or medical data and other very sensitive information is really needed to be able to address and combat the pandemic.
But the concern is, is that key Human Rights can be violated in such a context.  So, what we want to discuss really is, is there really a tension or how do we address and balance these needs?
So to get the dialogue started, I want to start -- we will be talking about three things under this topic, and then take questions in each of them.  So I'll start with the first theme where we do want to stay with this line of thinking.  So during COVID-19, we have seen how digital technologies have been a lifeline for many people.  Many of you have experiences and we are all here at IGF through this whole technology, so I think we see it as a very real way.
So, people have used digital technology as a lifeline around the world.  So first off, I want to talk about what are the key messages we have relating to digital technologies and personal digitalized entities and data governance?  So just from my point of view, ensuring that the conditions of on line access enable and preserve our personal agency and dignity in way that is empower people, it's very important.  And I think in the off line world or in the physical world, we have levels of agency and trust that are assumed or that are foundational and that are somewhat disappearing in the on line world or can disappear in the on line world where data can be combined and analyzed in new ways and in potentially invasive ways.
And in IEEE we have a number of activities where we are looking at managing exactly that concern through different bit of governance guide lines and things of that nature.  So I want to ask Dr. Salma, how do we reset and address the concerns around a surveillance post-COVID-19 in the context of sovereignty, identity and data governance?
>> Salma Abbasi thank you very much for inviting me to join this excellent Panel and raise the very relevant question in today's times.
I think that there is no doubt that globally there has been a huge acceleration in how technologies are being used by governments to support us during the mitigation and response to COVID-19.
Many governments opened the -- in Europe in particular, Belgium, Australia, Italy, U.K. and Germany, are gathering our data through their track and trade systems.  Some governments are actually doing this in a very unethical manner and taking the data -- I think there are some examples from Ecuador and Israel where data has been taken.  Your medical records, your own personal situation with COVID is being shared with people in the area that you live so that they can avoid you or your -- the potential threat or spreading the disease.
There is a huge debate at the moment on how is this actually invading your privacy and the doctor/patient ethical Code of Conduct in that space?  What I see is that there is a balance and a conflict here between how much data should be given to address the pandemic and how much data should be protected because we are moving into a very dangerous area of surveillance.
So the question is, how much surveillance is acceptable?  How much privacy do we need to keep for ourselves and how much needs to be given away due to public safety and health concerns?
So policymakers need to recognize that technology and surveillance systems are constructed by Private Sector.  They have ethics.  They have bias issues, all sorts of conflicts going on, which may not necessarily match what we believe as private citizens to be acceptable.  And also, unintentional errors occur which also impact us.  And there are all sorts of examples where we'll acknowledge that the data is being collected by these big giants in the world, tech companies like Google, FACEBOOK, Apple, Amazon, all forming an omni foundation, on line surveillance architecture.  John will probably talk about this as well.
With this, as you know, more and more data is bubbling up every day because of the Internet boom but also because of the pandemic.  Smartphone devices are also being used to gather lots and lots of data and we are unable to really understand exactly how our data is being used.
So there is an importance for us to build a technical task force that really understands how the data is being collected, how the data is being used in a more actable and transparent manner.  And we have to actually regain to reset and understand after the pandemic is over, what are the right things to do and how do we protect ourselves and how do states actually work in this space?
There is a danger with the response data that is out there, that our behaviors our attitudes, our moods, preferences and social society are actually being analyzed every day through AI.  And I know the work that the IT -- IEEE team has been doing on ethical-aligned design is helping to bring back efforts in that space.  What we see, as an example,ide like to give is the Government of Estonia, I think that's a Gold Standard that we should actually look to in the future because after they have a huge cyberattack in 2007, the government actually set up a huge infrastructure to protect its security but in a very transparent way where people knew what data was being collected, how was it going to be used, how was it going to be protected and which agency was going to use it.  So it wasn't in Private Sector's hand, it was with the government.  And that is a very important aspect that we need to address.
I think we have to accept that in the long term as life continues, that there will be need for more data to be collected by governments to keep us safe in the future.
This is just the beginning.  Many pandemics in the future are expected.  What we need to do is we need to take hold of our data in such a way when we develop a mechanism where we actually own our data.  We need to take back the responsibility rather than blindly saying, click, yes, take it.  There needs to be an ownership and recognition that our data is our -- we own our data.  I think we have to realize that the responsibility isn't just in the hands of the government.  It's also in ours.
And I think that as we deal with -- there is many, many things that I believe that we need to be able to do but the first thing is, we need to have some serious discussions with the Private Sector that is collecting our data and create those kinds of policies and systems that are in place that actually allow the individual to create in terms of reference for their data, where they decide who has their data.  Who is allowed or who are they giving allowances to share that data and when is that data going to be expired?  And when will it not be shared?  It's almost like in terms it of reference in contracts that we need to put in place.  And I believe the Estonia government model is a God one to study to take this forward.
The question was, post-COVID, the surveillance date.  If you look at how data has been misused and how companies like FACEBOOK, there is a wonderful example of a gentleman who wanted to sell on eBay -- an actual case.  He put 10 years of his data on eBay to sell and FACEBOOK stopped him and said, wait a minute, our Terms and Conditions say you can't sell your data.  You gave it to me.  So that is a ridiculous example of what happened but on the flip side, the U.S. port has actually stopped and find and sued FACEBOOK from using data that was -- people were putting data on FACEBOOK for their A I and testingtheir programs without the permission.
So the law is trying to catch-up.  But I think that the recent work that is going on in Europe, the EU, is also going to be something we'll talk about later but I think lots of things, but the first thing I'd like to say is we need to own our data and governments need to set policies that actually regain trust with the population.  Thank you.
>> Moira Patterson: Thank you Salma.  And I know John is very passionate about exactly this topic of data sovereignty.  So John, why don't you share with us why the emergence of data sovereignty is so essential, especially in the algorithmic age.
>> John Havens: Just to build off of Salma Abbasi, who is a dear friend and brilliant.  The phrase, own your data, it's a big term and I completely agree with you, Salma.  I think one aspect of ownership, which is such a beautiful time for all humans to think about, is what does it really mean to own your data anyway?
And I want to start metaphorically because I find that my friends who aren't in technology - eye know this audience is in technology, but I'm starting here to make the metaphor work and get more technical.
In one sense, what is the access to the data that you create?  And how would you even begin to understand why it's important?  So let me give you an example.  Our health data.  I wrote a book, two books ago called, hacking happiness, where I did a lot of research into the quantified self movement.  And these are geeks like me.  They wear a fit bit, they measure their sleep, they measure how many steps they take.  They measure this and that.  And people would sometimes say to them, why are you measuring everything?  Doesn't that take away from your life?  And their answer and their mentality was more, I'm not going to do it every day for the rest of my life.  I'm taking a measure of the data that represents my actions and behaviors that in aggregate really shows the world, at least the digital world, who I am.
In one sense, what we have experienced as humans right now, is this situation where other people, because of advertising and really good opportunities brought by advertising and governments in terms of safety, kind of literally know more about us than we know about ourselves.  And this is either some people can say it's good or bad or whatever else.  IEEE and me included although I'm speaking for John here, but I don't like to come from a place of fear.  It doesn't get work done.
Advancing technology for humanity, the tag line for IEEE is to say how do we frame digital data sovereignty.  Let's make it about an opportunity first.  So one aspect of owning your data is owning the narrative or understanding around what it would mean if we had the tools, technologies and the policies to do an example of every, whatever person on the call would like to be able to do.  When you go to your doctor, let's say you have a child who is sick with something that is pretty severe, like not to be negative but whatever it is.  And you have to see a bunch of different doctors.  What a gift it would be, and I can speak from America.  Right now today, I have to go to my doctor and then a surgeon and then a specialist and this person and that's of course if I have access to these amazing people.  So I want to be conscious of that.  But they all in general, give me this.  It's a piece of paper, right?  Cool.  Thanks.  But about what could they give?  Now there is the opportunity to give me digital data about those trips.
In aggregate that means I can start to have what is called portability of my data which is instead of a physical piece of paper, the actual data about my child in that example, starts to be grouped in such a way.  Now all this means, I'm still paying my doctor.  I'm happy to pay my doctor.  Happy to pay my insurance.  These deserves that money very much as caregivers.  I have a resemblance of control over my child because at the end of the day, I care most about my child.  But a lot of times, I think there are conversations about data that get kind of hard to understand, for me even, I have been in this space for 10 years.  Data is a big word.  Let's make it more personal.  Because this is how it will work.  This is how we take ownership of our data is to own the narrative first and understand why this is so important.  Your health data.  You have to know when your doctor or your surgeon or trusted whomever givers you data that you can share it with someone easily.
And this is really sometimes technical as much as it is policy or otherwise.  But when you start to think about 10 different doctors and 20 surgeons and this and that, it becomes life or death.  And the question then becomes, if there is all these wonderful technologies that can analyze our activities and behavior for advertising purposes, which that is great.  I'm happy that people are tracking my preferences to know what coffee I want or what have you.  This is well coo.  But the question that I often ask people is, why do you think that the same tools to analyze aren't available for people for things like health and the rest of our lives?
There is it a lot of answers and they come from a positive standpoint.  Let's just say I don't know because I don't want to be negative and someone already pointed out about companies tracking and stuff.  But let me just come from a technical standpoint and expert standpoint.  Every single tool that is used for advertising and tracking that heads been very nuanced for almost a decade, those are all completely available for the individual.  Period.  Meaning is it science fiction to say we can't build a personal algorithmic Terms and Conditions for ourselves.  We absolutely can.
So let's make the positive thing and I'll wrap up this part of my talk, which is to say, this is such an opportunity to say to the advertising world, whomever else, thank you for all these beautiful tools and technologies and ways to track us.  And what I want to have a better experience with my product I'm interested in, that's cool and now all of those companies et cetera, thank you very much for changing all of your priorities to now say, what a gift to the world to go to the caregivers dealing with COVID, to go to the environment, to go to all of these different things where along with now tracking our preferences for what we want to buy, cool, now what a sacrosanct and beautiful time to use all the beautiful technologies to go to every individual in the world.  It sounds impossible buffets book and Google have been flying balloons over Africa for five years to give them Wi-Fi.  The technology is there.  But the real opportunity is the narrative history and we have to stop saying, it's going to be so hard for people to do these different things.  It really isn't.  The message has to become the only way we will know who we are and have agency and identity and dignity is to go into the immersive era where we are equipped with the tools to speak back to the algorithmic world in the same we are tracked now and it's a wonderful opportunity and I'm very excited about it and I'm so happy we can do it versus just getting angry about things we can't change.  We can change and they need to change.
>> Moira Patterson: Thank you John and Salma for your perspectives.  And I'm seeing that there is already some dialogue going on, some agreements to some of these points about owning the narrative and also owning data and having some guide lines and controls around that.  But I'm not see anything questions yet so let me move to the second question that we have for discussion and then we'll ask questions and take them later.  Let me keep moving and move to our next theme.
I think it's actually related to what we just discussed.  We are talking about, and I think John to your point about a lot of these technologies have been developed.  How can we make sure they get leveraged in other contexts to make our lives better beyond the specific context you mentioned.  I think that's a good segue into this.  So do you see any changes that are needed and how we fundamentally approach technology development and how we think about solving problems?  And just one thing I want to mention before I extend the question to the other Panelist is that, I'd like to highlight the role of standards in this context because as a standards organization, IEEE of course is very engaged in this space and we see the critical role that standards can play in this space in scaling solutions.
So one thing as the role of standards to empower people, such as standards on digital literacy, IEEE just approved the standard in this space to help measure and create digital literacy frameworks, which then helps empower people with the necessary skills.  But even more fundamentally perhaps, I would say that human dignity needs to be at the core of our thinking.  And building on what was said before, the technology should serve people and people's needs at the very basic level.  People and their communities.  So developing standards to help support that fundamental understanding, I think it will be very important.
And so, I want to ask, related to this question for Dr. Salma, how do we ensure privacy and trust in this environment where data is commercialized in the algorithmic age?
>> Salma Abbasi: That's a very good question and as I said before, we have a lot to do ourselves.  I think there is no doubt in anybody's mind that today we are turning out -- I use this word, trillions of bytes of data, and one billion photographs are posted on line on FACEBOOK.  With the smartphones, the Internet of Things, the data being transmitted at high speeds across all sorts of networks, there is large data.  This is a whole business that has, involved and evolving faster every day.  There is a couple of things I think that are really paramount and this is first to acknowledge and understand that this data explosion is there and it is indeed a commodity and the person who is creating, generating this, is us.  So in order to be able to move forward and address the issue of trust, we need to understand that multiple components are playing with the artificial intelligence evolving and the ability of our personal information to be in nanoseconds or less than that, to be able to be analyzed and basically navigate through our data-mining, deep Machine Learning, our personal information is now being exploited at new levels.
So this issue has been seen to be in a dangerous form when you look at how people are being bombarded and manipulated through specific needs, political or commercial.
I think that first of all, we have to, as I said, as John said as well, we need to agree that we own our data and there is a new narrative that is set by us.  And we have to demand, trust has to be earned but we have to demand our rights.  And I think unless we collaborate collectively with governments and the Private Sector and Civil Society, it is very difficult to be able to shift this huge power, which is in a -- bigger than the government's if you will, there is a under tone here of risk that is becoming increasingly hostile that manipulate us in every single way you can think of.  And I think that we have to rethink how are we going to give our data to business?  And the Private Sector has to realize that this data is owned by the individual.  What they or how they process it and manipulate it and resell it is something that we need to know and we need to be responsible and supported by the government to have those regulations in place to protect us.  How is it possible we can do all these manipulations and interrogations with manipulation of data and propaganda and promotion, but when it comes to the analysis of the trends in health, we are unable to do that?  When it comes to technology for social good, there is delays, no revenue, no billion dollars a they companies and corporations are earning.  So that has to be pushed by government with the right accountability they is driven by citizen.  And I will go back again and say that we have to be able to develop a balanced method which is allowing the data to be seen and owned by us and used given by our permission.
That is going to require new laws and new regulations to be in place that are enforceable.  The regulations need to be enforced.  Consequences need to be had.  Only when there are consequences will anything change.  You can't have the big 5 sitting in America in Congress and the government saying that so you tell us how should we better regulate you?  That doesn't work.  So governments need to increase their collaboration with think tanks and the people like the IEE and other organizations and agencies to actually increase our negotiation power to build a more balanced ethical understanding of how our data is being used and manipulated.  Only by demonstrating this as the Government of Estonia has done, will we be able to rebuild trust because at the moment, everybody, everybody knows that they are being manipulated.
Examples of the targeted messaging and nudging that is going on commercially to young 9-year-olds and 12-year-old children is inexcusable.  They then start to pester their parents so right now I'm in London, we are in lockdown and the kids are exposed to the Internet.  The amount of issues that are going on, it's like someone has opened the fire hose and there is nothing to protect the citizens.
So I think the government needs to be held squarely and fully accountable to bring to the table with some serious conversations regarding this, which shouldn't take three years to discuss.  It needs to be done in months, if not sooner.  And I think that one of the regions of the world that have done or are moving in the right direction is the EU.  They have made significant progress in this space and small pockets of activities are happening in the U.S.
And I think the fear and the anger scientists in the context of the facial recognition systems that CCT V cameras, all that bias in the algorithms has been something that literally forced the governments in California and Oregon to take the laws and legislation in place to stop the police body cameras, the facial recognition system.  So I know when we make enough noise, we can pull things back.
And I think that is what has to happen with the balance of commercialization of our data and the ethical aspect of us owning our data.  But we are also responsible to start asking the questions and not blindly clicking.  We have implemented GDP-N Europe and it's a mess.  There is something there but it is a mess because you didn't click and move.  So we need to do something that is practical to follow as well.  Thank you.
>> Moira Patterson: Thank you for those insights.  And for really sharing a lot of different examples and highlighting the roles of different actors in this space.  John, how can we rethink our definition of societal success to optimize IA systems, design, to really ramp this up?
>> John Havens: And thank you to the comments people have made in the chat.  And forgive me if I'm mispronouncing your name, Gobori (sp), I don't know as much about 5G but I'll speak to the current question and then I'm just not a 5G.
>> Salma Abbasi: I'll address that later.
>> John Havens:  Who is governs the Internet and does an Internet Law from one country -- a lot of great questions.  I'll answer more generally and hopefully with your questions answer them.
I'm really glad that Salma brought off Estonia.  It's a specific country, 20 years old, meaning it was part of the Soviet union.  So I have been to Estonia twice and I'm a huge fan of the work that Estonia has done with Finland.  They have a lot of cross-border work they are doing and data is digital.  It's not physical.  But the servers where they live, it's a big part of how data happens.  So I bring this up because we are in this fascinating time in humanity where living between the digital and the physical and we keep using status quo kind of terms about our physical reality whereas right now, none of us are actually in the same room together.  We are a combination of bytes and atoms rearranged on the screens you're looking at.
My identity right now is not physical to any of you.  It's virtual.  So I think one thing there, which I think people tend to forget is that we are already in the virtual immersive world.  And the opportunity of data sovereignty and Salma mentioned the ownership of data.  Let me give another metaphor which I'm just in the metaphor mood today, I guess.
A lot of talk about privacy, they'll say what have you got to hide?  People use this phrase.  If you're focused on privacy.  And I'd like to give the answer back, what is ours to reveal?  Now what do I mean by that?  I used to work in advertising and PR, top 10 PR firms.  Let me hit you up with exciting advertising facts.  When you track someone on line, there are a lot of great tools to track someone.  And hi clients like Gillette and HP and on FACEBOOK, you pay money, CPM, cost per thousands -- I think it is.  But basically if I want someone to buy my whatever, razor, and I'm Gillette,  you can pay a certain amount for a cost of acquisition to get the data about them that will help me get them to buy my razor.
Now in one sense, this is fine.  It's like hanging up a sign outside of the store when you walk by, hey, I have razors.  Bob, buy my razor.  However, the difference now is how this is all aggregated and how the data about a person, which gives them information beyond just a shave, is are they male?  Where do they live?  What are their preferences?  What is a portrait of who they are?  What I'm getting back to is, the actual job of a good advertiser is to get to know someone and hit them up with an offer that will bring value to their lives.  So that's not wrong or evil or whatever.  So that is why morality and ethics, I'm careful how to use that term.  It's just what it is.  This is 10 years ago.
Now cut to the present, the opportunity for any company, and an organization there are two things, there is building trust and there is also sustainability of your business.  Now I bring this up because you can buy from data brokers who are not organizations.  These are third parties.  Pictures -- are you all right Moira?  I thought maybe -- okay.  Pictures of who is coming in to say how do I get this big group of people to pay for my stuff?
Those portraits, that's where I have my most concern because as pointed out, we don't own the list and in terms of owning our data, there is the ones and the zeros that represent the Code of Our data but the portraits of who we are, these are the analysis and insights about us.  This is what is valuable.  Why?  Because I want John to buy something.  I have this picture of who he is.  I introduced ads into his life, digital or virtual he'll click and buy something.  This whole system, before we get into the economic and I'm not disagreeing with Salma about the legislative side of things.  Here is what smart modern businesses know.
Pretty soon the individual is not needed anymore to track me.  You want to know what a eight a month ago?  I have no idea.  20 other people do and you can buy a list that says what I ate six months ago.  But eventually, if you want trust me, the man, John, you actually have to create systems where I know that you are reaching out to me directly.  It's an old school peer-to-peer mindset of the general store.  If Salma walks in and I know she likes black coffee with one sugar, here is your coffee.  Now she trusts me.  Why?  Because she has asked for something, I provided it, she trusts the framing and there it is.
That trust, those frameworks again whatever the physical substantiation of a metaphor, the general store doesn't exist.
This is why we have no trust or the real potential of erosion of trust, is because tracking us from the outside in is great.  That's how governments protect us.  Without data sovereign tools, that as an individual, we can't say back to the world, this is who I am.  And also why this is so critical is eventually, almost now, at least in the states with the current election we just had, if you're not allowed -- if you don't have a platform to simply say things like, I'm a Democrat.  I'm a Republican.
This is how I want to vote.  And you have a way to know that when you press the button and share that information it is through say block chain or trusted data coverage is structure that you're saying it just in a trusted way.  And this is what Estonia does so beautifully.  Then it actually means democracy doesn't exist and this is, I'm not talking about how news gets to people and all those things.  I mean, literally the channels of in the immersive world like when virtual reality takes over, if right now Moira was like, we are going to take a vote about whatever we just talked about, I have to be able to just press a lot on and know this is going to go right to Moira.  Like an individual IM versus going to the whole group.  It's about clarity.  And technical exactitude.  This is I didn't IEE, the standards I'm working on are a focus on this.
Hold on, before we get into these incredibly important difficult questions and privacy and whatever else, how do we sustain business?  We sustain business because brands need to be able to know they can talk directly to their customers.  Right now they aren't.  If I wanted to know about Salma, the logic is, hold on, Moira, do you know about Salma and ask 40 other people to see if she likes a certain beverage.  You know what I can do?  I can ask Salma, do you like this beverage directly?  And that's cool T saves a ton of money too.  So brands who are progressive and smart and want to move beyond the status quo, are realizing that along with these critically important questions of privacy which are essential and Seminole, they are also like, if we don't start to embrace coverage is data channels, then actual trust that is two way established through block chain or similar types of channels, we literally will have no way to know and our customers summery won't know how we will be trustworthy because we haven't built the challenges to try to understand how to hear and listen to them directly.
And legislation by the way, I'm agreeing with some of the folks in the chat.  Like what should governments do?  How should legislation whatever?  I found in the past five years instead of getting angry because it's easy to get angry and frustrated, is to tell businesses, let me ask you something.  Do you believe what you're saying about trust?  Then you have to build the date sovereign channels to allow your customers to speak back to you or it doesn't make a difference that you think you're being trustworthy.  You have not built the tools and empowered them with the tools to actually answer you back.  So what you're saying, which is critically important, being responsible in my design.  My intentions are to build trust.  Those things are wonderful.  That's cool.  Thanks.  But you know what you can also do?  The same structure you had in place for a decade to track advertising.  Learn about date sovereignty and news flash.  You'll save a ton of money.  Cost of acquisition is so much easier to go to Salma, do you like this coffee beverage?  No, I like tea.  Cost of acquisition once the tools are set up, zero.
And now I don't have send her ads that will cost me tens of thousands of list and she goes into that brand and I'll wrap up.  The brand reached out to me and we had a peer-to-peer data exchange.  They did what they said they were going to do and that and only then is when trust exists.  Only then because Salma gets to say they did what they said they were going to do.  They followed up on their action.  Now she has the opportunity to trust because she is being given agency dignity and tools to do so.
>> Moira Patterson: Thank you, John.  And I think that is really great concrete examples of how the technology can work and can work to really make or create Sarah Wynn-Williams situation.  So let me quickly jump to the two questions we have.  And I'll start actually with the second one.  Catherine is saying that the need for government regulation, is from but especially in the global South there may be some -- it may be difficult until whether there is advice to strengthen the enforcement of legislation.  So one thing I want to mention and I'll ask Dr. Salma to say a sentence or two about that because I know she works in this space.  But one point in IEEE we are actually working on a program where we are looking to create a standardization strategy.  So again standards can be tools that help translate principles and requirements to make them implementable by communities.  And we have a program where we are working with a lot of institutions from the African centre organization to smart Africa and one of the key things is to develop a strategy and then a roadmap that outlines some of the -- specifically in the context of the industrial revel execution that is very relevant in this context and the goal is to give governments tools to access this, knowledge and concrete tools I know other organizations are doing similar things and blueprints being developed for governments as well which may be helpful in this context.  But please feel free to e-mail later if you want more information but I'll ask Dr. Salma to say a word about that and also tow address the 5G question.
>> Salma Abbasi: Thank you.  Before we started the Panel I was talking about how difficult it is for countries, particularly in Africa and least Developed Countries that are being pushed by Private Sector and the governments are being pushed by development agencies to accelerate their broadband.  And this morning at 4:00, I was on a webinar with CIS countries and I was talking to them about my experiences in Africa.  And I believe that one of the most important things that we have been doing with the IEE for the last 9 months now is we have been collaborating on organizing a series of targeted webinars across Asia-Pacific and how to build digital resilience and mitigate the COVID-19 basically the spread of the pandemic and support the response.  And in that context, we discovered many, many huge gaps, systemic gaps that hopefully we'll be launching a program in a couple of weeks to build the or address the gaps through the missing standards that Moira mentioned.
During the course of these discussions through the webinars, where countries share their experiences and policies and regulations and challenges and testing, tracking, tracing methods, they also share the regulations and how things were modified because of the pandemic to maintain the trust.  And this is South Korea and other countries in the Asia ma civic.  What we established in June was a collaboration between Asia-Pacific and Africa.  And we built the bridge of south to south collaboration to accelerate the adoption of standards and policies and regulations that were working there because I'm very sensitive as a person who works heavily in Africa, particularly in Nigeria and in Garner, that we are all quick to adopt technologies and we haven't got maturity in our infrastructures.  So the only thing I can say to you is as Moira was saying, by sharing knowledge from other countries, adopting and localizing what works for you to make sure that your citizens are actually protected and you're not going to be exploited by technology companies who are going to come in and take everybody's data.  But I think this is a very good topic for future discussion in this area.
As for 5G, there has been huge concerns.  I remember in the early days if you remember, some may remember, there used to be -- this is the size of my speaker at the moment but it used to be the mobile phone for Motorola.  And I used to have terrible my grains in the 80sand 90sand I would went to see my doctor and said I don't know what is wrong with you, I think it's your mobile phone.
There used to be a massive headache on the same side I used my phone.  And I think that now with Wi-Fiand everybody wants Wi-Fiso there is no public space you can go to where you're not being X-rayed.  You tell me.  The proof is in the pudding.  I think there is a lot of research going on in that area.  But the evidence is weak at the moment.  And I think that there are consequences to health with technology and as John was saying, the advancements of humanity 3 technology is what we are looking -- through technology - what the IEES working on.  I'm running over but I have so much to say.  I'm going to pop my e-mail down in here because we can chat later.  Sorry, back to you.
>> Moira Patterson these conference are so interesting, we have taken a little bit of interest time.  I will ask us to contain our passion and keep it to two minutes because I know we want to highlight these last themes because they are important and we can always continue via e-mail later.  So the last thing is looking into the future.  And what do you view as one of the key important technology developments that you think will impact and enable personal sovereignty and the on line off line experiences?  And one thing that I would like to highlight is children and really looking at the needs of children in this space.  And finding or recognizing and acknowledging we need to have solutions and services and products for them that take into consideration their evolving capacities and their needs, the fact that they are growing up in an on line off line world that they have different capacities and different maturity levels.  And then we need to balance the need to protect them with the need to let them thrive in this space and look at holistic and inclusive ways to design these tools.  So that is a space where IEEE is looking at making an impact and, working with global stakeholders, including Dr. Salma who is also passionate about this topic.
So with that, Dr. Salma, let me hand it over to you and what is one key development that you think is going to be critical in protecting the free will in a digital society?
>> Salma Abbasi: I'll try to say this very quickly.  I think there needs to be a paradigm shift towards our view of our data.  We need to reappropriate our data and stop giving it away for free.  As I said before, we have billion photos on FACEBOOK a day.  We are the original producers.  They turn around and sell it for billions of dollars and we who are the producers get zero.  Until we get this in our heads we won't be safe.  We have to understand that human beings are actually being degraded and we are just objects, to be commercially exploited by the hypocapitalism running around with these Internet companies so-called to make our lives easy.
The first thing, one of the first things we have to do, stop being lazy.  Don't just keep swallowing it.  We need to get back and say, wait a minute.  What that means and how that translates is that we have to turn around and say that we are -- own our data.  Reappropriate.  I need give you one example.  I love examples.  This is it an American company and it's an American personal data collection company called axiom.  I'll put the name there it advertising 360 review of your customer.  They gather our data, our behavior, our status.  In the 80s, these are stuff HR could never ask.  Are you married?  How many kids do you?  This knows your kids, job, hobbies, how much money you make so they can target you and they have 70 categories to measure you.  And then if you don't fall in 70 categories, they throw you away.  They individual a dump pile.  It's called waste.  We have analyzed this to the 'enth degree.  You can not imagine how this is reading about what it is about us it's an awful situation to be in which is we don't want our children to be that way where they are going to be exploited.
We need to bring back the monetization and the ownership of our data just like it's an asset.  If any of you own houses, you have a physical property asset, look at yourself data that way.  If we have that paradigm shift and we own our data, we will be able to say, these are the Terms and Conditions.
This is the contract I'm making with you.  I'm allowing you to use my data.  This as John said, people frighten you by saying, so what do you want to hide?  My name is Salma Abbasi.  I could be a terrorist.  What am I trying to hide?  It's ridiculous.  We should not be pushed into guilt to think we want to hide.  Excuse me, my privacy whatever I do is my business.  What I wish to share with you, if I want John to be able to buy me a cup of tea, it's my business with John.  I don't like coffee.  That's it.  His business is my friend to know.
So we need to be able to understand and define the contractual terms particularly for our children who we give freely here is a tablet, play with it, go quietly in the corner.  We don't see what they are doing on FACEBOOK and other social medias.  We need to be able to stop giving away our information to these AI grinders with these algorithms that are trying to process and analyze and predict our behavior and how they can sell or manipulate our minds.
We need to understand in these Terms and Conditions who will be giving our information to, how freely do we want to give them to?  In John's case who wants to give freely to all hospitals, all medical companies.  How long they should have it for and what should be the price?  Our data should be sold at.  And most importantly, a termination clause.  This is how we can regain the trust because we will know after six months or three months after the pandemic is over, all of us and our data will be destroyed.  Again, I'm going to talk to final conclusion, I'm going to talk to what is happening in Europe with the AI committee.
The former Martin Schulz laid the foundation engage multiple stakeholders to discuss and build the resilience in our data.  And we need to just wake up and participate.  The IEES an excellent platform to discuss and one of the questions of who owns the Internet, we do.  We are the users of the Internet.  Internet Government Forum, this Governance Forum is a perfect flat form to voice, consolidate and collaborate today to actually make sure we can protect our children from the invisible dangers on the Internet it's much more dangerous than risky for us to have our children in their bedrooms on line.  We are out of time.  I'll stop there.  Back to you.
>> Moira Patterson:  And thank you for all this extra context.  And thank you for answering the questions along the way too.  So well done.  Let's give John a chance to talk about extended reality which I know is a topic near and dear to his heart, that is getting a lot of attention and opportunity and the data space.
>> John Havens: 60 seconds?  We are at 2:30.  Just to build on what Salma said, complete yes.  And I think it's more and more an urgency that is just required it's binary.  And all the stuff that Salma said is said.  We can get angry or -- it's true -- but extended reality is the idea of the immersive web and a lot of people probably know what it means.  We are already in it, right now.  Right now.  Hello.  I'm not in the room with you.  This is extended reality.  During COVID, how many hours a week do you all spend here?  What is going to happen soon, many gamers right now in second life or games are spending 50-60 hours a week in games.  And when we have our glasses have augmented reality and we see digital on top of whatever, the point is, that pretty soon our physical reality may not be the main place where we spend our conscious lives.  So there is a binary choice here.  Either the system continues to track us and that's it and all the -- let's say what it is, negative stuff, only expands.  It only becomes more concern oriented.
Or, what a beautiful opportunity just to simply say, before you put that helmet on, that is an Oculus rift helmet that is owned by FACEBOOK because FACEBOOK owned Oculus rift, hold on.  All the great stuff about that game, you'll still have it but here is the digital Terms and Conditions that you can write for yourself with your family, with your kids that simply says, these are my Terms and Conditions.  And the government is doing their stuff.  Businesses want to sell.  Cool.  When you put on that helmet, the second something happens where maybe whomever, whatever actor algorithm supports do something that you're child or you weren't wanting, there is simply a way to say, hold on, these are my Terms and Conditions.  It doesn't mean they'll be honored.  Ownership is a big complex discussion.  But the point is you're in the mix.  So the dream for me is we are in the mix because it's either we are or we aren't.  That's the extended reality, we either extend economic and all the other realities that we are not as humans fully present.  Or, we say once and for all, to Salma's points, here is our rights.  Instead of it coming -- I'm not saying that about you, because I shouldn't rage.  But hey, everyone else, what age is it?  5 years old?  4 years old?  The tracking isn't working for all of us because it's mainly working for a very small few of whomever.
And the technology is so amazing.  We have all these great standards.  IEEE is doing so much good work.  This is where we need all the Partners to simply say we can either be angry or we can just get the work done and the work is protecting our kids, honoring our dignity, taking all the tools that are available for advertisers in a certain small group of society and saying, thank you for developing all this stuff.  Now give it to us as well.  That's it.  It's actually not that hard T really isn't.  The hard part is the ideological, political and all these other struggles and the demand can also come from okay, everybody, give us what we need to protect our kids well.  Extended reality will do that because either it will be complete loss of everything, agency, et cetera, or complete gain.  So I'm working for B.  And thank you for the opportunity to be here today.
>> Moira Patterson: Thank you, John and for ending on that positive note.  So I want to reiterate a few things as we wrap up.  So, if you were interested in any of the topics or activities that John, Dr. Salma or I highlighted, contact us.  We all put our e-mails in the chat and there are many ways to get engaged.  IEEE is looking to make these things implement age and practical.  So it's helping create the solutions and be able to scale them and role them out broadly.  So, that is part of putting us in the mix as John said, and helping build trust.  So, feel free to reach out to us.  I saw one question on Child Online Safety and I know John already highlighted IEEE is doing work in that space.  So reach out to us.  And also Dr. Salma is one of the leaders or the leaders of the child on line protection work.  Also reach out to her on that.
And with all of that  I want to again thank everybody for attending, for your time and interest and your questions.  I want to thank our Panelists, the IGF dispeople IEEE team also supporting us and coordinating us to make this event a success.  So thank you for your time.  Feel free to reach out and also feel free to check out our boots on line, which I believe has also been shared in the chat.  Looking forward to connecting in the future, everybody.  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-7-parliamentary-roundtable-raw^^

>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Welcome to today's parliamentary roundtable as part of the IGF 2020.  And continuing this theme of virtual meetings, we are going to discuss today not just in a virtual setting but how the Internet affects Parliamentarians and view of political trust.  We have got wide ranging discussions and discussions from Panelists from all around the world.  When hoping to do in the next 90 minutes is tease out the conversation about Internet and trust.  Of course what we can't do in the current setting is discuss anything around the Internet and politics and Parliament without bringing up the subject of the COVID-19 pandemic.  So, we are going to focus a little bit in our discussion as well on how parliaments responded to the pandemic.
We have seen really in our work in the Inter Parliamentary Union, that parliaments went from a standing start, how do you turn yourself into a virtual Parliament?  How do you as a tradition alley physical institution operate remotely and increasingly have to rely on digital technology and remote connections when not only your members, but your support staff aren't able to be physically press innocent so we spent nine months seeing parliaments becoming different in a number of countries and we have gone through a period of radical and forced innovation to emerge perhaps nine months in without answers but with certainly some new solutions.
And what we are hoping to do today is drill down into the conversation about where particle investments a role in terms of Internet Governance and this is a two-sided conversation.  Parliaments ultimately are the institutions that make law and we have a lot of ongoing discussions and a lot within the IGF about the legal frameworks we operate in and the Internet needs to operate in.
National legislation no longer is significant in some cases because it gets over taken by other jurisdictions where sites are hosted, where data is stored, and the complexity that the Internet has brought to us and brought to legislators, is well documented.
The other side of this is, as legislators, our MPs are required to know complex technical issues as well as issues of trust and privacy.  We are also required to operate globally and we have seen a number of parliaments work together to try and understand how the Internet has impacted a number of us social and political structures.
So I hope that in the conversation today, which as a follow-up from last year where we introduced the parliamentary roundtable, we can start to tease out a little bit about how the Internet effects the life of politicians.  How it effects the public's view of trust and our politicians, but also what it is that members of Parliament, and our legislators can do to sensibly manage the flow of information to understand issues of digital literally and information literacy and how they can be advocates for a positive future on the Internet.
Today's discussion is co-hosted by the Inter Parliamentary Union and the United Nation Department of Economic and social affairs.  So what I'd like to do is call on the Under Secretary general of the United Nations Department of Economic and social affairs Mr. Zhenmin Liu to give us a short welcome.  Over to you.
>> Zhenmin Liu: Thank you.  Your Honorable Members of Parliament from around the world, Excellencies and ladies and gentlemen, welcome you all to this parliamentary roundtable, a special highlight of this year's Internet of governance forum.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, this IGF is convened entirely virtually.  By the United Nations.  I think my gratitude to Parliamentary Union for co-hosting this roundtable with the United Nation of department and economic and social affairs.  Also the Government of Germany for organizing the first-ever parliamentary session since last year.  The session sends a strong message for national parliaments to cooperate and exchange Best Practices in the Internet-related Public Policy issues.  This year, we are grappling with devastating impact of COVID-19 pandemic.  And has laid bare our increasing reliance on the Internet in so many ways.  Critical that the United Nations and global community work together to ensure meaningful access for all people to the Internet.  This can be achieved with the effective public policies and our enhanced Internet Governance.  Indeed, this resonates with this roundtable building trust in a time of COVID-19 response and the post-COVID-19 recovery.
Clearly, national parliamentary institutions play a critical role not only do they contribute to regulatory frameworks but effectively use of the Internet as a global public good.  They also act as leaders and advocates for achieving sustainable developable goals.  And budgetary and oversight functions in their predictions, natural Parliament also have responsibility to define how people and organizations interact in the inclusive and entrusted manner, especially in this fast expanding digital space.
Roadmap for digital cooperation, record for more actionable outcomes through high-level sessions at the Internet Governance Forum with specific reference to this parliamentary track.  I urge you to respond to this and I wish you engaging fruitful session.  I thank you.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Sorry, I was having a connection problem there.  I'm sitting in the remote wilds of the Scottish islands and sometimes the Internet just decides to stop itself.
Thank you very much for that and I'd like to call on Mr. Martin Chungong, the Secretary General of the Inter Parliamentary Union.  Martin?
>> Martin Chungong: Thank you for moderating this session.  Mr. Under-Secretary-General, dear valued partner of the Inter Parliamentary Union, distinguished members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, it gives me great pleasure to address this opening segment of the parliamentary session organized on the occasion of the Internet Governance Forum.
I am delighted that we are organizing this event with our valued Partners of the United Nations Department of Economic and social affairs and I would like to use the opportunity also to thank the Government of Poland and its Parliament for their support.
We have not been able to make physically this year, but I hope that next year we'll have ample opportunity, the health pandemic willing, for us to meet in person.
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Under-Secretary-General, you have just referred to last year's Internet Governance Forum during which parliamentarians called for more cooperation between parliaments for them to come together in order to exchange Best Practices for dealing with Internet-related Public Policy issues.  I'm delighted to say that the IPU is proud to sponsor this second parliamentary roundtable to allow parliamentarians and other stakeholders to do just that, share in good practice.
I'm also delighted that the voice of parliamentarians is now beginning to have a platform during the Internet Governance Forum.  This form of transparent inclusive and multi-stakeholder discussion on the Internet and digital policy is critical for advancing trust in digital technologies and for fostering trust in the work of Parliament.
The IPU is of course strongly focused on strengthening Parliament and through our Center for Innovation and Parliament, we and our participating parliaments are proud to be able to provide good practice, promote good practice, and digital innovation.  This role has shown through amidst the pandemic where our networks have been used to support parliaments and share experiences globally on virtual and hybrid parliaments and enabling our democracy to function in these difficult and challenging times.
Parliaments must play a robust role in our Democratic systems.  But they are not untouched by the world around them.  The Internet has been a transformative tool for knowledge, information and communication, and it has also been a dangerous and destructive too, fueling this information and conspiracy.
It is up to parliaments and parliamentarians and legislators to take this issues onboard and then show that legislation supports a creatable access and digital literacy and also that it protects citizens of societies from harm and attempts to sub vert democracy.
As a force for good, the Internet is potentially unparalleled.  Only if we can control the dangerous flow of this information.  We must, as citizens, be able to trust what we see on line just as we must be able to trust the legislators acting on our behalf.
The Internet has done damage to this bond of trust and it is imperative that parliamentarians and legislators work proactively to rebuild and strengthen first in democracy as well as to ensure that citizens can feel safe on line and trust the information they find.
We must understand how information is spread, how social networks operate and how to counter the negative impact that ranges from this information to cyberattack on our public bodies.  You're commend the Members of Parliament attending this meeting today and I see that many of them -- we have, if I look at the screen here, some 160 participants participating in this meeting.  And as I said, I commend them for being at the forefront of the debate, at the forefront of the conversation on building trust in this new digital age.  And I hope that they will respond to the call for actionable accounts.
I wish you very fruitful deliberations and I can assure you that the IPU will be prepared to support any recommendations that come out of your deliberations as we move forward with concrete actions.  Thank you very much.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you very much for those Welcoming Remarks and to Zhenmin Liu thank you for your welcome.  To set the scene for this evening's discussion, I'd like to introduce a member of -- and he will introduce to us a video that bondo stock has prepared to outline the events of the first parliamentary roundtable last year.  Mr. Hoferlin, over to you.
>> MANUEL HOFERLIN:  I'm very excited to be smear excited to announce that video with some reviews of the IGF last year in Berlin and Germany.  Last year we had this meeting from national parliamentarians it was an emotion day because we called out some of you.  So let us see the video and enjoy.
[ Video playing ]
 
>> Manuel Höferlin:  Thank you for Manuel for trues that video for preparing that video.  And it set us up very nicely for a discussion we want to have this evening.  And the rolls that politicians can play in determining how we have an effective and accessible Internet for all.  So I'm going to call on our Panelists to join us now in the conversation to make sure you have all got your video on.  Manuel Höferlin from Germany will stay with us.  And I'm hoping that -- from Nigeria has managed to connect and join us.  We haven't had time to check the connection yet so hopefully that works.  Mattia Fantinati from Italy and Krzysztof from Poland.  I welcome you all to this parliamentary roundtable and I'm going to start with Margarita Escobar, if I may.  You talked a lot in there about the role of Parliament and parliamentarians as the lawmakers and how important that was and you mentioned in the video that it's important for parliaments to be able to connect and engage.  I'd like to you reflect very, very briefly -- I'm going to ask all the participants to participate maximum of two minutes because of time, on how you think the Internet has changed the relationship with parliaments, particularly in the sense of the COVID-19 pandemic.  We had to move to virtual hybrid parliaments.  We haven't been able to be able to be physically present in the same way.  Perhaps you could give short reflections on how you think the restrictions have changed the relationship between Parliament, and parliamentarians and whether this is a opportunity to create something more open and transparent.  Margarita over to you.
>> Margarita Escobar:
[ Muted ]
>> Andy Williamson: I'm not seeing margarita in here.  I'm still seeing your video live and active.  Can I go with you to ask you --
>> Margarita: There we go.  I was saying thank you very much, Andy for this introduction and Manuel, thank you for the wonderful video.  As I look back and think about this year, I'm very happy to tell you that I brought the spirit of Jimmy Schulz asked us to do in the Jimmy Schulz call.  In Berlin, that COVID was around the corner as we left Berlin, and then everything was pushed very, very fast to moving through the Internet, digital era.
I think the COVID-19, trying to answer your question, gave us an opportunity to get closer between parliamentarians and our stakeholders.  Now for example, I have just finished a meeting with Civil Society because we are starting the -- a digital law that is on personal data protection.  But also it forced us to introduce a new bill regarding universal Internet access as a human right.  And this is another issue that we are starting very strongly near El Salvador.  Otherwise, a lot of people could be left behind and a lot of poverty could be centered in those areas without Internet access.
COVID-19 presented us the opportunity to get trust back to politicians.  Having politicians and technical people working together through virtual platforms, through Internet, I am very happy that I said that a year ago at the IGF in Berlin.  Now, I can tell you, because of the practice that we have here in El Salvador, that is the right thing to do.
COVID also has isolated our humanity and isolated that human touch.
That will remain a challenge for the future.  Internet can help us be more transparent, we build trust, started Bills in a more consultative manner, but we have the problem of the personal contact.  And that is yet to be seen.  As to the misinformation systems that I also are in place in Internet, we have a big challenge there.  We don't know how to approach this issue.
What we are doing is, I took from Berlin, the Declaration of Human Rights in Internet, and what we are doing here is, taking that Declaration of Human Rights and Internet, and trying to change it into a bill.  We don't know,will end up.  How we will work it out, but it has been introduced in our legislation and we are going to be starting that aspect of Internet.
So, I think it's my two minutes.  A multi-stakeholder approach is one to include trust.  Politicians and technical people building laws and another way to increase trust.  And third, we need to continue working on this information aspects of Internet.
>> Andy Williamson: Thank you very much, margarita.  Christoff, can I go to you and ask you the same question?  Particularly focusing on how you think digital technologies can help us facilitate more transparency and inclusive communication.
>> Krzysztof Gawkowski: Thank you this is very interesting.  We strongly support universal access to the Internet.  COVID has showed us how important it is in our lives and every day provide access to the Internet and it is only for the users themselves but also for the more economy.  There is so much to be done here through digital education and actualization of society to such case as Cyber Security data protection and user himself.
The current technology development including the spread of Internet and also recently the pandemic has resulted in the transfer of many forms of life to digital space.  This is a first for government.  This make it necessary to develop digital skill even faster.  The current digital transformation will lead in the near future to the experience of some profession as well as to transformation of others and the creation of the nuance.
Then the ability to use digital tools simply and necessarily in the labor market and it will be a great role of the government, Parliament, to digital exclusion, as much as possible.  This is my opinion.  Thank you.  And thank you.
>> Andy Williamson: Thank you for that.  You were present at the IGF last year like margarita and had interesting comments.  I would particularly like the comment you made which was perhaps more of a technical one but I think it's very, very interesting.  You said the discussion about representing parliaments and parliamentarians that perhaps it was a bad idea to have a technical representative.  What really mattered was members of parliament talking to themselves and among themselves and sharing that information.  And I'd like, if you wouldn't mind, just elaborate on that a little bit and talk about how it's not just important that parliamentarians talk to systems or their own country but the global dialogue and why that matters.
>> Manuel Höferlin:  And thank you very much.  It's a very good point.  I think last year, we just found out there are many Parliamentarians all around the world who just are wondering how is Internet Governance working around in their nation areas and their nations.  So we as parliamentarians often look at our own country and do our things in our organization or in the wider area like the European Union with you normally as parliamentarians you not often talk to others around the world and it's a another kind of exchange of thinking, of possibilities, what can you learn from other countries they have the same problems and ideas all over the world.  It's interesting to come together.
Like margarita say in one room.  Now we are in virtual room but it is better than nothing.  So I'm excited to see you maybe next year, hope so next year in one room.  And just let me -- I'd like to encourage the idea of informal parliamentarian workgroup.  Just that can develop and gather ideas from the IGF.  So that's also maybe the possibility to stay in touch around the year and not only have the IGF once a year.  I'd like to offer coordination with your help.  As margarita said last year, I think it would be a great chance to say in contact and to exchange a lot of views and I would be glad if we parliamentarians could enforce our last year's good work from all over the world and also in the future IGF.  For example with margarita's help and I think most of you are interested in staying together and I think last word from me, that is the idea of what Jimmy Schulz thought about as we found out that he always wondered why on all of the IGFs are so many representatives from the governments and so few parliamentarians.  And so let us change this.  I think it will be a great approach.
>> Andy Williamson: Thank you.  That's a very generous offer to lead on that.  And I can certainly echo in the last nine months, the value of networking is there for us all to see in the inter parliamentary union and the centre innovationing and Parliament where I'm based.  We seen the networks we have built around other matters just come to the fore in helping to solve problems of the pandemic and bringing parliaments together.  So I think that technical level, as an elective member level, it is a very, very good offer.  Mr. Mattia Fantinati from Italy, I'd like to bring you on next.  I'd like you to think a little bit in terms of what we can do around connecting Parliament with citizen and it is how the Internet helps that in the context of more marginalized groups, and particularly those that have more challenging access to information to the Internet.
>> Mattia Fantinati: Thank you for inviting me and I'd like to respond to your question.  This is a topic that is just not COVID-19.  It's something more.  I wanted to say this in two minutes about my --
[ Distorted audio ]
-- I think it is a issue because if I have to just a little spot on what is happening in Europe and the times now look for democracy, as system, as the face of the kind of -- and we have at the same time privacy and COVID pandemic.  Vast majority unrepresented.
I think for very often a lack of legitimacy.  So the citizens sends me out of institutions and something very far and there is a huge void.  Just because we the Internet can give the people the instruments to develop critical thinking and the separate can get it together in one platform in one environment.  Every citizen will be going on about something but in a single.
[ Distorted audio ]
>> Andy Williamson: Thank you, Mattia Fantinati.  Alexander, I'm going to try and take Mattia's point forward a little bit and ask you about -- we are talking about how to better connect Parliament to parliamentarians and citizens together.  Mattia was drawing on the challenge that some people have connecting.  It's not a level playing field.  Could you reflect for a couple of minutes on how you, as a politician, think about how you connect to people and make sure in your own work you don't create a new elite of digitally literal citizens and leave others behind.  And how that challenge plays out for you in your role as a member of Parliament.  Over to you.
>> ALEXANDER HINSHTEYN: [ Speaking in native language ]
 
 that is why I believe that people suffer from criminals from other jurisdictions they commit crimes also against your citizens in your territory and is it also possible our criminals are also destroying your citizens just as Russian citizens are at harm by criminals who commit crimes from the territory of some other countries.
This politics is just about criminal activity.  So a very important stage in the development of the different International instruments in the area of the information security as well as fight against cybersecurity as the abduction of the revolution of the General Assembly of the United Nation on the counter acting of information technologies to commit crime.  I believe that initiative of other document was counter Russian Federation so the cooperation in cyberspace is incredibly important, that is why we have to work together in the area of fight against cybercrime.
This document is quite well distributed over the United Nation.  I like to recommend for you to consider the draft document which can be refined but should become a catalyzer for the development of unified methods to fight against Internet technologies as well as cybercrime and fortunately, I have to conclude my address now.  We can see that Internet units people but it is also an instrument that can cause harm and suffering T does not only bring people together but it can also bring negativity.  I believe that everyone understands how it works.
Unfortunately Internet and different problems connected with coronavirus, they also for folks are negative, they trigger negative tendency and we are all over the word, we have to act against it.  Thank you very much for your attention and if you have any problems, and any questions, I can answer them.
>> Andy Williams: Thank you.  I think the summary there is that we heard some interesting discussions on how the Internet is a good thing for many of us with a number of caveats and a number of negatives.  Marina from the European Parliament, I'm going to give you the task of summarizing as quickly as you can, really, what you have just heard in the last 25 minutes of discussion.  Over to you.
>> Marine: Thank you.  I'll try to do my best.  I am very grateful to all the participants and it was interesting that many same topics, many same priorities were mentioned by almost all of our speakers.  We should take advantage over the tragedy.  It has brought digitalization to the top of political agenda.  We should keep it there and work with that.  Yes, there are benefits like remote working and remote schooling.  There are negative sides like cybercrime, and cyberhygiene.  Each and every person has to do much more about cyberhygiene than previously.  Maybe to add to my Russian colleague, I agree.  International corporation is crucial and I would undermine the  conventions we already have of cybercrime.  It's the convention which is open to all countries who exceed.  Cooperation has to be on all level and this year we celebrate the 75th Anniversary of the United Nation and I think it's very timely that the United Nations has attached so much attention to digitalization.  I have the privilege to serve on the Secretary General's high-level Panel on cooperation, security and trust, other keywords.
From there to regional cooperation and I like the idea of cooperation among parliamentarians.  When we talk about multi-stakeholders, we mention government, we mention Academia, Private Sector, industry, IT.  We do not mention palitition specifically.  But would argue that parliamentarians who have been elected by people should have a say-so I very much support that idea.
I'm wearing today a double hat.  I'm a member of European Parliament and I'm from Estonia, a country that has had, for 30 years, the privilege of on line so e-Life has its benefits.  We have the benefits of open, transparent society, on line voting, but everything is possible if people trust.  Trust is the word that was repeated by so many colleagues.  Trust between government and Private Sector.  Trust between citizens and service providers.  Trust between citizens and government.  Because if there is no trust, our people will not be able to take advantage of the digital benefits.  And earning trust, building trust, that is something where I would argue politicians and members of Parliament, are well positioned.
And my very last remark representing the European Parliament, I'm really happy that in next budget we have digitalization high on political agenda from all perspectives, being it data strategy, fight against corruption, being it protection of Human Rights on line.  So all of those aspects are equally important.  So I trade my best but I'm sure many right things will be said and colleagues, a pleasure to see you all. Ore not face-to-face.  This time on line but it is not the last time we are meeting and talking.  Thank you.
>> Andy Williamson: That was very passionate and I appreciate the brief summary of the power of the Internet to change the way that we see democracy in our representation.  A Levy from Nicaragua, I'm going to call you on to reflect on what you have heard in the last session.  And particularly just picking up on your thoughts on trust.
>> Florence leafy:
>> Good morning everyone and good afternoon and good evening.  Greetings from our beautiful country from Nicaragua.
Last year, we had a chance to take part in the meeting that took place in Berlin, in Germany.  And we took an active part in it.  I would like to say that what we had today, as well as yesterday, during all of the sessions of this IGF meeting, shows that as parliamentarians we have to be more conscious and aware of the social context and the economic context.
Access to Internet is essential.  It has to be provided everywhere in all the countries of the world, yet we know that in some countries, that access is not perfect and I'm talking about Developing Countries here.  I would also like to mention the health issues during the pandemic.  This is where it is absolutely essential to have a strong model of Health Care System also available on line because that will allow us to take care of our citizens and of the families.  So, it's a huge difference to know that Health Care System is free of charge or perhaps you have to pay for it.  And another issue is you have to face the reality, and that reality is different in different countries.
It's important to know what sort of approach is going to allow us to anyone appropriate coordination of activities within the Health Care System at the same time minding the economy.  For a country like ours, for Nicaragua, 40% of our citizens live in rural areas.  80% of urban dwellers work in the shadow economy.  So we have to remember that.  And we cannot fully lock our economy down.  And the Parliament has to bear that in mind and has to develop its strategies accordingly.  So it's important to find creative ways of working further on and developing a better economy.  This is something the Parliament needs to bear in mind always and in Nicaragua we can basically not afford not to work.  However, we have to reinvent our work.  We have to find a different way to perform our duties on line, remotely, of course, and other important issues.
And how to maintain communications?  I think that Internet is providing huge support here.  I think it was said yesterday during one of the sessions is about communicating not just among parliamentarians but also in a cross-border manner.  I'm talking about International communication among all sides, all parties.  In Latin America, we have the Parliament in Nicaragua and an assembly for Latin America and we have to take care of bilateral relations and intercontinental relations it's essential the communication is ongoing.  Another issue I would like to mention is the use of technology.  Of course technology is becoming essential.  It's becoming very, very important.  And under the circumstances, communication is also key consultations.  Wherever we adopt a legal institution, we have to consult it with others.  We are not able to convene in a single room with all stakeholders.  We have to do it on line.  We have to use the Internet to achieve it.  Another issue I would like to mention is the broadcasting of Parliament meetings on T.V., on line, or social media.  This is something that we are only just learning yet we are already practicing it because we want to make sure that our citizens trust the Parliament, that their trust is maintained.  In our country, our legal acts are already published in a digital form.  We have to bear in mind interpretation, translation and interpretation.  Many Parliament members need an interpreter in order to be able to send their message to the citizens in multiple languages.  I'm talking about multi-lingual countries here.  And I think there is going to come a time when we will come back to physical meetings but we will have to remember biosecurity.
This is not only true of the parliaments but true of the entire societies, the societies that will have to adapt to their new normal, to the new reality.  We also have to utilize local media, radio stations, T.V. stations, local ones.  We cannot only rely on the Internet because not everywhere the majority of citizens have access to the Internet and are fully connected.
And here I mostly talk about remote areas.  Rural areas where the digital infrastructure is still lacking.  I would also like to mention that as present, for instance, going to -- what my Russian colleague said, so increasing cybercrime, this is something that we see in our country as well.  We are introducing certain legal stipulations to prevent that phenomenon.  We have to consult on that and also have to pass these solutions, the legislation as soon as possible in order to protect our Internet users.  Internet security is a huge challenge.
Another one we are now facing, another challenge, is digital literacy.  Parliamentarians -- perhaps we need to have younger parliamentarians but every single Parliamentarian needs to know how to use, for instance teleconferencing software.  You have to invest in that as well, investing in training and invest in digital infrastructure buzz we have to know that that situation can come back.  It can reoccur or it can take a long time still and we have to remember that when designing our budgets.
All digital issues are goings to be more and more present in our life.  Cybercrime is a huge challenge, as I said before.  And I am happy that we are talking about that as well here in this forum.  We also need to exchange information among parliaments when it comes to legislation regarding these issues.  We can learn from one another.  We can follow what we do.  We can look for good legislative examples wherever they might be.  So we have to keep analyzing this it's becoming key also on a global level.  We will need digital technologies ever more and we will depend on them to a greater extent to finish what I would like to say that we should get even more involved in the work to implement International conventions focusing on cybercrime and other activities on line.
That's why inter parliamentary collaboration is so important.  Thank you.
>> Andy Williamson: Thank you very much.  That was Florence leafy from Nicaragua.  There is a clear challenge we need to be thinking collaboratively and not working individually.
Time is running away on us so I'm going to just reshape this session a little bit dynamically.  What I'm going to do is ask original contributors, very quickly, in one minute to summarize a voluntary commitment that their institution wants to make to try and take the role of parliamentarians forward in terms of the Internet Governance space.  And I'm going to start, if I may, with margarita.  So if I could ask you in just one minute to summarize the commitment that you would like to make around parliamentarians and IGF.
>> Margarita Escoba:  [ Muted ]
  Thank you.  I think we need to understand that the presumption of good faith will not be enough to build trust.  We need to construct a blueprint and to work on it on democracy on Human Rights, on line, fight against corruption and the power of the moral authority.  We need to work on security systems on line that can be shared among all parliamentarians.
Also I think the future will challenge the U.N. to put us together to work on a new blueprint for development that can carry basic points of access to technology, access to Internet, access to financial resources to develop digital infrastructure.  In those contraries that have no access.  As well as building this new approach of development.  Access to new educational tools through technology.  Those are really challenging times for humanity.  I appreciate very much the benefits of Internet but I also recognize the challenges for Developing Countries as El Salvador is.
And finally I'd like to leave reflection on all of you and that is a question, highway do we perceive history?  Doe we perceive history as something of the past that belonged to others?  Or history as now and we?  I think that poses an important question to all of us.  If we perceive history as now and not as yesterday and as we and not others, I think we will be building the humanity that we all wish to have with this wonderful Internet.
So my commitment is to continue to work on this issues in my own territory, my own square meter in El Salvador, as legislation and legislator.  And also to keep alive the Schulz spirit we are so grateful for and shown in Berlin last year.  So thank you to all of you: I look forward and continue working with all of you.
>> Andy Williamson: Thank you, margarita.  That was fabulous.  And I think that call to arms at the end is very, very important.  And that will drive us forward.  Manuel Höferlin, can I ask to you suggest perhaps something you might do?  And I'm going ask you for the elevator pitch on this one as briefly as possible, please.
>> Manuel Höferlin: So, yes, now the audio is on.  So, thank you very much.  I think as margarita said, the National Corporation is extremely important if we want to share -- national cooperation -- the viewing on the same topic.  If you see the big questions we have in digitalization all around the world, there are different views and everybody can learn from each other.  Not only in one direction.  And I think this is a very important thing if you exchange the point of view and this discuss it in an equal -- on the same field as parliamentarians.  I'm a Chairman of the committee of the digital agenda and I would like to push this informal cooperation or workgroup between the parliaments, just to exchange our point of views in digital questions in general so we will have special topics.  But I think it's mostly important to network more between parliamentarians in several digitalization questions.
So we can learn from each other and we can learn from our own countries just because we learned the point of view from the other side of the world and so let us use the Internet to stay stronger together and to make virtual room I and hope sometime we will meet in a real room, but in the meanwhile let us be in the great Internet network together and change our opinions and let's talk about it.  That would be what Jimmy Schulz would want for us.  That's what I would like to push.
>> Andy Williamson: Thank you very much, Manuel Höferlin.  I think it would be a pleasure for us all to be sitting in the same room and hopefully that will come about very soon.  Mattia Fantinati I'm going to you now.  I asked the others to make a short commitment.  Can I ask you to do the same?  And can I ask you to think about it in the context of how that might appear to the citizens as well, not just for MP, but citizens and I'm sorry to pop that on you in really one minute.  But over to you.
>> Mattia Fantinati: Yes, I don't know if I have a solution but we have to put the problem in the centre and.
[ Distorted audio ]
It's really important theme that emphasizes three aspects.  Rise for everyone because it is the future of the Internet T doesn't belong to a particularly segment, but it is belonging to everyone.  So government, companies and citizens.  So let's share with government and share -- I'm staying positive.  Thank you very much.
>> Andy Williamson: Thank you very much, Mattia.  We are running short on time.  I'm going to ask Mr. Hasanul Hag from Bangladesh who kindly joined us as an observer in this, to perhaps just very, very briefly, Mr. HAG, to reflect on those commitments you heard.
>> Can you hear me?  Thank you very much.  Most COVID situation is exposed the ongoing socioeconomic political structure of the world and the countries.  To that extent, I think what we have here, we need to consider the situation from the mounting situation, look at the post COVID situation.  Number 2, let us focus on capabilities.  How to apply these technologies in the digital divide in the case of e-Learning, e-Governance and e-Health, so everybody can participate.
Access to equality, quality health for all levels.  Here I see we have to gets very important, how to develop the capabilities.  Access to emerging technologies which is rocking the boat in this evolution.  That is very important.
How we cooperate in the task for knowledge transfer and to implement all of these things because involvement system needs to inform and need to become more simple and agile.  Cultivate and targeted programs, physical, social, mental and financial well-being.  And let us develop human-centric qualities.  For that, we need to enact new laws to reform the government.  Already discussed here, I add yes, we need to go for certain global events and certain laws at the national level.  What parliamentary needs to act very quickly.  Here are global level to check the cybercrime and global cybercrime but we also need global implement and data.
We need global emerging economies of Internet.  So these are the areas where we need to emphasize.  At the same time, at the local level, we need to emphasize certain very important laws discussed access to Internet should be universal human right it's a fundamental right, we should be able to choose and in post-COVID situation, exposed the weaknesses of the Society so we need to work for universal health care, universal education, universal food insecurity system and universal safety net.  All these centers should be have basic fundamental Human Rights to enactivate in the Constitution and the government is bound to ensure these areas so the digital divide and the social divide is wiped out.
For all of these, the application is very important.  So, how you apply Internet to relief the social and digital divide, that is the job of the parliamentarians in the country also.  So I don't go further, I concentrate in the post illusion and passed to evolution and so we are entering the domination of the machines.  How to make the domination of the machines more human.  So that is a very important thing where Parliament need to focus.
We have said that and I maintain that while we are living in a glass house, which is transparent but in that glass house, you learn life exists here.  So managing cyberspace is very important.  Very important.  So I hope we need a safe Internet.  Trustworthy Internet.  And for that, we need to have an agreement on the standardization of technology.  Thank you very much.
>> Andy Williamson: Thank you.  That was a really good intervention at the end and I think promoting the inclusivity of the Internet is very, very important.  And talking of inclusivity, I'm going to try now to ask Francesco who had his hand raised for quite a while to make an announcement.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-7-ws194-governing-cross-border-data-flow-sustainable-development-raw^^

 
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Good evening, good morning, depending on where you are.  Let me thank our speakers, A, to host us on dataflows, privacy and impact on ITES and a host of related subject issues.  Let me thank our speakers for their time and for their interest to speak on the subject.
So in my intro remarks I will be very brief and I will touch upon a few major findings.  A study in partnership with the U.S. India problems advance T looked at not just the dataflow but more in the Indian context that we are now debating a Parliament, which is called data pro technician.  It could be enacted but the debate is going on.
So there are broadly two schools of thought in this cross-border dataflow on various walks of life.  So what we have done, we have looked at the impact of the measures which have been -- in this prediction of India, on our digital exports.  Of course I come to this point and I'm ready to talk later on and also we have looked at a few other things like employment generation and -- now if I look at the India current data protection regime, cross-border dataflows, it is fairly non restricted.
What we have found, we have also ran as part of missions of our data protection, we have also looked at the provisions of data protection in many other countries.  And we found that if this bill is enacted, that India's data protection regime will become a little bit more restricted like the European Union; not as restrictive as let's say Viet Nam, of course China and Russia, they are very, very restrictive.  But more like -- but suddenly not as less restrictive.
And the impact on our digital export will be negative, which means it's not going to be a huge impact, in terms of percentage it won't be that huge but the impact will be large.
There is another school of thought in India who says if we have a data protection language like what we have been proposed, then we get more and more investment for the setting up of data centre.  More and more employment generation and of course that will depend on various other factors broadly speaking ease of doing business Internet business ecosystem and various other factors.  So that during -- the jury is still out.  We must keep in mind it's not a blanket protection.  So we have divided the data under three broad heads, personal safety, privacy and all of these aspects and it is those data which we think are important, for us and they are being protected most as compared to more common data.
So we have done this work with the USIBC and have been very kind and active in this work.  We have presented our findings before the many parliamentarians, including our parliamentary dealing with the subject and we hope that many offer accommodations.  So in this brief intro, let me now request Jay Gullish.  He was working in New Delhi and Jay is living the work on data related topics and subjects.  I understand Jay is going to talk about the Internet Ecosystem and how does it evolve over time?  What kind of lessons you can draw from the history of rev illusion -- and what lessons we can draw in today's context cross-border dataflows, not just for our digital exports, but the overall economy including jobs and health organizations and things like that.  So you have about 25 minutes.
>> JAY GULLISH: Thank you very much.  I really appreciate the opportunity.  I want to thank my colleagues and speakers on the line as well for your time.  I'm really excited about participating in the IGF.  I want to thank the organizers as well.  I know these are major programs to put together and superbly done and bringing critically important issues forward within a global, multi-stakeholder debate.  So thank you to everybody in the background who make today possible.
Where I want to start today is emphasizing the importance of privacy and cross-border dataflows within the policy making environment.  This is the latest issue that has come into the Digital Economy that really is going to be foundational.  The decisions we make in the next year or two or three, will set the stage about the overall digital ecosystem going forward, how much benefit do we globally derive?  What innovation comes out?  How do people and governments work together?  How do we build trust within the Internet environment?
What I'd like to do is put some context into where are we today and how did we get here.  A lot of people think that a lot of the recent activities are sort of the beginning but it's actually -- we are in the middle of the journey here together.  Looking forward, we have to figure out how information about individuals, about information under contract and the outsourcing environment, how information derived in an AI environment, how machine-driven information whether personal or autonomous gets fed into the industrialization.  There is a lot of really difficult questions that we have to ask ourselves about information and data about people and how it's going to ultimately be used within the economic environment to create the things I think we all want.
We all want economic growth.  We all want increased investment.  We all want innovation.  We all want social benefit and the financial derivatives that comes to individuals, companies and ultimately governments as well within tax environments.  How did we get here?
I'm old enough to have visibility of where we started.  The Internet in its current formation had a slow start in the 1970s, 80sand 90s.  It was very foundational.  In the 1990s, you saw a massive boom of the Internet based around infrastructure development.  Many, many new connections or nodes coming in.  Many individuals and organizations coming on line.  I think if you take a point in time like 1996 or 1998, it was not uncommon for people not to have an Internet account or for companies not to have a website.  Just take a moment and think about that.  Imagine a major company not having a website.  Imagine someone in the professional environment not having an e-mail.
So if you go back 20 years ago, that's kind of the environment where we were at.  And so you had a massive investment that went into infrastructure and embedding the Internet into the IT environment.  And that was called the dot-com boom.  And around 1999 there was a shift.  It took a little bit of time but the bubble burst and it had to do with an antitrust case, had to do with web browsers.  I don't want to get into the details of the policy decisions there, but as the dot-com bubble burst and the economy took a downturn, a lot of the investment became stranded and lost and the Internet Ecosystem basically evolved.
Then it started to add what I call the social layer.  So the second iteration, the first iteration was foundational based on some of the protocols, based on infrastructure.  And the second iteration was besides a lot social media that in essence predicated an understanding of the user that you got free service, whether it was Free Internet, free news, free chatting and all of that stuff, with the understanding that information was being gathered and had some value on the back end.
Now, something else happened in this generation as well.  The Internet was designed to maximize availability and access and did not really build in, in the early days, an understanding of the downsides, whether cybersecurity, or cyberbullying, and those sorts of pieces.  And so as the second generation evolved, social media layer got developed significantly, and really drove an incredible amount of innovation, economic growth, investment and the this phase really lasted 10-15 years into just the more recent past where we started to see a significant uptick in cybersecurity breaches.  We saw the creation and formation of the dark web.  We saw people's data being sold, being utilized, we saw some cultural changes around cyberbullying, violent extreme on line and some of the ills created around this social layer.
And then we had a very major shift and that's where we are today where there was this realization that we needed some sort of security-driven environment based on some risk analysis of various threats and costs.  But also we started to see this privacy element where people became increasingly concerned about the quantity of data, about the quality of that, and how it was being use to not only influence individuals but collectively use in more and larger activities around the elections and things of that nature.
And so, that's where we find ourselves right now.  We are toggling into what I call the privacy-driven environment where we are going to have the Internet that will be more secure technically.  We are going to have a greater understanding of some of the cultural benefits but also the limitations and how people utilize it, and there is also a whole privacy element that is being fed into the need for cross-border data.
As we talk about this today, as a group, I think there is a couple of key things to realize.  That the benefits of the Internet in a Digital Economy over the last 20 or 30 years, have been massive.  And we cannot underestimate that.  And looking forward as we move in going forward, I think it's fairly clear that again, going forward, the economic, social benefits are going to be massive.  So when we need to optimize that, we need to find the right tools, regulations, to provide enough flexibility that the inherent innovation areas of connectivity can continue.
And the privacy and cross-border data flows are the decisions that will ultimately define that mechanism.  I'll say two or three things.  One, the movement of data has been incredibly beneficial T will continue to be beneficial.  Soy we have to find the right mechanisms to allow that to continue.  Any time there is man dates or movement for the reciprocity, that's going to create barriers and minimize, reduce the value of this.
Secondly, we need to rebuild trust.  Trust between the end users and people who have that data, but also the companies and the countries perhaps seeking to access that information for legitimate lawful purposes.  And so we need to build trust.  The last thing I would say is this is not inherent to any one country.  My country, the United States, is going through privacy regulation.  We need to get it right.
Many countries are looking at it.  We all need to get right.  But we needs to get right together.  And have some flexibility to understand that each country has its own context for privacy but at its core there has to be interoperabilities, particularly those countries that have major economic activities that is tied to the United States, India, our allies in Asia and Europe.  We need to figure this out.
The very last thing I would say when it comes new policies and new regulations, it's always easier tightening the screws than it is to loosen the screws.  We need a system to add additional layers of regulation, compliance, whatever mechanism going fished.  We don't have all the answers.  So if we try to create a really constrained environment right now, we will have trouble unwinding it when we realize f we realize that we need that flexibility.
So with that, I'm really excited to hear from our other speakers today and looking forward to questions and just want to emphasize that getting our digital relationship right across the countries, across the globe will be crit duel maximizing the optimizing continued value that the Digital Economy has provided and afforded us.  Thank you again and look forward to further discussions.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you for taking us through these per suspect and I was aspects and dimensions.  The Internet-based economy.  This takes me back to the initial days even before the establishment, the early 90s or Mid 90s.
That time we also had been discussing a number of issues without having much understanding of what those issues are and what the impacts are with various sections of the Society.
The reason why I'm saying this is that it's not just the technical persons, it's not just the International limitations, it's not just the think tanks or Private Sector.  It is also important for the Civil Society to have at least some understanding on many of these issues.  I understand that this year's Internet Governance is discussing a large number of them.  The important point is our relationship given the fact that many of these issues are --
So with that, let me now request joy to pick up from what Jay has said in the context of our discussion about cross-border date flows and particularly in African country.  So over to joy.  You have about 10-12 minutes.  Thank you.
>> JOY KATGEKWA: Thank you very much.  I'm pleased to be part of this important conversation.  Thank you for including me.  My name is Joy Katgekwa and I'm the strategic Advisor to the Assistant Secretary general and Director of the Regional Bureau of Africa.  I come to this conversation really as a trade exert and someone who spent most of my career trying to do the link between trade and development.
And I think when we talk about cross-border dataflows, we are really talking about how trade can work for development.  And so many times in situations of this nature, it's almost easier to take away the complexity and try to look at the issue for what it is.  When we talk about cross-border dataflows, what are we talking about?  The 80 of the transactions cross-border to make their way seamlessly.  We are talking about a situation where for years on end, we spoke about the early years T has already been accepted, acknowledged, 245 cross-border dataflows are critical for the movement of goods and services.  When you look at your services agreement at the WTO in terms of mode 1 and 2, you're looking at that possibility of goods to cross borders in a sort of seamless manner.
So in a sense, the importance of cross-border dataflows is well understood.  When you look at India and I'd like to congratulate this important study you put out, it's always easier to explain this point when you look also at the numbers.  What does your study tell us?  It tells us that if there are restrictions as to dataflows, exports will drop by 19%.  GDP will drop by 36 billion.  And a value of 0.34%.  Behind those percentages of people.  Behind those are jobs and innovation and reduction in investments.
When we are amidst the last leg of a decade of action, pushing forward sustainable development, trying to lift people out of poverty, and understanding critically that trade is a critical means of implementation, then we do understand that we have to manage this situation carefully.  Here we are in a COVID environment where if we had any questions before, as to the implications of digitalization, the Digital Economy, and cross-border trade flows within that, if we had any theoretical -- as to importance, it quickly shifted from the theory space smack into how we live our lives, and smack how we do our business, smack into how we trade across borders.
And so in a sense, COVID demonstrated to us it is in escapable for us to find that right balance on how to live rich cross-border trade flows, for sustainable development.  When we look at health for example, the amount of services that have gone across to vicing levels of recipients have been only promoted, harnessed, leveraged by the possibility of digitalization.  Let's look at the same example from the converse way.  Here we are sitting in New York in my case for example, my children will go to school on line.  Where I come from in Africa, it's only the privileged to be able to make that transition to the on line learning.  So early in the pandemic when we used to track these numbers, ting came wrought a figure that spoke about 333 million African children out of school.  And the whole implications of that for the girls and for the boys.
So the whole idea of digitalization and its ability to contribute to sustainable development, or put differently, scale back the reversal by an absence of capacities is where the development question is.  And that's where I'd like to sit wait it.  So to conclude on that point, it's moot whether we should be investing in cross-border dataflows because the economy in which we live, the development we are pursuing, is inextricably linked to that.  Live health and live education and look ate e-Commerce.  The businesses managed to stay afloat are the ones who managed to my great to the digital space.
It's a critical development point for cross-border dataflows and therefore what is the issue?  The issue is about how to democratize that space.  And hire I'd like to take us to the key findings of a recent report that analyzes the Digital Economy.  And of course it's in the context of hitting the Regional Office of Africa so quite familiar with these issues.  The problem with the space in which cross-border dataflows operate is precisely because you have a yawning gap in the digital divide.  You have a marketplace and a business model where there is only a few dominating, seven key owners of the platform.  So Microsoft, Apple, FACEBOOK, WhatsApp and so forth.
Africa owns only 1.3% of this platform.  1-5 people has access to Internet.  So it's a question of inclusivity if we are talking about Sustainable Development Goals.  How do we ensure this promise of digitalization for sustainable development reaches everybody?  And this is where we need to touch on that which is holding back the capacity of this new wave to contribute to the Sustainable Development Goals.
And we do that by tackling the question of how is data owned?  How is data mind?  And how is data ad value on and then how is data therefore exported?  So that is increases the value component of the exports of African countries?  What the report tells us is that many of the African countries will give the data for free because it is being mind because of your participation in the platforms but the collection, the value addition that creates a product, that then comes back to you to buy s where the real value is.  So how can Africa capture those parts as well?  This is the critical development question.
When I was coming to this conversation, I was pleased to have a friend from Kampalao who said they just established the first data collection centre in Uganda.  It is my hope that we don't use it as an opportunity to localize in terms of restriction, but certainly to start to think about how to capture some of that value, create product that can then enhance our exports.
The final point I'd like to make how do we correct some of the ruins understanding that cross-border dataflows are critical for development, the second pill of the augmentation being there is a problem with the temptation of capacity.  Not everybody is involved so the way we are going it is promoting exclusion, even if the numbers are coming also on the side of exclusion.  What then do we do?
I'd like to say two points.  We must invest as heavily as we have in trying to understand the new dynamics.  We must invest in the capacities, extend the reach, because it's now very clear to everybody that it's not a matter of choice or luxury, it's a critical matter of survival if we are talking about the core of basic services.
We talked about health, education.  So we must invest in those capacities to strengthen the ability of more women, youth, enterprises, to be part of this revolution.  The second point I'd like to say is we have to think about competition and the rules framework that can get us there because while you think about dominance, the owners of the digital platforms tell us a situation of this arrangement.  How do we ensure we are managing that from the perspective of competition and policy in order to ensure that there is fairness in the market?  Because for now, even if there is parts that are participating, it is certainly true that there is some larger play.
The third and last point is the question of regulation.  Regulation is this place where when you think about many of the advancements Africa made, and Africa is indeed leading the fourth Industrial Revolution in some areas, not at least areas around mobile management, innovations come from the continent and spread world over.  There is an interesting approach to regulation in this area, which is that if we think about people, if we think about protection, consumer protection, think about safety, we must also think about regulation from the lense of facilitation.  That not all regulation and control.  Not all regulation is about collecting taxes.  Many of the these great innovations coming out of Africa came from a type of regulation that some call sandbox but really put simply this idea of we don't understand it, but let's watch and then when we need to come, we will.
So there is a need of a mix-and-match in terms of how you approach regulation in this area.  So you ensure that the capacities are created, they are bigger, the market is operating in a more fair manner introducing new players but you're not stifling the possibility of advancement movement.  Thank you very much.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you, joy.  Thank you for that.  I would just like to highlight a few key points that joy has made.  First is that numbers will be more small, participation may be small but there are stories behind them, there are people behind them.  We shouldn't just talk about beginners.  We should also think about the possible losers and how we can help them to gain from all of this development.
Very rightly emphasized on and contextualize this whole thing.  In a manner we should have a positive agenda.  It's not a question of restrictions or ideation.  Liberalization or things like that.  It's not a question of this or that.  It has to be this and that.  Now keeping this context in mind, a question which is going in my mind is that, are we missing the bus?  Are we going to miss the bus?
When we talk about the various elements of this fourth Industrial Revolution, Internet and others.  And this COVID-19, it is also taught us or highlighted to us, that things which are going to take place over a fairly long time, I would say -- are taking place in a short time, 3-5 months.  Changes.
So there are good aspects of it and there are challenging aspects.  Not bad but I would use the word challenging.
So she used the term democratization of the Internet space.  How to enable our small and medium enterprises who are actually the backbone of our economy?  In getting advantages of these changes.  So I know that there are various agencies working on it.  UNDP have projects to help, not just -- but to help.  Develop countries.  To not just to come up with challenges with all the changes which are taking place, but also to take advantage of these changes.  So before I hand it over to Raymond, we are very pleased to have you with us in today's meeting.  Let me also analyze a very important point in the context of what we are just wanting to speak about it's not a question of having this regulation or that regulation.  We need to been optimal regulations.  We also need to think about that dominance may not be bad, per se, but dominance is definitely there.  Profit is not a bad word.  Profiteering is a bad word.
So here we are seeing it, this new economic Internet based where maybe once they think they are getting things free of cost but actually they are not.  There are other aspects; which we need to take into account to understand consumer behavior, to understand the impact on consumer behavior.
So let me now request Raymond for talking on the subject, 10-12 minutes.  Raymond, over to you.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: Thank you very much, by pull.  I would also like to commend the great presentations and the talk of the Panelists, joy and Jay.  Thank you very much.  You make my life easier United Nations in the organizations, I will be sharing four slides so you can understand better what my organization, a U.N. agency, focusing more on the SDG9, which is for innovation infrastructure and industrialization.  So you can better appreciate what we are doing as agency in terms of helping the countries to enter into the revolution, which is really characterized by data management, date acquisition, the use of data to make the difference to trade.  And we could go further because here we think the other Panelists, they mentioned idea of data for development.  But you can see the data regarding people moving the country, moving from the country to another place.
So I want to just mention those meeker trends which are the migrations, which are these new technologies and opportunities they offer, which are now the pandemic situation.  And we can mention without any doubt the tensions is not over.  We are still into trade tensions.  And all of that without the pandemic or organization, was to assist countries to swiftly move from the third Industrial Revolution to the force evolution to the digitalization of our economy.  I can share my screen, which would help me at least to put things together.  I'm getting a challenge to share my -- anyway, I would like first to mention aspects.  We are focusing and having challenge.  I don't know if somebody can see this otherwise.  Can you hear me?
>> We can hear you.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: The problem is sharing the screen.  Can you see my screen.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: We can.  Now it is better.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: Excellent.  If you can see my screen, I'm going now to -- first I mentioned the pandemic situation, migrations, new technologies, and the protection.  I want to start from here in the last seven months this is the case.  The case showed that there is an increase of digitalization and so it means without even knowing it, already accepted it, we are sharing data.  We are protected, not protected, but this is the situation.  So to discuss the concept and what we can do together with joy and Jay.
Here what I hope just to say is, obviously, the potential of data collected, we don't really know the data that is the big -- those are -- they have the domination of the digital development gathering.  The only thing is the concern growing now when we have the time to think about our data, what we are sharing.  People are sharing their behavior.  They are trying to be more cautious.  They are sometimes the issue of which kind of regulations and now the first world regulation.
I could not hear it before when Jay office - I was expecting to see that and joy mentioned it.  We could maybe regulate -- and joy was inviting to regulate more, regulation using the length of development, the length of sharing of inclusiveness.  But not of really -- it used to be the same thing.
So that is why in my presentation, we are going to mention more status.  I think the standards and quality Jay mentioned those aspects of building the trust and I think when he was saying, we need obviously to build the trust and we need to be flexible in cross-border data.  Not to boost the Research and Development and the internal development or Digital Economy development.  The next slides I would like to share with you are the slide Number 6 here, which is focusing more on the standards of what I was just saying.
In the white part of your screen, you can see some selected technologies that my agency is promoting in manufacturing because obviously tomorrow in many, many Developing Countries at least in transition country, it is essential to the event that manufacturing that you have block chain.
I think the other side is it interesting to see the new technologies of yesterday are recording for new standards because the essence of the existence of the new technologies of the new industrialization is data management.  The data governing we mentioned before.  Data will make the difference.  And from my organization, into the force in the evolution, it is trying to help the new business models.
We can talk about smart factoring, where you have many more technologies which are very gritty on data.  So, what it means, new technologies and new standards.  But also data to manage, to know how to handle it and to have the capacity to mine data, to manage them, to protect them, to share what we would like to share.
After these slides, I wanted to share this, another one with the way forward, which is going into what joy was just mentioning.  Inclusiveness, existence or the basis of our actions, multilateralism.  If you could like obviously cross-border and corporation.
Those are our basics or the fundamentals of our expertise and actions.  Inclusiveness even the new slogan we use, it is inclusive and sustainable in this development.  No one should be left behind.  It was the motto.  It was our slogan.  Why we started the process before the force of the evolution has made some countries to enter into globalization and global play value chain exchange.  And nowadays, it is the same that we are using, so global should be left behind in terms of digital infrastructure.  Capacity and skills and the people in order for them to be able to engage and to include this.
Multilateralism.  I started it's a new challenge now.  We could not get out from this pandemic without the multilateralism where everybody is thinking about the solution could be national because we are all concerned about our nation, our problems nationally, but global solutions and let's say the solutions to the pandemic is coming from the multilateralism.  We shouldn't be kept out from that.  Corporation, I think the two worlds are really complimenting somehow they are the same in certain aspects.
You need activation.  Remote cooperation.  And when we recite policy, it is not only national policies.  We are talking about regional policies --
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: You have five minutes, please.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: Okay.  The rights are the regional economic information where we gather in a economic environment and regional policy and data management providing capacity that you see later on.  So capacity development of institutions not only SMEs on data management and standards, but we also strengthen the capacities of institution.  It's the capacity in terms of themselves managing data, creating new infrastructure or new institutions in charge of data, creating new projects and pilot centre like just joy mentioned before when you mentioned the first management centre in Uganda.
I'm not going to show what we are doing in other parts of Africa where we are helping the country with smart factories as demonstration but we have been had more digital observatories centered to manage data to protect data to enable the enterprise locally to take advantage of the data they can mine and they can manage.
I think I wanted to mention the policy and standards and the standards bodies, but we do more.  We are working at International level with the other quality development of quality infrastructure institutions.  ISO, International laboratory of centers are for all to accompany and solve this new trend of data management, new technologies in terms of standards.  We go beyond what our perspective is, and harmonization of standards, which will be less -- an example of regulation.
What I would like here, people take away is, we can find solution for the cross-border data management and exchange without regulating like it used to be the first basic behavior and reaction of International level let's.
Regulate.  We can also set standards.  We can help to be much more flexible without development of new technologies which are in need of data.  I think this is what I wanted to share today with you.  And I thank very much for inviting us.  I think I stick to the time?
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Yes.  Absolutely.  Thank you Raymond.  So we are on time, which is good.  So there are a number of questions.  Let me start with the question, which is to Jay N there I will come to a question for Raymond and then follow-up questions for joy.
Now, Jay, the question is, without localization are there ways to protect sensitive data and ensure that law enforcement can investigate crimes?  So we have about a good 30 minutes to go.  So I will be saying Jay if you could repeat your answer to 1 1/2 minutes to two minutes.
>> JAY GULLISH: Thank you.  The easy question in 1 1/2 minutes.  So the first thing I have to share is when you have mandated data localization, what happens is you have an architecture that may be globally intended to have five major points of entrance, hence risk.  Then you have to add in additional sites.  If you're talking about one or two sites, maybe that is more manageable but if every country on the planet has some sort of data localization, you're talking about many dozens if not 100 additional sites.
Most people think about cybersecurity from the zeros and ones but most people breaches, at least really the real critical ones and many of the dangerous ones, actually have to do with physical penetration or insiders.  So every time you add a physical centre, you actually create or increase risk.  One more physical site to protect and one more site where there may be ab error in configuration or mispatch.  So when you're talking about balancing cybersecurity and privacy, fewer physical sites of where that data is managed is often better than more sites.  Obviously managing redundancy and backup and so forth.  Now for law enforcement, this is one of the trickiest questions.  You need to balance access to data for legitimate law enforcement that does not have any of the bias or the political leanings or for those of us in democracy, maybe have to worry about this less than government itself.
So when people think about privacy, it's not only privacy from companies.  It's privacy from governments as well.  And so you just have to add that into the overall argument.
Now in terms of law enforcement access to data, you have to think about the real criminals and people that really trying to hide this information, they are going to do a lot of workarounds and you do things that actually make them safer than others.  So, in a lot of instance we are talking more about sort of incidental, accidental or unexpected sort of access to data as part of just sort of normal law enforcement or enforcing cultural norms such as cyberbullying.
Here there is a lot of work that could be done.  A lot of work that needs to be done.  There are some International, not the International accords, the Budapest Accord is one of them.  The United States is developing agreements on a bilateral basis.  There needs to be a lot more there so that law enforcement can be part of the solution to access this information.
A lot of the issues here has to do with different legal environments in each country.  So if one country wants to give data to another country, it has to meet certain criteria.  There is no perfect or comprehensive way for law enforcement to do this.  But also we need to make sure that we are balancing access that is even too easy or in cases can be abused by certain types of governments or in certain instances.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: thank you.
>> JAY GULLISH: Needs to be multilateral recall and multi-stakeholder as well.  It needs to be a mechanism for consumers and individuals and organizations to be part of that conversation.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Absolutely.  Thank you.  I know we want to discuss this as well.  There is a question for Raymond.  How will climate change mitigation efforts such as leveraging artificial intelligence, which uses the data to boost secular models that are more sustainable industrialization and technological changes, including policies in Developing Countries?  Raymond?  In about two minutes your answer.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: Thank you very much.  I think it is critical.  If it is all what have we are doing.  You have a division dealing withs economies and division dealing with digital development and innovation and so we are working together so it means it's not alternative.  It's the use of data like you mentioned, and use various other new technologies which is what we are promoting.
Obviously what we would like to do is not to be fragmented in our interventions in countries but to have integration of all of those aspects which sometimes seems to be let's say stand alone like when we talk about secular, it's just a science of thing other aspects of where you need new techniques and innovation.
They record more innovation even if the people see it is for sustainability.  So, our policies are the policies we are promoting in Developing Countries, policies which look at sustainability, prosperity, and respect of the planet.  So integrated policies we are promoting.  And just to finish also, we need a hybrid solution that we are promote -- proposing to our member's face.
So I don't feel that we are thinking about two different things here.  In many Developing Countries you have lack of infrastructure and you have lack of skills and you have also non existence of policy which are now appropriate to help them to live from the new technologies.  The ease of solution is a new business model and really effective and sustainable.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you, Raymond.  I have a number of questions for joy.  There are three.  She has already answered them in the screen.  There is a common question which I will request joy to address.  This is from Alan and another from Michael Nelson that says, what would you say at the most widespread excessive restrictions to the cross-border dataflows?  One of the examples with overly restrictive legal framework, and interested to hear your opinion on whether or not the date will be able to maintain to protect data if the restrictions are lifted.
A related point is, we tend to focus on Best Practices at the IGF, but often one can learn more from what practices when it comes to data localization and data sovereignty which countries are making the most mistakes, especially with regard to government's own data.  So since we have come to more or less an end to this session, there are 5 more minutes to go.  I will ask you to all touch upon these points as briefly as possible without overshooting the time.  I will start with joy.  Then I'll come to Raymond and finally to Jay.  So over to you, joy.
>> JOY KATGEKWA: Thank you very much and thank you very much also for the questions.  I made an effort to answer them as they come in.  I think in my one minute, I'd really like to touch on a forward-looking question, which is where is the solution when you try to anchor it in trade?  We have seen some perspectives and direction from New Zealand, Chile and Singapore, which created Digital Economy partnership agreements.
Is this the way forward for Developing Countries?  Is this the way forward for Africa?  I think we have to be careful to ensure that you bring countries onboard.  Everybody is trying to leverage the value of digitalization but I think the moment you trade, the moment you talk about banning customs duties and the moment you talk about dispute settlement, the moment you talk about nations, you're not really putting a trade negotiate's mind into the defense, how do I get flexibility out of this.  So you determine what will be a willingness to come to the table.  My plea in what is left of the 30 seconds is this question of, can we learn from the trade facilitation agreement?  By front loading the question of dealing with the capacities to implement?  We know that infiltrate supporting digitalization is only 1.2%.  It was 3% in 2000, reduced to 1.2%.  We need to touch that capacity point because that is answering the development question.  Once you touch that capacity, you democratize the space and then it has direct relevance for schooling and health and for the exploitation of various services.  Thank you.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Absolutely.  Thank you.  I'm glad that you highlighted the transportation agreement in the context of technical aspects and capacity building.  This is exactly the point which you have in the paper done by my boss -- and the title is, what would happen to a world without the WTO?  And we are going to release it next week.  I hope you all will join us.
So Raymond n one minute what you say?
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: I would like obviously to reemphasize what I mentioned before.  We have another approach so that approach is to force the more quality and stand outs and so to regulate less because we think that with quality and stand outs, it is another way to facilitate or trade and to make technology, Private Sector, to help them to develop without ways and regulating and maybe creating barriers.  And I have another message I want to share with everybody.
The other message is maybe all this sharing of data without asking, or hindering dataflow and let's say exchange should happen in our own city.  What we are doing and we are working very, very strongly on that, is to try with this new Industrial Revolution to create smart cities.  Smart cities is a kind of own experience in your own city.  You see the interactions, the exchange of information and everybody would benefit on that exchange of data information to boost new technologies and relate new solutions for the development.  This is the message I want to pursue into this discussion today.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you, Raymond.  We have about a minute to go.  So Jay?
>> JAY GULLISH: Thank you.  So, I think the core question here is where do we want to go from here?  I think we all agree that the Digital Economy up until now has been incredibly beneficial to humanity at large, to countries to, individuals to, companies, and so as we move into this next iteration, we should look at rather than what Best Practices in the future, what is generally worked?  What has worked up until now is an incremental build.  There is open movement data.  There is transparency.  It's a multi-stakeholder approach.  It's risk-based.  I think going forward we should look at some of those sorts of tools and techniques and we don't want to go too far too fast.  We clearly need to, but it should be done in a measured way to thoughtful way, flexible way, building on existing privacy laws, existing laws of consumer protection, existing laws of competition.  And so when we are thinking about localization, what is the solution we are trying to solve here?
Is it really about data nationalism?  Is it about cybersecurity?  Is it about protecting privacy?  Because all three of those aren't solved by any one policy so we should just be very conscious about how we move forward from here so we can optimize the benefits.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: Want to thank you and I go.  If.  And really appreciate giving me the opportunity to talk to you all.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you very much and everybody.  Let me conclude by saying that we are going to prepare a report of what we discussed today.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-7-ws20122-exploring-the-future-of-endangered-languages-in-cyberspace^^

>> MODERATOR: Let's start the session.  Hello, everyone, I'm Prateek Sibal, I'm a Technology Policy Researcher at UNESCO with interest in transnational governance of AI, ethics of information, and media economics.  
     On behalf of the organizers of the workshop that includes researchers and youth representatives from Pakistan, Korea, Australia, along with UNESCO, I welcome you to the session which will talk about AI inclusion and building datasets in African languages.  
     Of the 6,000 to 7,000 languages in use today, (garbled microphone audio) and English is a major language.  For millions of people lack of access to information in their language can mean that their education and their work is a bit imaginary and it lacks cultural context of their surroundings.  
     So today we are joined by an incredible team of researchers who are working to strengthen access to information in low resource languages across the world.  And we look forward to listen to their insights as we build towards bigger projects.  
     I would begin by introducing Dorothy Gordon, who will be giving introductory remarks for the session.  Dorothy Gordon is the Chair of UNESCO's Information for All Program and Board Member of the UNESCO Institute for Information Technologies and Education.  She has worked in the field of international development and technology for over 20 years and is recognized as a leading technology activist and specialist on policy, education, technology and society in Africa.  
     Dorothy, the floor is yours.  We look forward to listening to you.
     >> DOROTHY GORDON: Thank you, Prateek.  And good morning, good afternoon.  Welcome everyone to what I hope is going to be a Seminole workshop on languages, data and multi-lingualism.  
     I'm really pleased to be here as the IFAP Chair because IFAP provides a platform for all stakeholders in the knowledge society to participate in international discussions on policy and guidelines for action in the area of access to information and knowledge.  
     We have been promoting diversity, linguistic diversity in technology and universal multi-lingualism, access to information, and knowledge in cyberspace as these can be determining factors in the development of a knowledge-based society.  But we don't look at these issues in isolation.  We look at them in the context of access to information and knowledge, preservation of information, especially digital content, media and information literacy, the use of information for development, and information ethics. 
     Over the past 10 years, we had many meetings on these topics.  And these have been promoted by the Chair from the Russian Federation, the Vice-Chair of IFAP, and Chair of the Multi-Lingualism Working Group.  And I encourage everyone to have a look at the Declaration on Linguistic and Cultural Diversity in Cyberspace.  
     I assume that anyone who is listening to this talk is already convinced about the value of language in terms of its transmission of heritage, as a main vector of communication, and the fact that its use in new technology determines the degree of access and participation in knowledge societies.  
     And we all know that the landscape or the information-scape is very skewed and we have very few languages which are currently dominant in cyberspace.  And this has really been evident from March up to now as we see a deepening of digital divide partly due to fact that we have such a limited language environment online.  
     And it's particularly relevant for Africa as we expect that by 2050 we are going to have the world's largest population.  And definitely we will have the world's majority of youth so I'm very happy to see the youth representatives on this platform.
     And while we recognize the value of languages for our socialization, we should not forget that languages have been factors in domination and separation of individuals and nations for the purpose of changing their identity as well as their capacity for analysis.  
     And I am very concerned as an African because many parents on the continent, they do not speak our languages to their children in an effort they think to promote their access to jobs and to a more sophisticated lifestyle.  And as a result, they are affecting their brain development because if you speak to your child in a very limited vocabulary, we see that this has huge impact on their cognitive functions.
     Those first thousand days are very important for children, and so multi-lingualism must be a priority topic for all of us at both an intuitive and a rational level.  And when you look at it, you see that for natural language processing there is really a tiny amount of linguistic resources and research that are looking at the African language context.  
     So I'm really pleased that today we have several researchers from African universities and Civil Society organizations that are involved with this workshop.  And they are working towards the development of datasets in seven African languages across 22 countries reaching about 300 million speakers through the UNESCO project.  
     And, as you know, UNESCO has as a priority Africa.  So we need to further scale these projects and support downstream innovation for people to develop innovative solutions for strengthening the access to information through AI-driven innovation.
     We also need to ensure that we are not introducing new divides as we pay attention to certain languages and we leave other languages behind.  One of the ways we can do this is by documenting our process in such a way that anyone who is excited by the idea of using these tools to get their language online will find it that much easier to do this.  And, of course, I'm sure that everything that we do is being licensed openly.  
     So I was a bit worried when I saw a relatively male dominance of researchers, but I'm hoping that we are going to work to actively ensure a greater inclusion of women and young women as well at all levels of the research and not just as passive kind of yes, we call them to a meeting, but really as drivers for this whole process.  And I'm pleased that at least we have two women researchers here who are already mentoring many people in this area.
     I want to also encourage us to -- in this age of online courses to ensure that African universities are given the opportunity to upgrade their personnel in computational linguistics.  We can do this relatively easy.  I know the group I work with at the University of Ghana really wants to get these courses going.  And that way we deepen the resource pool.  Then I have already discussed with you a bit about making sure that your methodology is open.  
     And in closing, let me just say that we are not really just talking about the creation of a dataset here, but we are talking about the creation of a multi-stakeholder network that actually understands what it takes to get this to happen and who can continue to broaden its base and get more people involved.  Data scientists, Civil Society organizations, youth activists, linguists, even high-tech companies.  We want all of them to get involved.  
     And in closing, just let me remind everyone, nothing for us without us.  This is what was key message from the road map for the decade on Indigenous languages.  And I want to remind us of the Secretary General's road map for digital cooperation paid considerable attention to multi-lingualism.  
     I look forward to the outcomes of this workshop and the projects being discussed, and I will be extremely happy to discuss potential opportunities for bringing these initiatives to the attention of all Member States of IFAP.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, thank you so much, Dorothy, for emphasizing importantly the value of inclusion not only in terms of stakeholders but also communities who are affected and who have the possibility to be left behind online.  
     And on this note, I would actually invite our colleague Christian from GIZ who would share good news regarding openness and building an alliance.  The floor is yours, Christian.
     >> CHRISTIAN RESCH: Thank you very much for the introduction.  
     I'm very happy that I'm here today to speak on behalf of a group of people from like UNESCO and business, and I think as well as Joyce from Makerere University who will speak later.  And what we would like to share today, this group of people gather to form what we call the Open for Good Alliance of a number of partners including UNESCO, Makerere University, GIZ from Canada, KNST from Ghana as well as Mozilla, with whom we work closely, to share a commitment to make open training data available.  Following on what Dorothy just said, I think it is also part of the Chair's commitment that much more than data is needed.
     But the experience we made and I think the story where this came from was a bit that we work in this field and a lot of us work -- have a strong focus on languages, and also on languages in Africa is that there is a lot you can do.  A workshop like this, you can do a webinar, and you find people who work on this all across the continent, but also all across Asia and many pockets of this world.  
     You can like call to talk to people and at the same time, it is a new topic.  It is a new topic.  There are a lot of open questions.  There's a lot of learning to be done.  I mean don't think we claim that we really know all of the answers.  But I think we together saw is that there is a need for coordination and a need for platform and initiatives and an alliance to enable the coordination to share what works good, to share what maybe always does not work that good.  To discuss the problems there are.  
     And this kind of brought us together, and I think the idea started already awhile back to form this alliance.  And this then now we are very happy about this formed Open for Good.  
     What I think is the very fair question there is why we need another alliance.  I mean there are a couple of them around already.  I think where we see the need or where we think makes Open for Good unique are two things.  The one thing is the strong purpose and the commitment to localized data.  And this literally follows on what Dorothy just said.  
     And the problem is that, as I said, we have brought forward, for example, work a lot in Rwanda and Uganda and they have languages that are spoken by millions of people that are currently left out.  And I find the commitment, for example, of Joyce in Uganda wonderful that we need the training data to open up the technology to represent those languages in the 21st century, but currently this is just starting.
     It isn't done yet, and there is a lot of work to do.  And this is just an example which also goes to a lot of other spheres beyond languages.
     And the other point, as open is in the name itself, but where we may be for data, what we think it is crucial is that these resources are openly available, that people can contribute to them, that people can also use them to develop, to bring the languages forward to use digital technology also to make information in their language accessible.
     And this is a -- is something we hold very dear which we find crucially important.  And this will go together and now we are kind of ready to like step a bit out of the shadow and into the light, launch it publicly.  And this is something we would like, most wholeheartedly like to invite you to.  We will have a launch later this month on November 25.  It is a Wednesday at 3:00 p.m. Central European Time.
     If you would like to get in touch or get further information, I'm happy to share them via mail if you leave a mail in the chat.  I will -- or we will get back to you.  Otherwise, I can point you to our Twitter account where we will share further information, which is @fair_forward.  
     But if you haven't followed the reasons why we would like you around, let me just end, reiterate we would be very glad to have you along.  Two things, we would like to with the launch not just say that we are here but like start what we wanted to do, which is to start.  During the launch we will focus on representativity and the prevention of discrimination through this data.  
     But we also are very curious to hear your insights, and we would like to see what you think about these topics and also would welcome you to see which options and which insights might be in there for you.  
     So I hope to see a lot of people we see today again on November 21.  More information will be shared then later.  Thank you very much.  
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, Christian.  Thanks for your remarks and introducing the alliance.  
     I just want to quickly underline that the alliance is going to be a both community-driven initiative where we are listening to the stakeholders and they would be driving the initiative forward in different parts of the world.  
     Without much further ado, we have already heard a lot about Joyce.  I would like to give the floor to Joyce.  
     Dr. Joyce Nabende is a lecturer in the Department of Computer Science at Makerere University and the Head of the Makerere Artificial Intelligence and Data Science Research Lab.  Joyce holds a PhD in computer science from Einthoven University of Technology, the Netherlands.  And currently Joyce leads a team of researchers that carry out research in the application of machine learning techniques in solving problems related to agriculture, transport.  And she is an expert in natural language processing.
     Joyce, we are looking forward to listening to your remarks.  The floor is yours.  Thank you.
     >> JOYCE NABENDE: Thank you very much.  Can everyone see my screen?
     >> I suspect you may have shared the wrong screen.
     >> JOYCE NABENDE: Oh, dear.  Just a minute.  I hope that is the correct screen.
     >> That is better.
     >> JOYCE NABENDE: Perfect.  Thank you so much for the invitation to speak about the work that we are doing at Makerere University in trying to view datasets in African languages.  So in this talk I will briefly speak about the work that we are doing at Makerere to drive and have more language resources for NLP.
     Just a minute.  So I will start by just giving a brief introduction about languages in general in Uganda, and then the context of our work from Makerere.  
     So as you can see from there, Uganda is a multi-lingual country with over 40 Indigenous language dialects.  However, we have a gap that is existing due to the lack of available datasets for many of the languages that we have in Uganda, especially on the internet.  And most of this end up being low resourced and they lack large multi-lingual or even parallel that is necessary for building NLP applications.  
     Based on this demand from the African continent, there have been several growing initiatives to create NLP data.  And I just list an example some of the things that have been going on around common voice, and around Makakhane and also especially the AI for digital challenge focus that has been mainly around building language resources in Uganda, Ghana and South Africa.  So we are lucky that Uganda was one of the countries featured to help build our language resources.  
     And Makerere University participated as part of that challenge, and we have been able to build our datasets.  And I will talk about that later as we move on.
     When I made the slide, I said Uganda languages were missing but not anymore.  Since September 2020 we have a big initiative that has happened for Uganda languages on the common voice platform.  So we are making the list sets and we are trying to move there.
     So I just highlight several of the NLP projects that we have been carrying out around Makerere University.  We like to move NLP to the researchers that we have in the Makerere University and in the Makerere AI Lab.  
     One of the projects we have been doing is looking at key word spotter models and building automatic speech recognition models from radio recordings.  So if we look at the majority of the people in our rural areas, they will try to communicate and put up their views best on radio.  And that is where they will go.  And they have the hope that the government and people in policy, that people who are making decisions will hear them.  
     So part of our work has really been around trying to mine what people are saying on radio and trying to understand, for example, around process and business surveillance, but also understand trends, perceptions, mentioned especially now around the COVID-19 pandemic.  
     And that is a very good project because you actually get to sift through the so many radio recordings that you have in so many different languages.  It looks like a very easy thing to do, but it is not an easy thing to do, especially if you do not have data.  And I will talk about the efforts that we have made in the area.
     Another piece of work that has been going on has been around building natural language processing for low resource languages.  And there are several different high stream machine learning activities and tests and several applications that have been done around several languages like Acholi, Luganda, Lumasaaba.  
     So one of our researchers has been trying to build models around machine transliteration from one language to other.  We have also been able to obtain and build compare which is necessary for machine translation.  
     We have a PhD student who is also working on building grammatical frameworks for the language.  Also we have another researcher who is looking at text-to-speech models, especially looking at spoken dialogue systems, again, around Luganda.  And we have also been lucky to work which is important for question and answering and search engines and even information retrieval.  
     So we have been able to start with Luganda because Luganda is like the widest spoken language here in Uganda and you will see that most of the work that we are driving around most of this project has started with Luganda as our main language.  
     So as I said, media limitations around all of these very brilliant ideas that we might have has been around data.  So, for example, to build a grammatical framework has struggled to get the resources.  They are just not available.  They are just not out there.  For example, the work we are doing with radio, you can't just get the radio recordings and build open models and put the data out there.  
     There are so many steps that you have to go through for licensing, for having to openly put out this data.  And these are many of the things that are driving us Open for Good, how can we have this data, the local data openly available that any researcher who is interested in building NLP models can quickly pick up on that data and be able to build their application that they care about.
     If you look at the available resources for Ugandan languages, of course we always start with the common one, the oldest, which is the bible.  But we also know that the bible has very limitations.  Right now the way people write, the way people speak, even when you listen to the spoken version of the bible, it is quite different from what we are experiencing now.  It is little dialects that are changing.
     People usually code switch.  We even have a version of English in Uganda which is called Uglish.  So all of those complications as you are trying to build both speech and text resources our Ugandan languages.  We also can get Luganda Wikipedia, which is also limited.  And try to partner with the Institute of African Languages here at Makerere University.  They have their resources, they are a bit limited, but we are also moving forward with them because they are the language experts and it is very important to have this partnership together if you want to build up these NLP resources that you require.  
     So what efforts have we put in place to get to where we are now?  As I said, that we are likely to be able to have data driven through the AI for data engine and we have been able to come up with agriculture keywords and we have heard recordings of these keywords.  And voices and spoken and given us enough keywords that launched a challenge which is ending this month for building a keywords spoken model for agriculture.  So that has really been very, very helpful for us.
     We are also in the process of finalizing with licensing with one of the radio stations who appreciate the value for building up this automatic speech recognition models because that is very important for them to even sift through these radio recordings that they have.  
     When did people speak, if they are, for example, interested in a particular topic?  They can go through that once the model is deployed and get out the meaningful transcripts or the meaningful pattern of the radio recordings where these particular things are mentioned.
     So we have also made an extra effort there with the Institute of Languages.  We are also trying to create parallel work across several languages we care about here in Uganda.
     Most importantly, in September this year, we have been able to launch Luganda on the common voice platform.  Because if we want to build this into the speech recognition, we are driven with the fact that we need a lot of data, both speech and text.  And o getting the radio recordings is good.
     It has been really slow because after getting the radio recordings, you also have to transcribe the data.  But you need, again, lots and lots of data.  
     So what we have done as the Makerere team in the AI Lab, we have been able to partnership with GIZ and Mozilla and we have been able to add and launch Luganda as a language on the common voice platform.  
     Our efforts are under way amidst COVID and university opening up slowly to try and drive as many contributions as possible from the community such that we can be able to build up and have a very good speech-to-text compare that we can use for building the deep speech models.  And we hope that this can get started before the end of the year, that we increase the number of hours on the platform.
     We have also been encouraged by the work that's going on, they have done work in pushing on the common voice platform.  So that has been an inspiration as we try to do the work for Uganda.  
     And because we care about open AI training data, we also partnered up with GIZ to come up and build open AI training videos that we put together.  And we have a series of courses and open and unbiased data.  And we have been focusing on how can we help people in the African continent to have access to often AI training data.  
     We have five a series of five videos where we are talking about how to access open voice training data.  And we are focusing on Mozilla because it is like the portal where we have the experience with especially at Makerere University where you can easily go in, download, and build a simple deep speech model.
     We are also focusing on how to access open data.  We have also been able to talk about our work since open image training data much of our work in the AI lab has been around computer vision and building models for agriculture.  So we also want to help people to kick start and get to the step but how do you access the data.  When you access the data, then what? What can you do with this?  So the video can also help to be able to do this.  
     But also because with that data that we are coming with and with the Open for Good Alliance, we want to make sure that people know where to put their data, how to prepare their data to put it out openly for people to have access to it.
     So we have a video that is also talking about how to prepare open AI training data.  Because that is important.  Yes, you can have the data, but the data is closed and no one has access to so how do you put out the data that it is fair and people can have access to it, it is findable and all those things that we care about in the fair principles.
     And finally, we have also been able to talk about how to eliminate biases in AI training data.  That is very, very important.  Even as we are trying to run our own with the NLP data and voice data on the common voice platform, it is so critical that we take care of so many things around bias.  
     For example, having as many female contributors as possible.  Having diversity in terms of age.  Such that we can have a very good balanced dataset.  So these are the things that we feel like are important as we drive to make sure that we build NLP resources and datasets for the African language that we want to do it the correct way.  
     As such that we can have at the end of the day a very good model that is useable for everyone.  So for fairness and equitability, efforts have to be put in place to develop NLP resources for the African language.  
     And I believe all the people on this call are interested about this, and we are all together to guide and provide support for everyone in their journey toward achieving this goal.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Joyce, for this really illuminating talk.  You touched upon different kinds of data resources available from radio to bible.  
     And on that one we have a question in the QA on fonts and where to find characters related on different languages, if you could take the time to answer that.  
     But before that, I just have one quick question before we move to the next speaker.  What are some of the practical applications you have already been able to look at or work on using, for instance, voice data or other kinds of datasets that you created, if you could share quickly with us?
     >> JOYCE NABENDE: So for our voice data what we have been about to do is we have our project of mining the radio recordings.  And so that that dataset that we are trying to build up from that -- from common voice platform is very important because now we are trying to build our end-to-end speech recognition models best on that data and trying to apply that on our radio recordings.
     So we are in the process of collecting the data, but the simple model that we started with is just simple keywords or the model.  And so the data that we have in the challenge, we have also been working with it inside the lab to try and look at if I have a radio transcript and I run a simple keywords and start a model and I know that I'm looking for a particular keyword, for example, where I mention maybe a particular pest or a particular disease, can I be able to flag out that transcript with the highest probability that the particular keyword has been mentioned?  
     So we started with the simple keyword model.  And as soon as we have as much data as we require from the common voice platform, then we can be able to build the speech models.  So that is one of the applications that we are running with.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks for sharing that.  And I think this is a good entry point to Kathleen, who has leading a lot of the work in Africa building communities, mentoring a lot of people, and for us is definitely a big inspiration.  
     So Kathleen Siminyu is an AI researcher who is Regional Coordinator of the Artificial Intelligence for Development Alliance.  And Kathleen has been -- hi, Kathleen?  Yeah.
     And Kathleen has a long experience of running -- working with AI communities on the African continent including the Nairobi women and machine learning and data science community.  We had the opportunity to actually organize a workshop with Kathleen and some of her colleagues at the deep learning endeavor on questions of AI and fairness, AI and bias, AI and gender equality.  And it was a really enlightening experience to bring all these communities together.  
     Today we are learning -- we are here to learn from Kathleen about the participatory research environment that she is driving forward in Africa.
     >> KATHLEEN SIMINYU: Thank you for the introduction.  I hope you can hear me all right.  
     So my presentation today is titled specifically Research for Building in Low Resourced Settings.  And I will be using a case study of African languages, obviously, and particularly two projects which we shall speak about a little later in this presentation.
     So talking with attempting to define what low resourceness is.  So with this table, I just tried to illustrate the fact that there is a huge imbalance in between the number of speakers that speak some of the languages in the world and the available resources particularly on digital platforms and with this table particularly on Wikipedia.  
     So I will draw your attention to, first of all, English, which has 1.2 billion plus speakers in the world.  And then 6 million plus articles available in Wikipedia.  
     And then below the line that is under English, that is all African languages.  And particularly -- well, African languages are low resource languages.  
     And I will draw your attention Kiswahili, which is the largest most widely spoken language, I think, with 9 million plus speakers.  But in comparison to English, there is only 59,000 Wikipedia articles available in this language.
     Yeah.  So why does this problem exist?  It is actually a very complex situation.  And what we decided to do is to reflect on the entire NLP process in particular because this is a field that we are in to understand what the problems are and what can be done.
     And this is -- we created this I guess diagram to explain the relationship and the interaction between agents and the interactions that they have with the external resources that they require to create and participate in this cycle.  
     And not forgetting the stakeholders.  So where the stakeholders are individuals who are impacted by the artifacts created from this process or, indeed, in this case, the low resource nature of the artifact.
     So talking back to the content creators, and they are the primary group in the cycle really.  In NLP, we speak a lot about datasets but really these are the work of authors and writers and musicians and the like.
     And, of course, we find that there is an abundance of digital spoken languages such as English and French.  And the reason why this is not the same for African languages, the reasons actually varied.  They range from a lack of tooling for language -- specific languages such as the keyboard.  And this actually goes back to the question that Joyce had been asked because you will find that there are African languages that have special didactics and those require special keyboards.  But if those do not exist, it is already hard that I as a writer have to create any content in my language.
     In addition to just a lack of availability of online platforms that can be used for didactic creation or rather collection, and then there is also a lack of an audience.
     Particularly for political and historical reasons, Ngubi Wath Thiongo described in his book being punished in school for speaking in a language other than English.  So he is a Kenyan writer.
     And he described a time as a writer in precolonial times when they would be jailed for publishing books and articles in African languages.  So this is just further to the fact that content creators really have not had an audience or had an environment within which they could create in these languages.
     Second, we move to the translators.  And really just following up from the challenges with content creation, if there is no audience to consume the content, it means there is also no audience or demand for translation. And that being one factor.  
     The translators would also require additional tools for their job such as dictionaries.  And you find that in many low resource languages no one has taken the time to sit down and formally create tools such as this.
     And then we move on to the curators.  These are individuals who are putting together datasets.  In an ideal situation, they should be individuals that have a knowledge of the languages and they would require access to web crawlers and to know the language IDs of relevant languages.  So in many contexts you may imagine that language IDs is a solved problem, but in many low resource languages we start to realize that there may be either a duplication or an exclusion of low resource languages and this also causes a challenge to the group of individuals.
     And then we move to the language technologist.  These are individuals who largely deal with model creation.  They are the ones who build the computational tools.  And they will require access to machine learning tool kits.  
     Again, if we go back to the fact that we are working at low resource environments, a lot of these tool kits need a lot amount of compute to run.  So that presents a challenge.  And also the fact that preprocessing needs to be done, for well-represented languages on digital platforms because they are a no-brainer and make the engineers' work very easy.  But then in the low resource context you almost have to reinvent the wheel and think universally about how you are going to prepare your data to train any sort of model.
     And then we have the evaluator.  This is an individual who is tasked with evaluating the quality of results from tool sets language technologies have made.  Ideally, an evaluator should understand the language that they are evaluating.  In practice, when it comes to low language resource the evaluators will often not understand the languages and will instead resort to using and relying on exclusively Korean metrics as a measure of evaluation.  For example, the blue score which is very commonly used in Russian translation tasks.
     Whereas if now you are in a high resource language, whoever the evaluator is, in addition to relying on an evaluation metric, is also able to give feedback to evaluators based on their human evaluation of some of the output.  And this feedback will help the language technologists to improve the model.  So we find that particularly in low resource language work this feedback loop is excluded.
     And in an ideal world, if all languages were high resource we would have or we would find that each agent in the cycle has the tools to carry out their role and the process is cyclical such that if one agent is able to do their role, then they are able to provide the next agents the material to then effectively do their role.  
     But then the reality on low resource scenario is there are breakdowns in very many points of the cycle.  And in each segment of the process, if there is a breakdown it affects consequences downstream, making the entire process very much constrained.
     So we conclude that low-resourced-ness is more than just about the data, it is about the society.  And really, who is society?  That is you and I and everyone around us, right?
     So what is broken?  What are some of the common failures?  We find that African -- a lot of not including African languages in NLP research.  So African languages are largely not included in NLB researchers and not involving native speakers in the development is a problem.  A lot of NLP work is centered on English-centered data only.  So this brings a disconnect in terms of contextual understanding if we are always just not looking from within and looking to build resources based on oral tradition, I would say, but rather looking to translate or copy and adapt from external.  And then finally, not involving native speakers in the evaluation process.
     I'm now going to go into some of the ways in which we are tackling this problem.
     Both looking to make it a participatory research.  So using this as a means to ensure that everyone who should be in the room and should be contributing to this work is actually in the room and able to contribute to this work.
     So hypothesis one, the participatory research can facilitate low-resourced machine learning development.  And the project that best speaks to our efforts in this area is Makakhane.  So Makakhane is a grassroots NLP community for Africa by Africans.  And it started initially for questions on machine translation.  
     Which you will consequently see a lot of the learning related to Makakhane are based on but then it has grown to involve a wide variety of other tasks.
     What is Makakhane?  We are the efforts are open source in that all models, data, code, even down to meeting notes, every time we have a meeting are freely available on GitHub.  It is continent wide.  At last count, we had researchers contributing from 30 African countries now.  Many of us have never actually met in person and really only know each other by our avatars or our digital pictures.  It is largely distributed and entirely online thus far.
     So again, I mentioned that Makakhane began as a movement for machine translation.  And these being some of the biggest wins.  So far, there's 47 translation models for 35 African languages that have been published.  And again, all of this work is open sourced and freely available.  
     And also evaluation work that we have most recently undertaken will be trained machine translation model is the translating of COVID-19 surveys and TED talks.  
     So we went through a process of doing those translations and then doing an evaluation iteration of having individuals post edit for nine languages.  And when this presentation is shared, you can have access to the full list of languages trained.
     My slide stopped moving.  Okay.  Again, Makakhane is research focused so we have seen great success with papers published in the past year.  Particularly, Masakhane published with two papers with I think about 20 collaborators each on those papers, which is pretty cool, in my opinion.  
     So the most recent one has been published to ENLP Findings and also to the African NLP Workshop which was held earlier this year in collaboration -- sorry, collocated with the online ICLR.  
     And there is papers on really variety of other topics from researchers dedicated to Masakhane.  And again, the full list will be available in case that is something that may be of interest to you.  
     And participatory research can certainly help the development of good high-quality African language datasets.  And the work to test this has been to facilitate or to run a language fellowship program which has led to the creation of a number of datasets.  So you see the languages represented here at the bottom.  
     And really, I guess what happens to bring about language fellowship program is we got an opportunity to have some work funded.  And to put that into context, Masakhane is largely run on the goodwill of individuals and on the energy to work on stuff in their free team.  
     So when the opportunity came to fund some work and to really engage researchers full time on a problem, really the common shared problem that none of us can escape is a lack of data.  And so this is what we chose to do with funding that became available on the premise that when data curators originate from the States where languages are spoken, creative and culturally grounded forms of dataset creation can take place.
     So through the work with the fellowship and the various fellows, we've created the datasets for machine translation, text to speech, sentiment analysis, and document classification.  
     The slide gives an outline of the languages involved and the countries where the teams originate from.  And we have seen a variety of methods and processes used down from engaging with translation communities or engaging with community groups like church groups and hiring translation, let me call them parties, where individuals sit down and create datasets from scratch.
     It has been a very eye-opening process to see the creative means in which people want to create such as this.
     In addition to the datasets that are resulting from this process, other outputs that we have created through collaboration with partners and really just using each dataset creation cycle as a case study is IP and copyright guidelines which are pretty important considering a large number of the fellows are creating datasets from data that is already existing on the internet.  So they are doing a lot of scraping of websites, newspapers, books, scraping of text and data.  And then data protection and privacy guidelines, again, because data sources do include social media platforms and just other data sources which include personally identifiable features of individuals.
     And this work has been funded and made possible through very many partners who I'm going to try and acknowledge now.  So there is the Knowledge for All Foundation.  There's IDRC and Swedish SEDA. So IDRC is the Italian Development Agency and SEDA is the Swedish run.  Of course, UNESCO.  And GIZ through the Fair Forward Initiative.  There's Strathmore Center for Intellectual Property and Information Technology, the Data Science Working Group, three such group at the University of Pretoria, and Zindi.
     And I will leave you with Masakhane.  We build together.  Masakhane is a Zulu word that means we build together.  And that's it.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Kathleen.  I personally loved how you presented the framework within the five points -- the content creators, the conciliators, the curators, the language technologists, and the evaluators.  It really gives us, all of us an entry point into look at the challenges, the map with the fire and the heat that you showed on how to address each of these challenges.  
     And I think this is an important take-away as we work towards the outcomes of this and also to take forward the fellowship program to go beyond the content curators which is super important to have native language speakers doing that but also to address challenges in translation and language technology.
     Thank you so much for this insight.  And, of course, always looking forward to working with you and learning from you.
     Moving on, we have Roy Boney Jr. who serves as Cherokee Nation Language Programs Manager.  He is an enrolled citizen of Cherokee Nation.  He has been working in Cherokee language revitalization programs for nearly 20 years, with 14 of them directly for the Cherokee Nation.  
     He has served as a cultural and animation specialist for the Cherokee Nation Chaka School where he created books, short films, and digital media content in Cherokee language.  
     We are really looking forward to hearing Roy here now.  He has first-hand experience in generational losses in Cherokee language transmission, something that our previous speakers have also touched upon on how a lot of people can be excluded or there can be forms of colonization which still exists and how we need to battle those.  
     Roy, the floor is yours.  We are looking forward to listening to you.  Thank you.
     >> ROY BONEY: Thank you.  I'm glad to be here today.  Let me get my screen sharing going here.  
     Can everyone see that?  All right.  I will talk about the Cherokee language today of (Speaking non-English language), as we say it in our language.  We are a very small language comparatively to a lot of other languages in the world.  We have about 400,000 Cherokees total.  We are represented by three different Cherokee tribes in the United States.
     So I work for the Cherokee Nation, so that's the largest of the three tribes.  Overall with all three, we have about 400,000 citizens.  And out of that, we have done a survey in the last two years or so and we've discovered there are only 2,000 people that are fluent in the Cherokee language.  
     So we're at a very critical point in our language.  So we have engaged quite heavily technology to ensure that we can revitalize our language.  We don't like to say preserve because that kind of implies that it's going to die.  We're going to do what we can to make sure bring it back and revitalize it and bring life to it.
     So I'll give you an overview about a quick history and then jump into how we are using technology.  We have our own writing system.  This was developed by Sequoia in the 1820's.  This is a chart of his own handwriting showing what it looks like.  We have 86 characters in our language.  It is about 200 years next year is the anniversary of it.  So we're going to have a big celebration among our communities about this.  
     But there are 86 characters.  So over the decades from its introduction to the community, we adapted to different types of technologies.  So back in the 19th century, they adapted from the cursive handwriting to the movable type to the printing press.  And so from that we started doing a lot of printing.  
     As someone else had mentioned earlier, you know, we did a lot of religious materials from missionaries.  So there is the New Testament is in Cherokee.  Lots of other religious materials like hymn books and things like that.  We also have traditional materials from our traditional communities in the Cherokee language as well.  
     We still print newspapers in Cherokee.  So this is an issue of the Cherokee Phoenix.  That's our Cherokee newspaper that has been in circulation since 1828.  There have been a few interruptions, but for the most part it has been a resource for our people for a long time now.  
     Our newspaper is online as well.  You can get a paper version.  You can go to the website and read it in English or in Cherokee.  We engage with our translators to record these stories in Cherokee and they write it as well so they can follow along.  
     And that serves as a very good tool for second language learners of Cherokee.  They can see our languages as written and hear a natural speaker saying these words.  
     We engage with technology pretty heavily.  We have a language technology program in our tribe.  So what our people do there, we do a lot of vocalization and we've worked with Microsoft and Google and Apple and a bunch of the other tech companies to make sure that their products support our language.  We also engage, we use the internet quite a lot.
     We have a TV series called OCO TV.  And that means hello in our language.  And all of the episodes are put online.  And they interview our culture elders and artists and other people doing important work for our tribes.  
     But we have language lessons as part of our TV series.  So you can watch all this stuff on YouTube now and on our website here.
     We also engage with the university so we have a telecourse in Cherokee language that people can watch on the TV air waves here.  You can also take this class online for college credit.  
     And again, we work pretty closely with our Cherokee first language speakers.  I'm a second language learner so I'm not fluent myself.  I'm still learning but engaged in this process.  And we want to make sure that anybody that wants to access our language can get to it whether it's online or through TV or radio.  
     So we have a weekly radio show as well that's hosted by a Cherokee speaker, Dennis Sixkiller, and he interviews our various elders throughout the Cherokee community.  As of this year, we have about 950 episodes of this radio show.  And you can listen to all of these episodes on our Cherokee Nation website.  And we have them being podcast as well.  
     So this is another resource where you can listen to -- they are about an hour long, and hour-long interview with a Cherokee speaker all in Cherokee.  You can listen and learn and hear about the way they grew up and various things like that.
     So again, we're leveraging the technology to do this.  It is broadcast on the radio, but if you miss it you can also listen any time you want.
     And we are also engaged in research, documenting things like tones and all of that kind of stuff.  I'm not a linguist so that is outside of my purview.  For the radio show, for example, we have a university linguist who is working with our translators and they're going through these interviews and marking things like the grammar of the language and the tone and all this and they're documenting this.  And it's just providing very valuable research to us as learners.
     And we intend to share all this stuff with our learners as well because we have a master apprentice program, too, where we pair young learners with elder master speakers for a two-year intensive project.  So they get engaged with the language heavily and they can use the language shows and TV shows and listen to Cherokee and learn while they're working with an elder speaker.
     I mentioned we do a lot of vocalization.  Part of that -- we had our syllabary encoded with Unicode.  It look awhile for the communities to understand what that really meant.  
     Prior to that, we had a lot of different fonts floating around that were not Unicode compatible so that caused an issue with communication in the communities.  You know, if you didn't have the exact same font you couldn't read what someone had written.  So when we got past the barrier of getting our language into the Unicode standard, that was a huge leap forward for us in terms of technology because it opened the door to not only using our language on the internet but having this data that we could transport easily to another source, you know, and we would have the same code points for the characters.  
     So we are ensuring that we are sharing the correct information as it goes to another device or another system.  And we can use this in databases.  
     And we operate a Cherokee language immersion school as well for children from prekindergarten to the sixth grade.  And they can have user names in our language, they can have passwords in our language.  So that provide an extra level of security as well using our writing system for that type of system.
     So building on that, since we are -- since we do have our language encoded or our writing system encoded in Unicode, we can do things like we are trying to get into a lot more of machine learning, using datasets to generate verbs.  
     So this is our test.  We created a Cherokee verb builder.  Our language is synthetic so we can break it down by the prefixes and suffixes and stems and all this, but without it being encoded in Unicode we would not be able to do this type of work easily.  So we're very glad that we have this ability to do this.
     And it is only in recent years that we kind of moved in this direction.  I know I heard earlier mentioned, too, a lot of times communities want to try to translate something that exists already into their language.  So we are moving away from that and trying to create new content directly in Cherokee for our communities.  And using this technology has helped because our translators, we have staff translators at Cherokee Nation and they create such a lot of content of translation like the newspaper I shared earlier, they translate that.
     They need a place to store all this data so we're creating the databases, language core to hold all this so we can share this data with our communities as well for the learners and the other Cherokee speakers out there.
     And the great thing about this is since most of our communities have smart devices, you know, they have some tablet or cell phone now, if they can get an Android device, our language is supported on Android and iOS, on Windows, and on Chromebooks.  It's kind of any mobile device you can think of now our language has support in it.  
     So we have elders in our communities using our language.  They're texting, e-mailing, posting things on Facebook in Cherokee.  So they are communicating with their grandchildren and their children.  Despite our language endangerment, we are having a very interesting period of revitalization, again through the use of technology.
     We also have a tourism department.  And so what they do is they try to engage the public around this that might not be familiar with the tribe or the language.  And we do videos like this, we do a Cherokee word of the week.  There is a couple of hundred of these videos on YouTube.  
     Again, we use our writing system and the English phonetics.  And these videos can be shared with anyone.  Again, a lot of learners access these.
     And we have our own YouTube channel for the tribe itself which has lots of -- we have interviews with Cherokee speakers that we film.  We also have online language classes that are archived.  We have quite a lot of number of Cherokee language online classes.  And especially with the pandemic now, we've moved online pretty heavily.
     And on that front as well, we are in the process now of developing our own custom virtual classroom.  So it is similar to Zoom, you know, what we are doing now, but it is going to be the interface will be in Cherokee for our students.
     You know, so without, you know, Unicode technology, we wouldn't have been able to do that kind of thing either.  So we're in the middle of doing that development, too, at the moment.  So on our Cherokee Nation website, we have all our language resources easily accessible to the public.  
     We develop a lot of things in the technology realm for fonts and keyboards.  We work with professional font developers like at Google.  Google released a font for us in Cherokee.  And we also engaged with Microsoft to do a UI font for Windows in Cherokee.  And then we have professionals like at Adobe that have made fonts and things.  
     So we try to have the resources to create content in Cherokee as well.  So we have been training a few people in our community, too, some of the younger people that have the how to you make a keyboard in Cherokee?  You know, that's a skill that a lot of these kids pick up on pretty quickly because they play a lot of games that kind of thing and they understand the technology a lot more than our elders do.
     So they are creating these new ways to use our language on these devices.  And I should mention we also are doing animations.  We have done animations for quite a long time.  
     They have been very small-scale short films, but we recently have begun this animated series called Inagei, which means in the woods.  And it is a full professional level Cherokee language cartoon.  
     Coinciding with this, again because of COVID, we are making a language app using these characters to teach languages well.  So they will have a various set of games inside the app.  We are in the development process right now with this.
     We have engaged with an app developer to do this process.  But again, because our language has been encoded in Unicode, it has really helped us bridge this gap where we can send our datasets to the developers and they can input our language into it.  
     And on top of that, we're doing recordings as well so you can hear the language being spoken in the game.  So for us, as I mentioned, we are a very small language community, but we are trying the best we can to leverage the technology.  
     So hearing the stories from everyone else, we are in a similar situation, and so I like to hear or see how people are using the datasets as well.
     Because we are creating -- we had a grant prior to COVID where we have got all of these universities and other institutions in the United States that have Cherokee language documents in their archives.  We digitized several thousand copies of all these documents that are written in Cherokee.  
     And so we're building a database where we are inputting all of this data in the Cherokee language and we're having it translated so in the future we will have a very large, centralized database of Cherokee language terminology.  And it will include things like the transcripts from the scripts of this animation, for example.  So we're going to try to include it all in one central area for access to our citizens.
     So we have our own department at the tribe now.  Prior to -- we recently were reorganized as a government internally, so our Cherokee language has its own governmental department now.  
     We used to reside under education because we just did classes for the community and things.  But now with the departmental level structure, that will help us quite a lot more to engage with our community and hopefully be really successful in our language revitalization efforts.  
     If you have questions, there is our catch-all e-mail.  It will be routed to the proper person in our organization.  I will wrap up here.  But thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Roy, so much.  I think one of the beautiful aspects of this webinar/discussion that we are having today is that we have so many diverse perspectives and so many key points.  
     For instance, in the beginning Dorothy mentioned about how younger people may not be engaging so much with their languages.  But seeing the programs that you have implemented from animation to, you know, radio shows to pairing youngsters with people who have mastered the language, there is a lot of societal aspect, as Kathleen was mentioning, in actually revitalizing and spreading language forward.
     On that note, I would invite Subhashish to talk about his experience.  Subhashish is from India.  And he is a steward in the openness movement.  And he works at the intersection of openness, digital human rights, diversity and storytelling.  
     For over a decade, he has led strategy programs in diversity and inclusion a rights-based approach in many international Civil Society organizations, including the Wiki Media Foundation, Center for Internet and Society, Mozilla, Internet Society, and Engaged Media.  
     As a National Geographic Explorer and documentary filmmaker, he has documented many Indigenous and endangered languages under the ambit of Project Open Speaks.  
     So potentially there are some linkages with what Joyce is working on in Uganda and what Subhashish is probably going to talk about.  The floor is open, Subahashish, looking forward to listening to you.
     >> SUBHASHISH PANIGRAHI:  Thank you very much.  And thank you, all of you organizers, for giving me this opportunity.  So I come from a country that speaks more than 780 languages, out of which 22 are officially recognized.  That means that the provinces and the governments are encouraged to use those languages for governance.  And that is very good news.
     But what happens in reality is that the concentration rights and the policies don't always end up in implementation.  And that has affected my country for a very long time.  And as I have worked with many Civil Societies across Asia-Pacific, I have seen that in other countries as well.  
     Where our countries are seeing sort of a digital shift right now and e-governance is being emphasized a lot in the developing countries in the region.  Whereas there is little emphasis on the socio-economic divide that exists in these countries.
     Last year, I was working on a fellowship called the Digital Identity Fellowship.  And one of the areas that I looked at is the use of languages in governance.  And particularly providing critical information to people in their native languages.  
     What I found out through interviews for a documentary is that a lot of members of different Indigenous language communities don't really have any understanding about the -- when they comply to the government program and they share their permission for private data collection, they mostly comply and they don't provide consent because they don't understand and don't have the literacy of the legalities and digital rights that they have.
     And because that becomes much more difficult, but also a very critical element right now that all of us that work in this domain of languages being used for governance, we need to look at how these stakeholders pay more importance and provide literacy in different languages around the areas of digital rights and human rights and also the Indigenous rights to begin with, which varies from community to community.
     Moving on to the next area that I personally have worked for a long time, which is openness.  And when I say openness, it sort of cuts across many different practical areas including open source software to open licensing and open content and open culture.  
     And something that is more philosophical, and that is embedded in many Indigenous communities, which basically means that knowledge is free and universal, and everybody should have equal and equitable access to that.  And knowledge is something that is collaboratively created.  And there is always a distributive ownership and there is always a feedback loop.  And these foundational aspects are common in many Indigenous practices and many of the openness areas that we work with.  
     So when it comes to languages and the use of languages, particularly on the internet and digital domains, we see a digital divide.  And I think it was Dorothy who kind of highlighted or it was probably a -- but if you look at the internet, it is highly divided and it is not democratic yet.  It is not equitable.  And the digital divide that we see also lies in many different areas starting from oral knowledge and written knowledge and oral content and written content and how much participation people have on the content that's available on the internet.  And I think Dorothy spoke about that in the beginning.
     And I think there are projects that are driven by communities.  And those projects are certainly working towards reducing that digital divide and the gaps that we see, particularly from a rights perspective starting from Wikipedia.  And Wikipedia, as we know, is itself run by volunteers and it's written by volunteers.  And it is written, and there are many oral languages.  My own country has so many oral languages that aren't not even documented and don't have a writing system so they can't be there on Wikipedia.  
     But those tools are useful when it comes to building machine translation and AI and other similar tools.  So a lot of language communities are certainly working towards creating resources and they're creating open datasets, but a lot of community members also don't have the literacy about openness in the first place.
     And when it comes to government programs, they certainly don't have a very clear stand.  Sometimes the data that is released by many governments is open data.  But the content, that is the documentation and other supporting literature, that isn't available in open licenses.  So that means that the governments don't have a clear idea when they release data.  So that kind of creates more problem.
     So I think many governments have to sort of standardize these things.  Look at what is really basic and fundamental and what is really important for the end users.  If, say, a documentary filmmaker like myself is documenting a particular language, then their first and foremost duty is to make that documentary available under an open license so that the community itself won't have to deal with the copyright restrictions and license.
     And that isn't the case for many academic research.  A lot of researchers themselves don't have a very clear idea and that is not part of their studies as well that they need to release something after the end of their research.  And their research items have to be openly licensed so that the community members themselves can access the research outcomes freely and openly.
     So I think it is really important that we underline these aspects in our own work, whatever stakeholder we represent.  And I think documenting our own work is also very important so that other people from different countries or other communities that might be doing similar work can use the documentation for their own research and for their own work.
     So going to the next aspect of my presentation.  Is social media being used?  And social media has, you know, a very -- it lies basically in the spectrum of our rights.  And it has a lot of good things and bad things that contributes to the society.  When it comes to the rights, you know, a lot of social media companies collect a lot of personal data.
     And the privacy aspect is always in question when it comes to large social media companies. They can have surveillance that potentially increase in societies.  And social media is also used for propagating fake news and disinformation and misinformation, which is really important.  
     But what is really important right now is the algorithmic decision making that social media companies use.  They harvest people's search history and the patterns and use that data to kind of provide them ads.  And those ads are now multi-lingual.  
     So there is a lot of use of native languages and human languages on social media that is now used for algorithmic decision making.  But on the other side, that is also used for spreading the languages because social media is a very pervasive technology.  And it's very decentralized and Democratic in that sense a lot of communities use that to promote their own languages.  
     Communities use social media for engaging with other people that are geographically dispersed.  And that sort of is very important for us to kind of have that distinction that how much literacy people have, how much literacy end users have when it comes to using social media and what kind of literacy should be provided on social media.  So people know when they give their consent for something rather than just using them and probably being victims of big corporations harvesting that data and using that data against them.
     So I would probably summarize what I shared that the future has to be more open and collaborative.  And we need to focus a lot on open educational resources and resources that are available to everyone in a free license.  
     So those resources could include content.  It could include educational resources.  It could include datasets.  But the resources have to be open and there is no sort of negotiation there.
     Whoever is producing that resource have to understand that the work that they produce is not just a one-time effort, but that could be used by other communities elsewhere.
     And there has to be a lot of effort to kind of ensure that the content that is used for machine translation and other training, the training for the datasets, should focus on using content that is not just, say, religious or cultural but also looks at social justice and other feminist issues.
     And there is definitely content in every language around areas that are probably minority, but it is important that those -- that there is a diversity of content that is used for machine training.
     And, yeah, so I will probably end there and leave some space for more question and answer and also discussions around this.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Subhashish, for bringing this rights content to the discussion today and also talking about literacy and media and information literacy.  More importantly, also how it is not just about researchers harnessing data but also giving it back to the community to be able to use and benefit from those resources.
     On this note, I would pass on the floor to Elliott who would moderate the conversation.  If you have any questions, please let us know.  And the floor is yours, Elliott.
     >> ELLIOTT MANN: Thank you.  We will now enter into a now short period of open discussion time.  Feel free to ask questions in the Q&A box in Zoom, or otherwise just in the usual chat.  
     And as participants, you can raise your hand if you want to speak.  I think, Jaewon, you had a question first off.
     >> JAEWON SON: Thank you for giving me the floor.  I'm one of the organizers today in capacity building.  
     I would like to just touch upon like the use and social perspective.  So just like Dorothy mentioned, I believe a language is endangered if not being passed on to the younger generation.  And you don't want to lose the ability to speak the language as well.  But without like the proper support from the society, community, and family and education, they wouldn't be able to like maintain their native tongue.  
     While Africa has a lot of foreign investment in recent years, creating more jobs for local people to get their, the job, they should learn more kind of primary languages like Swahili or English.  And I think this has put a lot of pressure on having a survival of the endangered languages which also endangers their cultural heritage and traditional knowledge going through the language.
     So in this context, I thought just like Kathleen mentioned, I think it has to be more encouraged to have more AI kind of fellowships and encouraging more AI researchers focusing on the endangered languages for them to have more capacity on having those research and also developing a multi-stakeholder network that strengthens the research on the language technology based on AI technology for Africa languages just like the Open for Good Alliance that Prateek and Christian mentioned.  Thank you.
     >> ELLIOTT MANN: That is good question how we can best involve young people and get people involved into the research and those sort of technologies for AI.  
     Does any of the panelists want to take a crack at that one?
     >> KATHLEEN SIMINYU: I would like to chime in.  Not really in response to that of the question, but just to add the fact that like Jaewon has mentioned, we are increasingly finding that young people in Africa don't speak their mother tongue because individuals are now are growing up in the cities.  And whereas in the villages you use your mother tongue a lot in the home context or in more informal situations.  Now you find that English and Kiswahili are used which are more regional and not ethnically attributed to any group.  
     So when there is a desire to learn their mother tongue, there just isn't available pedagogical resources.  And I think that's something that we overlook.  If I wanted to learn French today, I could download Duolingo and start doing exercises and that would be really easy.  
     But to start learning my mother tongue today, the process is not as simple.  And I'm always saying the technology for this stuff to be created exists.  The applications are just not there.  
     So I think another relationship that could be formed is multi-disciplinary relationships between AI researchers who are collecting this data in their work.  But then also, you know, web developers, mobile developers and pedagogical who can start building those applications for this to be made available.  Thank you.
     >> ELLIOTT MANN: Exactly, I like that part as well.  I have spent some time in Indonesia where it is very much like that where you have the national language and then you have different regional languages as well.
     And many young people these days growing up are only speaking Indonesian, the national language, and not learning their local dialects.  And it can have a big impact even if they want to talk to their family or other people back in their regional areas.  That is one area that affects young people especially is learning these different languages, particularly where there isn't basic access through a mobile phone or something.
     I do have a couple of policy questions here, which I think we might have a bit of time to discuss.  The first part I've got here is where the machine learning techniques and the internet can be used to strengthen multi-lingualism and the availability of information and knowledge in low resource languages.  
     I suspect everybody here would agree that that is absolutely the case.  But I'm personally interested in how everyone here sees -- you know, these technologies have grown incredibly quickly over the last few years.  I mean where do you see the next steps as being going forward?
     >> ROY BONEY: I would like to see more text-to-speech increase, so it is much easier for a low resource language to engage with.  
     We've tried it with Cherokee, and it required such a huge amount of data to even start so it's daunting at that point, but maybe it will get better in the future.
     >> ELLIOTT MANN: Certainly, that seems like a very good area for innovation.  Joyce, did you have something to add?
     >> JOYCE NABENDE: I think, as I mentioned earlier, I think we really need to push and have more ways to push out the datasets that we are creating, so they are really available.  
     I was just reading yesterday around Kiswahili, someone wrote an article and said that we are to blame for the poor translations that Google Translator is giving us in Kiswahili, right, because we are not making an effort as much as possible to push out as much information as possible in Kiswahili such that it can be crawled to make the translations better. 
     So I think the onus is on us that as we try to create and view as many researches as possible in our local languages that we can push them out as much as possible and that they can contribute around on the internet and make this research available for all the different languages. 
     >> DOROTHY GORDON:  Let me just come in and say that I think it is really important that we not only look at it vis-a-vis the colonial language, but making sure that we use machine learning techniques to help us translate between our own languages.  Because that is what actually happens a lot on a daily basis.  
     For the -- even though the urbanized youth may not master our languages, the bulk of the population conducts most of their business in our languages, they move around our countries, and they need to be able to communicate between African languages.
     >> SUBHASHISH PANIGRAHI: If I can add something here.  
     I work closely with a community in India and their language has a writing system that is standardized in Unicode.  So that is good news, they have a Wikipedia that was created two years back.  
     And many of the community members now use Twitter to create sentence pairs.  So it's mostly English and their language.  And they are doing that in a collaborative mode very ethnic mode and it's all being kind of saved in a place to use the dataset in the future to create a text-to-speech or a machine translation tool.
     But right now they don't even know what tool they are going to use and what tools are going to be available in the future, what is the best open source tool that they could use.  But they are just creating these sentence pairs.  
     I think many communities can start from that basic baby step that they can take that they can create things that are most needed for a larger project.  And that could start with a little resource with people that don't probably have much understanding about AI or machine learning techniques but that can contribute to a larger project in the future.  
     So I think that kind of collaboration.  And many community members don't also have enough access to the technique.  But they could -- they all have smartphones with them, and with that they can just tweet.  And that is pretty simple, and that is something that many elders can do as well.  Elders that just have got a smartphone but don't know probably much about the internet, and they can just easily contribute and type two sentences a day.
     >> ELLIOTT MANN: Thanks.  So I think we're just running out of time, I think we will end on this one question here.  
     How can documentary linguists collaborate in a concrete manner with AI practitioners to enhance less resourced African languages?  
     Dorothy, I saw this was a point you raised earlier in chat and certainly it's something that I have seen raised as a sort of theme throughout this session.  
     How do people feel about the linkages between linguists and AI practitioners in the area?  We could leave it as a comment.  
     >> DOROTHY GORDON: Because you already mentioned I had said something, I want to talk again.  
     But I definitely I feel we could do better here working with the two groups to actually have a better understanding of each other's field.  And that is why I keep pushing for computational linguistics being taught at the university level throughout Africa and bringing together experts from both computer science and from linguistics.
     >> ELLIOTT MANN:  Certainly. I think that would be a good pathway out of that.  Prateek, I'll hand it over.  Oh, Kathleen? Yes?
     >> KATHLEEN SIMINYU: Yeah, I'd also like to chime in. 
     I don't know what we can do to tangibly incentive more coordination between academics.  I have seen very interesting work, collaboration between linguists and computer scientists where the computer scientist builds some feature cognition models and the linguists use them in language documentation.  
     So they would go out in the field, collect the data stories from native speakers.  And then as an initial path for transcription use the speech recognition tool kits used and then quick edit which made their work much faster, more efficient.  And it is a symbiotic relationship because on the other end of things the transcripted recordings then act as additional data to make the speech recognition models much better and perform better in future.  So that is one example.  
     Another is going back to the point of there being a lack of pedagogical processes for language learning in some of the languages.  Again, I have come across particularly for the languages I'm working on linguists who have been working for years and years to build pedagogical resources.  
     And they have unpublished dictionaries and lexicons and all sorts of things which could be useful to computer scientists.  The two, I don't know, silos in academia are just not talking or are not connected.  
     So a lot of us are out here trying to scrape data from the internet but we don't realize that there are places in academia where the data exists.  And they on the other end don't have readily available means to make that openly available.  
     If I got access to dictionary like that, thinking about how I send published data on the web portal, but I have the technical skills to make that possible whereas they do not. Many times it has been as simple as making an introduction and making each party aware of what the other is trying to do.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-7-ws218-climate-change-disinformation-beyond-confusion-action^^

 
     >> MODERATOR: So we'll start, right?  Good.  So I'll open the situation.  Hello to everyone, hello to all and to each one.  My name is Ricardo Grassi.  I'm a journalist, an author, an organizer.  I'm from Argentina, but I'm living in Rome since many years.  
     And I'm the Director General and head of policy of an organization, an independent organization, it's an initiative called Citizens Platform, Climate Change and Sustainable World.  We are working together with UNESCO, and in particular with Bhanu Neupane, who will today speak.  
     I want to thank very much to the Internet Governance Forum for accepting our proposal for the workshop.  I mean submitted by UNESCO and Citizens Platform.  And also, I want to thank each one of those that have enlisted to attend this workshop plus our speakers.  
     We wanted very much to consider in this context the climate disinformation and we add to this the double perspective trying to go beyond confusion created by disinformation and to generate action.  
     I mean disinformation and false information is an extremely disturbing issue that we have to face every day that generates among people, regular citizens, an enormous confusion.  And that confusion leads to inaction in a moment that we do need to be very proactive.
     Personally I think that we have instruments to do that, as those interested in stopping any change also have the instruments to do that and an enormous amount of resources to carry on their plans.
     This is a particular technology, and that is why we have invited two of the speakers that are very knowledgeable on their technologies that has to do with internet, social media platforms, and with artificial intelligence.  And at the same time, this is the nature of defining policies on how to move forward, how to curve this disinformation.  And for that, we count on people that is dealing with the science communication and defining policies that allow to try to balance this that is heavily imbalanced.
     I would like to put the accent on the need of coming together in a proactive way because personally I think that regulating the use of internet and particularly regulating the social media platforms is a very complex and probably much -- it's a very complex issue and probably much slower than the urgency we are facing would require.  
     I mean, the climate change issue is a very, very serious matter.  And we need to do it.  And that is why we put after the confusion, we put action.  I mean these social platforms are gigantic corporations.  Out of the 10 main social platforms, eight are based in one country, which is the United States.  And they are in synthesis the result of the neoliberal globalization and deregulation that still defines the world's governance.  I mean national and international levels.
     So that is a reality that is there.  I support the efforts, of course, to deal with this in terms of political relations and so on, but I also strongly support and believe the need of action from the Civil Society side.
     And I think that at the bottom line of the disinformation that we are considering in this workshop there is a deep lack of communication.
     We live in the illusion that we are all very much communicated and that we have the privilege of living in a fully informed society.  Not only this is an illusion.  We do live in bubbles organized by algorithms and the communication is much oriented.  While at the same time in my perception there is a deep communication between the north of the world and the south of the world.  
     Probably most of us live in a situation where we received real world analysis within this globality, the local dimensions of which we often know very little and particularly in that that we call the majority world or that we call the Global South.
     At the same time, there is an enormous activity going on despite the information and false and malinformation and all of the amount of financial resources that are put on that, we see those of us concerned about the climate issue, we have seen that weak in terms of the possibility of action.  Yet, youth generated this future mobilization that among different results produced one that is fundamental.
     Climate change is no longer an opinion, but fact.  And a fact that calls for action.  It's a kind of consultation between David and Goliath.  But this David generated an enormous mobilization, and that is the road that from the Civil Society side I think we need to move forward.
     In this we are people concentrated on communication and information.  And this is what the Citizens Platform for Climate Change is.  We have considered in working together with UNESCO.  And currently after very successful webinars in June and July, we are moving forward to what we call a climate change communication convergence which is coming all together to produce something that starts curving the disinformation process.
     So this would be my introduction for now.  And I would be very pleased to introduce Bhanu Neupane.  He is a program specialist from UNESCO in the communication and information sector.  He's a scientist, and particularly concerned about science communication.  So, Bhanu, if you could please come in.
     >> BHANU NEUPANE: Thank you, Ricardo.  
     Indeed, the collaboration with IPS in this sphere and especially with Citizens Platform has produced some significant headway in curbing climate change disinformation as you just mentioned.
     Dear panelists and participants, climate change refers to a change in the state of the climate that are characterized by changes in the mean end or the variability of its properties and that persists for an extended period.
     Such changes are long-term in nature and can lead to changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in the land use.  The impact of climate change have already begun to threaten the survival of humanity through direct destruction of habitat, violent weather phenomena, reduction of water and food supplies.  
     Right now I'm sitting here in Tampa.  And Tampa, in Florida, and we are -- in fact, there is a hurricane warning out there.  It was raining until recently.  So there is a state of chaos.  
     The U.S. is a very strong country, and U.S. has started to feel the brunt of climate change and its realities.  So let's think about, you know, the unary of the fragility of small countries in different parts of the world which are not as resource rich as U.S. is.  
     So in this sphere, human identity is directly concerned with and influenced by climatic information. 
     Accurate information about climate change is vital to take the right decision, understand impacts and take urgent actions to mitigate its ill effect.  But disinformation or the falsehood designed to undermine the validity of scientific evidence not only permeates the sphere of climate change communication and information.  
     Such false information may delay and even hinder actions to respond to climate change.  It is thus crucial that these questions are properly addressed.
     And we all know that like COVID-19 pandemic, renewed tension has been prone to informational problems.  Disinformational problems and their detrimental impacts are familiar to us which work in the field of climate change.  
     During June through July, as Ricardo mentioned, we organized four webinars to take the agenda forward.  We established that there was urgent actions needed to start this or develop monitoring and fact-checking mechanism, support framework or governance-based responses through law and policies.  
     We have to curate information through technological and economic responses.  And also, and I think it is the most important that we bring all of the stakeholders together to normalize ethical and educational context to enable all concerned to assess the credibility of the sources that are producing this disinformation.  
     The global narrative from demand and supply side of information, the demand side requires that the correct information is generated for all stakeholders to connect with it.
     At the same time, supply side and -- needs to work in a better with the producers of information to curb the production of false information and prevent spread or produce more true information.  As you all know, and this was a recent statement, that almost in 60% of the total climate information is Twitter, generated by machines.  
     So our panel today is composed of speakers representing technologies, climate activism, trans value expert and communication expert.  
     So before we begin this discussion, I would like to invite the audience members to post any questions that you may have so that when the time will come we will either give you the floor or read out those questions for our panelists to respond to.  
     To start the discussion I would like to request our panelists to reflect on their experience on questions such as how does the interplay between systemic information campaigns, news, social media platform, et cetera and its understandings have a bearing on science and innovation?  What are some of the strategies that can be done?  
     First, I would like to invite Dr. Martina Klimes.  She's a good friend who works as an advisor for water and peace at SERI where she is responsible for the water and peace portfolio in addition to advising on serious activities on transboundary basins affected by water scarcity, political tension, and on violence.  
     She has recently turned her attention to how targeted disinformation pose dangerous and growing problem for transboundary water cooperation.
     And I think you may have recently watched some of the videos she has posted on YouTube and also on her LinkedIn profile on how disinformation can be dealt with properly by bringing the proper spirit of cooperation.  Martina, the floor is yours.
     >> MARTINA KLIMES: Thank you very much, Bhanu, and thank you everybody for the nice introduction.  
     I must say I'm happy that the Internet Governance Forum is looking into these issues related to climate change and disinformation.  Because as climate change, it really is one of the major concerns of our times.  
     I should say how I became first interested in disinformation in climate change and water cooperation, it was actually through a request we received by the government that we work with that is located in a region that really is hugely affected by water scarcity, political tensions, and conflicts.
     And the government said we never nerve received any -- we don't know how to deal with the situation.  We feel completely powerless.  We are dealing with the complex environmental situation, and we know that it will be only worse and worse.  We have regions in our country which really have almost no access to water.  And then we are constantly attacked by different information influence campaigns and we don't know how to respond to the situation.
     And that really made us think how disinformation and/or generally more information influence campaigns are also used in the trans-boundary setting or are targeted at countries that are affected by many other challenges.
     So for that we decided, SIWI, Stockholm International Water Institute, we actually looked at this challenge from the position of these governments.  What can we do?  And when looking more into this issue, it is really about the space in which disinformation campaigns thrive.
     So it is really about what the governments can do to limit this environment in which information influence campaigns can be used.
     And it is about really getting people's buy-in and increasing public awareness about the challenges to really understand both the importance of these issues and also the need for change.  It is very difficult, you can think how difficult it is in developed countries to really change behavior.  
     Maybe we should think about how to do we use resources?  What food we buy, how do we behave?  Just imagine how very different it can be in a country that is affected by many other challenges.  And how do you in this context really encourage everybody?
     Now we have to be considering also the climate aspects and we also need to maybe need to change our behavior.  We need to tell the farmers that maybe we cannot no longer really plan on planting wheat because that is a very important crop, maybe they need to change to quinoa.  
     So introducing the changes in the difficult countries is complex and, of course, this offers an opportunity for many different actors to use information influence campaigns to further destabilize the countries.
     And I think we need to look when thinking about disinformation and climate change, we really need to look at four different aspects.  One is climate.  What is really happening with climate change, climate variability?  
     And the other one is related to communication.  How do we communicate it from the government?  We see often there is a lack of transparency on different parts of the governance.  We also see that there is a very low trust between governments and public.
     And now we can also see this what happened with I think the COVID-19 pandemic really help us to understand that there is just in some places very, very low trust in any information that the government shares.
     It is being questioned.  People say I no longer believe in science.  So really -- and that also stems from the fact that there is a very low trust between governments and public that also contributes to the situation and environment in which disinformation thrive.
     And then we have politics.  We see that there are groups that actively manipulate knowledge transfer, they abuse the power symmetry.  For example, we know that we have technology that can, for example, predict droughts in the remote part of Africa.  How does this information get to the farmers and informs them that there will be drought?  Of course, we know also know that there is a lot of traditional knowledge, that the farmers also rely on this, and that this is also very important aspect.  But through modern technology, we can also use this and further advance their situation.
     However, the knowledge transfer about this is sometimes very slow and very weak.  And then we have groups who abuse this, who use the situation because -- because of both the environmental degradation but also a lack of knowledge of the future developments to really advance their own political gains.
     So this can be in regions, for example, different parts of Middle East are really affected by proxy wars and wars are now fueled not only by weapons by also by information.
     So you see a lot of different groups that are really trying to escalate situation in certain places by spreading either disinformation, or really using the situation that, for example, some groups of population do not trust the government, do not trust information that comes from the government and further abuse it to advance their own political gains.  
     So it is really about the tactics to actively manipulate the knowledge transfer.  And, of course, now we have a widely available social media.  Social media are available across the globe, as you know.
     So this is really not -- so this is really not only a situation of countries in the west or in developed countries, but really the spread of information is extremely much, much faster in all parts of the globe this, of course, also makes it easier to spread disinformation.
     And the last is data science.  Despite the internet technology, we still have data scarcity in some parts of the more fragile countries.  We also have lack of understanding of data and we have low science literacy among some decision makers.  Often -- and I think this is that organizations like SIWI but also organizations like UNESCO and the Citizen Platform can really play a very key role into transferring these very complex scientific messages into something that the decision makers can work with.  And this is important to help the decision makers know how to use science and how science can be their friend, how to use information and data to really argue for needs to change politics.
     We will see that -- and this is -- I think I will end with in.  Just imagine in some parts of the world, it is very challenging to make decisions that will really affect public behavior.  It is very difficult to challenge them to really start, for example, saving water in a certain way.  When they finally can maybe afford a solar panel to have their own well when there is just the general system is not working to really pass the message to these people that you also need to think about water sustainability.  You cannot just pump as you like.  
     So really to send these messages in a way that the citizens would trust it and then would trust that this is really in the interest of the future of their countries.  
     So these four aspects are extremely important.  Climate, what is happening with climate change.  How do we communicate it?  What about the low trust between the government and public?  The politics, who is really abusing the situation?  Who is taking advantage of this?  And how do we use data?  How can we use data better?  How can we use science better?
     I will end with this.  I think that the knowledge is already here.  It is just not equally distributed.  So we really need to make an effort how to get the right information to the people who need it, and how to empower governments who have mandates to make a change that would minimize the space in which disinformation campaigns thrive.
     >> You are muted.
     >> MARTINA KLIMES: I think I used my three to four minutes.  But I'm very happy to, of course, answer to other questions.  
     I'm happy -- I have some -- I have a slide that is examples of disinformation campaigns in context of trans-boundary waters so I can really show you specific examples and I can tell you how it affected certain processes.  But I thought we can do it in the second part of this.  But is that correct?
     >> MODERATOR: Exactly.  Perfect, Martina.  This introduction has been perfect.  It's extremely interesting.  And myself, I already have like some questions to put to you, and I look forward to seeing also those slides that would illustrate it better.
     We move forward.  I would like to introduce now Mr. Asher Minns.  Asher, besides being a friend, is the Executive Director Tyndall Centre for Climate -- Research Centre for Climate Change.  This year the Tyndall Centre is celebrating its 20th anniversary.  So it is 20 years working on climate change issues.
     And Asher, as its Executive Director and as the science communicator, because that is his know-how, is much into all of the issues of how science is communicated.  I mean the difficulties, the flaws in science communication.  And at the same time, with how to deal with the rejection of science, the disinformation, the false information, trying to curb or to isolate what science has been teaching us about this specific issue.
     So I would like Asher to tell us about it.
     >> ASHER MINNS: Thank you very much, Ricardo. Nice to be here in this panel, and also to people there in the internet sphere.  
     Exactly as Ricardo says, so I have been communicating climate change for 20 years since the founding of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change research.
     And to use Bhanu's terminology, I guess I'm one of the delivery or supplier people.  So I said we tend to supply the latest knowledge, the research, the commentary, the policy intervention ideas.  And it is my job to help our researchers get their very useful information to where it is that their useful information is supposed to be.
     However, that just sounds like a pipeline of delivering information.  The communication of climate change is really all about dialogue.  And that is where the internet has something very different to traditional media, which is that it can be a lot more interactive.  However, we do know from lots of research that traditional media is still where people get information about climate change from and most of their -- most of their news from.
     So, you know, the internet and traditional media, albeit traditional media online, serve slightly different purposes.  And I think some of that also is about not only the news gathering abilities of traditional media, but also the trust in source as well.  And I think as exactly as Martina was saying there, trust in source is how all of us all the time evaluate information because we can't possibly be an expert in absolutely everything.
     So mostly we look, as does the public, but we are the public, we look to see where information is coming from.  If we trust that source of information, that is generally the information that we will be -- that we will be taking and talking to our friends and family about.
     All to do with our values, less than the information ourself.  And, of course, that is exactly where the internet has an enormous malaise of how do people trust information that is on the internet versus provided by a traditional media which, right or wrong, is supposed to have some quite professional journalistic norms.  Now that might not always be the case, but that is the theory.
     But I think before we get too worried about misinformation and disinformation about climate change, we have to remember how hugely successful the communication of climate change has been.  As I said, I've been doing this for 20 years, and I'm not trying to claim this as my success at all, but when I started, nobody knew anything about climate change.  Maybe some governments were interested, or I would maybe get invited to a village hall to talk to some farmers about how the climate is changing or something.  
     And now it is this big, big public policy issue.  We are here talking about it.  And we have the Paris Agreement of 2015.  Next year will be the Glasgow UN Summit as a follow-up to Paris.  We can see it all around us, we hear it all the time, information about climate change.  So there is certainly no deficit of information about climate change.  
     It has been remarkable in engaging policy and public with an issue of our day.  Now the one interesting thing or an interesting thing I think about the internet and the internet governance is the internet is probably still wide open in terms of engaging people with climate change.  
     People on the internet are already interested in climate change, they're looking for information in climate change.  And most information about climate change on the internet is not very good quality.  And I will hold up my hand and say well, that's true of my organization as well.  It isn't an easy topic to communicate well.  It is a huge topic.  There is many different types of audiences for information about climate change.  And so nobody has got it worked out on the internet yet.  
     The communication of climate change on the internet is still very much a work in progress, and it is still taking baby steps.  It is not at all grown up yet.  And that is something that the CitizenS Platform is hoping -- trying to help with.
     And my second sort of caution about having said about the communication of climate change hugely successful overall is also in terms of misinformation, disinformation that we must remember that most people are not out there at the extremes of the bell curve.  They are not right at the end.  
     The majority of people, they're here in the middle, and that is the people that are being engaged with and talk about climate change.  Don't worry too much about the people out at the extremes.  They can be influential, and they need quite specific ways of dealing with and engaging them, but most people's hearts and minds, they're in the middle and not out there.
     And one of the -- well, the worries about misinformation and disinformation is often it is not about the information itself.  It is about this erosion of trust in scientific evidence.  So we've talked about trust already, trust in source.  
     And misinformation and disinformation often hasn't got anything to do with the actual information about climate change.  They are actually trying to ask questions to erode trust in where that information comes from because that is how we evaluate information that we are not expert in.  We wait and see.  
     And I have not actually looked at this yet really but, of course, COVID has really brought science back to the top of public interest in every country in the world.  And so wait and see, or at least I haven't looked yet to see what -- how that's changed, if at all, how people are thinking about science and what science can do for society, which is different from what governments say about science.  
     So there are two very specific things.  Science from the scientists, from the experts, and then information mediated through governments and others.
     And certainly towards the beginning or the beginning of the pandemic and going on and perhaps it is a bit less now, I was really surprised, but I couldn't help but note all of the different sorts of pundits, none of which had any qualifications whatsoever commenting on and disputing about numbers and policy choices, you know, journalists, random people on Twitter, also sort of putting their opinion out there.  Some of which were very big audiences.  Some of which are actually ex-presidents of major global countries.  You know, just basically giving their opinion as if it has the same value as experts.
     And so we'll have to -- we'll have to look to see how trust in science currently stands.  Trust in science is always high.  I'm going to imagine it has gone higher, but I could be wrong.
     I just wanted to finish with sort of just four very quick lessons around anything that we are doing around communicating climate change misinformation, disinformation.  Communicate, I teach a little bit, and these are some of the hard learned lessons, but these are actually all rooted in theory as well.
     So I mean the first one is don't amplify misinformation or disinformation.  It is too easy to argue back.  And but what you actually do when you are arguing back is often you then amplify that information to an audience that didn't see that information to begin with.  So starve misinformation or disinformation from the opposite of publicity is an ideal thing to do.
     It is interesting when we look at Trump's tweets, the fact that Trump's tweets now get marked as "this tweet might not be true" is the fact checking actually makes a news story.  So that's a million people now alerted to the fact that what somebody said wasn't true.  But they didn't read, they are not following Trump's Twitter feed to begin with.  So there is something in there.  So starve the oxygen of publicity.
     Taking responsibility from how we are heard is completely different from what it is that we think we said.  And there we are talking about things like cognitive bias whereby we are all accumulating the information that supports our world view.  And similarly with values.
     And we can absolutely work with that.  And I was talking a little bit about the extremes.  You can work with that.  You can work with values.  You can work with cognitive bias certainly when you're dealing with the extremes, but also when you are working with everybody else as well.  
     And pay attention to psychological distance which is that climate change seems far away from the future happening to somebody in a distant land.  That is really not the case anymore.  It is happening here and now so we don't have to talk about climate as a future thing.  It's a now thing.  
     And just to reinforce around working with people's values.  It is not just about information, fact.  Is this a good fact?  Is this a bad fact?  Are these numbers good?  Are these numbers bad?  Has this been interpreted correctly?  
     Working with people's values sort of gets us around a lot of those issues.  I will stop there.  Thank you very much for listening, and I look forward to hearing the other panelists and your questions.
     >> BHANU NEUPANE: Thank you, Asher.  In fact, you raised points that trust definitely is an issue.  And it essentially reminds me of two studies which were published earlier this year.  
     One by Brown University, which actually established that 25% of all tweets that was generated around climate change were generated by bots and they were not in a human -- there was not at all any human intervention in generating those bots.  
     The other thing is John Hopkins also published in another study -- and they went and evaluated to what extent the information on the cyberspace right now related to COVID-19 is based on the fact or, quote-unquote, fiction.  And their finding was also very interesting.  It looks like our lives are slowly like being data mined and kind of guided by the kind of technology that we have surrounded ourselves with.
     So to discuss this thing, we have got Marko Grobelnik with us.  He is a researcher in the field of artificial intelligence.  His focused area of expertise are machine learning, data text, web mining, network analysis, semantic technology, and deep text understanding and data visualization.  
     Marko co-leads the International Lab at Jozef Stefan Institute.  And he contributed to the establishment of UNESCO's category two center on artificial intelligence -- International Research Center on AI.  Recently, yet to be inaugurated, but it has been confirmed by UNESCO as the new category two center.  
     He is also the CEO of Quintelligence.com, and he specializes in solving complex AI tasks for the commercial world.  He collaborates with major European academy institution and does quite a lot of work.  Marko is co-author of several books and he has founded several startups.
     So one of the things that I must say is in 2016 Marko became digital champion of Slovenia at European Commission level.  So With that, Marko, the floor is yours.  
     You are muted, so can you please unmute yourself and provide your view, and what can technology do to shed light on this and bring some trust in the current sphere of climate change disinformation.
     >> MARKO GROBELNIK: Bhanu, Thanks.  This was too long CV to read.  
     Yeah, so I'm coming from the area of artificial intelligence.  What we do a lot is building with information and understanding disinformation flows.  
     So I prepared a couple of slides.  Maybe if some slides will be shown afterwards, maybe I can show mine now.  Let me just take the screen.  Maybe just to start, right.  
     So what I'm showing here is the live picture of information on climate change as it's being published in recent minutes or hours, right, across the world.  So the actual information flow is even faster what you see.  But this is like something which is happening right now on the topic of climate change.
     Might be proper information.  Might be disinformation, we don't know.  But this, as you see, it appears in all of the languages, right, Chinese and Arabic and many others, right.
     So this is -- so we have pretty much good sense of who is talking what.  This is mainstream media, this is not social media, right.  But still just to give you a sense what is happening at the moment, right.
     Okay.  Now, let's -- now it is not just about collecting information and understanding, it is trying to -- we need to understand while the content but not just the content but also the dynamics of information spread so that we can actually react, guide, and steer towards information which we would like to pursue.
     Okay.  What is the ecosystem which we talk about with disinformation or misinformation or even proper information, right.  
     First we have social media, which we touched already.  What are the key features of social media?  It's fast spreading.  Mostly no context, which provides good ground for manipulation, right.  And prone to this echo chamber effect.  
     Why it's prone to echo chamber effect?  Because typically social media is run by big companies and they optimize their business goals, KPIs and somehow these KPIs usually are higher if you create echo chambers and people seem to be happier on the short term, right.  So this is social media.
     Then we have blogs.  These are usually a little bit longer document, right, can be influential.  It's kind of not as fast as social media, it's more like medium speed.  No editorial.  So this is again issue where we -- which allows manipulation and usually these would be more like compact social circles.
     Mainstream media.  Again, kind of medium speeds, editorial.  Higher trust and broader social circles generally.  And then we have in this ecosystem also research papers.  Slower.  Peer reviewed, high trust, but very small social circles.
     This is the ecosystem which we talk about.  And why I am mentioning this is because this -- later I will touch the point why we need the data, right, if we want to steer the discussion.
     Now, one key issue is to understand how information spreads, right, and how echo chambers appear.  I will show now just a few seconds of video.  So how information spreads from mainstream media towards social media.  
     You see this is -- in the center is one "New York Times" article.  And this is now -- every circle is one hour and how social media picks up information from one single "New York Times" article.  And each line which you see here is basically one opinion line.  So this is how information spreads, right?
     The point is to catch this information, to understand the dynamics, where it goes, and to steer it in the right direction.  Here on the right side, I won't show the second video, but here on the right side you would see these clusters which are basically echo chambers in the end, right.
     So it is everybody within this echo chamber is more or less convincing each other about the same thing, right, while they don't really have good contact with others.
     Now the point is how to break these echo chambers so that we don't get these isolated things.  Now, just one small comics, which maybe you have seen it and maybe not.  I really like it.  So how social influence works, right.
     So there is a guy staring up, right.  And then a few more come, and they all are starring up.  Still not clear really what is happening there, right?  The lady spots them.  They are all staring up so she starts staring up as well, right?  The angel on the top, right, spots all these people staring up so he should know, I guess.  But no, eventually he also starts staring up, right. 
     So this is how this media and these echo chambers work, right. Nobody really understands why everybody is staring up at the end, right?
     So now just to conclude, there were a couple of key policy questions which we touched which were in the opening text.
     I just wanted to touch some of them, right.  I mean some -- address some of the issues, right.  So how are -- the first question is how are existing and emerging digital technologies being used to facilitate the production and dissemination of disinformation about climate change?  
     So today's technology, like social media certainly increased speed of information.  I mean this is something as compared to like 10-20 years ago, the information speed spread is much faster.
     And the goal, as I mentioned before, or the effect are these echo chambers which are mostly aligned with the business goals of companies which are running this.
     These dynamics which is happening, these echo chambers certainly accelerates public polarization and causes people to be more resistant to change their beliefs as well, right?  
     So this is what we are fighting really, right?  So as long as we can change people's beliefs, it is fine.  But if we have the whole media space stuck in a state where we cannot change them, then we cannot win, right?  
     As we see, the future technologies want to automate critical thinking in the near future.  So we will be there for at least 10 more years, I would say, right.  Climate change topic is just one of the many victims of the same principles.  COVID discussions, as Bhanu was saying, same thing, right.
     So how to combat this disinformation, right?  So here on the right side, I put this one graph.  So I'm dealing with AI, right?  So AI is really about complex systems, how to deal with complex systems.  And the information space is a complex system.  
     Now we see this public opinion being just one type of a complex system which you can steer if you have the right tools, right?  And so here the point is so if this small circle here is public opinion and we want to bring it from here to here, we just need to find the right tools, the right mechanisms being applied to the right times.
     So this is pretty much how marketing works, how psychology and how many other things are working.  The same thing is here, right.  So to achieve this, right, to be in a position to even start systematically influencing, first we need to have the proper landscape of the origin of information and also how this information is spreading.
     So without this, everything is just a guess, right?  So this is systematic approach.  And next step, right, these operators, these actions basically should be psychologically, pedagogically, or scientifically founded, right, to boost the trust.
     And just the last slide, the question was what sort of policies or regulations could be formulated?  So let's say three fact checking at the moment, this is really short-term thing what we can do, right?  Still mostly manually done by experts.  
     And then breaking echo chambers.  This is more like a mid-term goal and cannot be done without the help of social media companies.  Whatever we do, we cannot do this if Facebook or Twitter or others are not cooperating, right.
     And structure to education.  This is more like long-term goal, right.  And okay, here are a couple of other recommendations maybe which we don't need to go to -- into details.
     So much from my side, more like from the technological side how to operate with public opinion and climate awareness about climate change is just one of these public opinion topics.  Important ones, but just one of them.  Thanks.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks to you, Marko.  Thank you very much for this so detailed exposition of how things are working which is fundamental to learn how to move on and to define our own policies.  
     Now this is what we are trying to do from the Citizen's Platform including -- and this with specific support of UNESCO, we are just starting to build a tool to be able to track specific disinformation or false information in some social media, particularly in Twitter.  Because that would be a good place to analysis and to output to be disseminated among the people.
     And this is one of the roles created by Citizens Platform that have been created by journalists, artists, in synergy with scientists and experts.  And that moves to the convergence I mentioned before.  
     Linked to this, I want to introduce Mr. Fabian Sivnert because we are working together but currently in building this tool.  
     He is the Co-Founder and the Head of Analytics of a communications company called Ancored that is based in Stockholm.  And Fabian is an expert in communication assessment founded on data analysis.  And he is a former researcher and contributor at University of Oxford, the Oxford Internet Institute and Chatham House.
     So as an expert on these matters, I would like Fabian to speak.
     >> FABIAN SIVNERT: Thank you so much, Ricardo, thank you.  Hello.  We are obviously delighted to be here and chat with you all today.  
     And a special thanks to Bhanu and UNESCO as well as, of course, Ricardo of the Citizens Platform, and of course every other distinguished panelist who have spoken.  It is incredibly interesting to be here and share all the insights and understand what we're all thinking, and obviously and most fundamentally, everyone is here listening today.  
     I think that that is obviously one of the keys to spreading this information that we have here today.  
     As Ricardo said, I'm head of analytics of a next gen strategic information firm called Ancored, fundamentally founded on the principles that data and strategy go hand in hand.  Those are two fundamental aspects that we need to control in order to be able to communicate in a better way.
     So my purpose here today is speaking a little bit more from the technology side, but also on a methodological side of understanding how we can really approach these things.  And obviously, as Ricardo mentioned a little bit, so we are currently working with the Citizens Platform of developing a scientific methodological approach to how to assess and track fake news or disinformation, specifically focusing right now on Twitter.  
     The research and methodology that we're working with came about when I was a graduate student at the University of Oxford and working specifically with the Oxford Internet Institute focusing on trying to track this.
     And I think that this comes very naturally to one of the things that Marko said is that we are in right now in a short-term look and we need to try to start tracking these things so we can start making an impact especially on the three questions that we have been discussing about.  
     In essence, not to be too long or too detailed, I think that what we're trying to produce is a three-step process.  And obviously, number one is going to be to identify disinformation and fake news.
     And how would we go about doing this is a function of do you go pure AI, so you let computers and algorithms do everything?  Or do you combine humans?  And we are of the fundamental understanding that right now we need both.  
     We need artificial intelligence to track the conversations, but this needs to be informed by humans that can understand the nuances, that can understand the difference between sarcasm and humor and fact. So it's very important for us to include people in our process as we're trying to understand this.  Which means that we're getting to data plus experience.  
     And the next step, once we then identified let's say the big bad wolf of sharing and spreading fake information, we obviously need to track them.  Because simply identifying them is insufficient.  We need to understand what they're saying, how frequently are they posting, what are they posting about, which regions are they focusing on? We need to gather information on them.
     And once we have that, we obviously need to start trying to combat it.  But we combat it by knowing the data, knowing what they are focusing on, knowing what they re trying to target.
     So really addressing kind of like the three questions that was addressed originally in the seminar like emerging technologies.  How is that using to further fake news, and how can we combat it?  And then which policies can we use to try to hinder it?  
     So from our perspective, we can't address part three, policies, without first dealing with one and two.  We need data to inform policies.  And data without insights is going to be useful and insights without data is going to be pointless.  We need both data and insights.  And that is the fundamental thing that I think that we all are speaking about today is that we need information, data, to then inform policies.
     And that is exactly what we were trying to work with, with Citizens Platform right now.
     And I think that rather than just carrying on too long here, I can happily just end there for now so we can take some questions from the audience as well.
     >> BHANU NEUPANE: Thank you so much, Fabian.  That actually brings us to a very -- some very interesting questions.  
     I see that, you know, there are a couple of questions have been asked, and they are primarily to Martina.  Martina, if you read those question and maybe try to respond to that.  
     And after that, I have got one question for Marko, and the other one for Fabian.  So Ricardo and I will take turns in asking you questions.  
     But this one which has come from the audience which is pretty much like in your comfort zone, Martina.
     >> MARTINA KLIMES: I see -- is the question about conflict resolution in trans-boundary water cooperation.  
     So I will try to quickly answer that.  And Aleksandra, you are very welcome to reach out to me afterwards if you would like to know more because I understand that this is not even to focus on trans-boundary water cooperation. 
     But I do also try to in my answer say a little bit how disinformation and information influence campaigns in general affect these processes so to really put the capability in our context.
     So for -- you may know that there is 310 trans-boundary basins across the world.  That means that it is rivers that are being shared by two or more countries.  And it is more than half of the world's population that is dependent on fresh water from these rivers, trans-boundary rivers.  And most of -- I think over 60% of them, they lack any form of agreement how to manage these waters.
     And then what we have, the framework is really international water law.  And that is quite complex.  As you know, in international law there is no higher arbitral.  So we have the basic principles like duty to cooperate.  You cannot cause significant harm.  And also reasonable and equitable use of water. 
     But it is really about the countries to find -- they have to find a common agreement, and it really needs to be owned by all countries that share a particular river basin.  
     Of course, in some river basins that are not really so challenged geopolitically, it is really much more matter of fact, it's more a technical discussion.  
     But then in the most famous difficult basins like the Nile, you have Tigris, Jordan, we also have Mekong.  As a very famous agreement we have an agreement in India and Pakistan.  It's really then all other issues come into play.  And that is where information is so important.  
     What we see is often these countries when we look into these water disputes, they are actually not in agreement what is the main challenge for the basin, what is the main challenge for the region.
     They don't trust each other's data.  They don't trust, for example, how is the water used?  And how will the future look?  We have a lot of -- even there where we have agreements, we don't actually know how much water availability and water demands we will have because we have a -- because of climate change, we have less water in the system. 
     And we also have growing population so we have higher demand. We are complex societies.  We need more water for agriculture, we need more water for industries, and we are still not yet very good at using new technology how to be more efficient in our water use.
     So it is really data and information is extremely important.  And often this is actually abused.  There is a lot of disinformation being spread.  For example, in upstream countries there is those who would like to maybe fight an agreement.  There is a lot of public opposition because in general there is a very low awareness about the principles of international water law.  
     I agree it is really not a very popular subject, I admit, that really explain the general population that maybe it is in our interest to find that agreement with our neighbors how we can jointly govern these shared water resources.  And then we will all have enough water, and it will be better for the whole region when we can really think of sustainable policies.  
     So there we work with information and public awareness about these processes and also public awareness about upcoming challenges.
     And we also work with the information that, of course, the policy makers have.  Often in trans-boundary basin it is all negotiation in any context, it's an art of compromise.  And imagine if you have a whole public against you.  
     And we have seen cases, for example, in the Euphrates and Tigris, the previous water minister from Iraq would go to negotiate with Turkey.  And he was often subjected to information influence campaigns.  There were specific disinformation campaigns focused on him that it was extremely difficult to reach any kind of compromise with the upstream country because there were incorrect accusations that he had secret bank account in Turkey, for example, and all kinds of information.  And it was that he is selling our water.  And this spread fast so then it was very difficult in that type of climate to really come up to any kind of solution.
     We also have, there is, you know the whole situation in the Nile between Egypt, Ethiopia and Sudan.  There is a lot of different disinformation campaigns floating about that situation.  
     It is really about, yes, the information that we have available for the policy makers, information that is available for the public, and some information that public can trust.  And if we improve this, it would significantly help us to achieve some shared solutions for these very complex challenges.  
     And I think I will stop here on this issue because it is much more complex.  Under human right, I can only say that human right to water is an individual right.  And then historical water rights that would refer more to rights of countries.  SO these two are different things.  
     And there is a special -- of course, there is a special rule on human right to water, that has helped many leaders individual person is entitled.  It changes if you, for example, are based in IDP camp your daily need is lower than if you are in another situation.  
     But I should say that this is really a little bit different topic so please do reach out if you would like to learn more about this.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Martina.  We have been warned that time is almost due.  There is a question for Fabian Sivnet.  I see that.  I don't know if you've read it, Fabian.
     >> FABIAN SIVNERT: Yeah, I did.  I will happily answer it briefly in terms of I think that the way that we approach data, specifically in what we're doing with Citizens Platform is that we are focusing on not the tweets themselves but rather the information that they are trying to share.  
     Specifically focusing on URLs.  So when we get the data itself, we treat it as neutral.  We don't treat it as negative or positive.  But then when we assess each individual URL, which is done through human coding, we must then assess whether or not the information is trying to express positive sentiment or negative sentiment.  We treat that originally as neutral and then based on understanding and expertise from humans, we then assess it based off of that.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay, thank you very much.  Thank you very much.
     >> BHANU NEUPANE: I just had a very small question to Asher.  
     Asher, do you think it is more crucial to target malicious actors who produce false information or social media sites which are unwittingly having false information?  Which should we act or address first?
     >> ASHER MINNS: From my perspective of somebody who deals with the research and the new knowledge, it would be the actors rather than social media.  
     I would argue that you have got -- ignoring bots, you have got influencers. 
     And so those thought leaders tend to be the influencers that then often set the pattern.  So that is not to say ignore social media.  I think for me also it is a question of resources, where do I put my effort?  And so if something is wrong or incorrect or misunderstood, then I will probably put my effort on the influencer rather than the sort of the mass everybody.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Asher.  I think you have a question for Marko you said.
     >> BHANU NEUPANE: Yes, I have a question for Marko.  
     If bots can spread disinformation, why can't bots be utilized to spread the correct information?  Why are the bad guys winning which I don't understand?  Is there anything that you can add?
     >> MARKO GROBELNIK: Certainly we can make bots which could spread right information as well, this is not problem. But if you want to do this, this seems like polluting the information space.  This is maybe one comment to this.
     That is why I was putting on my slides this item that social media companies need to cooperate, right?  For them, it is way easier to spot and block the bots.  As we -- I mean, we cannot stop them, right?  We can just fight in the same way.  
     But I'm not sure if we want to put ourselves to that level, right, to, you know, to send our bots.  We can, no problem.  Maybe even then it would be cheaper to pay the same people which are creating these other bots to create our bots as well.  Just economically speaking, right?
     But not sure if we want to do this because it is really pollution, information pollution.  But without cooperation of social media companies, it is really hard to win this battle with bots, right.
     >> MODERATOR: I would like to comment on that.  Personally, I think that social media companies cooperation is a difficult thing.
     We just have five more minutes.  But briefly, if we have created Citizens Platform, we do believe in the power of proper information and that without proper information, I mean super accurate information plus adding reporting what a lot of people is currently doing, implementing worldwide regarding climate change and sustainable development, should be enough if properly organized to curb the disinformation.
     The point is that we are an enormous amount of sources of information, or organizations and people concerned about the climate change and how to start building a different paradigm because this is the bottom line of all this.  
     I mean we grow in the paradigm, we moved in the paradigm that has been installed there.  And to change the current efforts, we need to start introducing other kind of considerations.
     Now, this spread of sources here and there, here and there, I mean the point is to try to come together and not competing because there is no need to compete or it makes no sense to compete.
     And that is why with UNESCO we started talking about a convergence, a communications convergence.  I mean, adding resources, adding know-how to produce constantly.  And you need quality and quantity.  
     And that is the way that we believe we have to move forward in the context where you don't only have internet and social media.  You have traditional media.  You have advertisements agencies.  And that apart from those that most of us are able to consult, the enormous amount of media worldwide is producing superficial information.  No follow-up.  No analysis.  No linking one thing to the other.  And so this is part of the disinformation, let's say, more than false news.
     So with this, I would like to see if someone else has any other comment?  Otherwise, our time is over.
     >> BHANU NEUPANE: We have that one small thing to request everyone.  If you think -- because we still have about three minutes.  
     Please take like 20 seconds to say what do you want UNESCO or the Citizens Platform and maybe SIWI and all of us do together, just in one statement and something that we can essentially provide as a recommendation of this panel discussion.  
     So maybe we will start from you, Martina, and then go around in the same. Just one statement.
     >> MARTINA KLIMEK: I just would like to add here what Ricardo said is that often in the regions where we work is because people do not trust government but they trust people they know and that is why they listen to social media because that is a mean how to communicate with people they know.  
     So if something is forwarded by a friend, then in certain regions one doesn't question it because one trusts the person.  And that is really being abused, how the disinformation spreads because there is ultimately no trust in government but there is a lot of trust in like the private relations.  And social media is just means for spreading this.  
     And it's a very good question.  And I must say that SIWI is really very much looking forward to working on this and we would really like to see how we could better communicate science, and what we can do, how we can better share these messages and minimize the space for the disinformation campaign.
     >> BHANU NEUPANE: Asher, timer is on you, 20 seconds.
     >> ASHER MINNS: I agree quite a lot with what Martina was just saying. 
     It's all to do with trust in source.  It's the personal relationship, your friends at the dinner table, on Twitter or other social media.  But we should certainly be aware, as I think Marko is saying, this is all within a bubble and it's actually talking outside of the bubbles, especially with social media.
     >> BHANU NEUPANE: Marko?
     >> MARKO GROBELNIK: My message is just we shouldn't be naive, right.  And we should fight this discussion with he same or stronger tools as are being used for misinformation.  So we should be naive.  It's fine, Citizens Platform, we should optimize the reach and the impact, right.  This is the KPI which we need to optimize.  Nothing else, right.
     >> FABIAN SIVNERT: One of things that is key here from our perspective is we need to make sure that everything we talk about is in some way, shape, or form supported by facts.  
     And try to provide data, if you can.  Try to follow, as we have been mentioning here, influencers or key individuals who are informing the narrative in a positive sense.  Try to keep them engaged, try to be there and support them as much as you can.
     >> BHANU NEUPANE: Thank you so much.  Thank you, you know, from Ricardo and my self.  We are signing off. 
     And thank you so much to the panelists.  And you have been so nice and so to the point and precise. 
     We will prepare a report and we'll share with you.  And then this recording I think will be available.  Everything is transcribed so we can also utilize that for our report or for preparing the news item.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much to each one of you.  And thanks to the Internet Governance Forum for giving us this opportunity.  
     I feel this just like adding and the departing point again, we should continue in contact and working together.  Martina, I will contact you quickly.  Bye-bye 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-7-ws381-overcoming-the-us-china-digital-cold-war-raw^^

 
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  We're all here.  We all know the organisation.  The panel has four sort of areas we'll discuss.  Peixi and I will make introductory comments, about three minutes.
    We'll start with the first question which will feature Stephen Anderson, Feng Guo and Charles mock and we'll go to the rest of the world where we go to Joanna, Iginio and Jyoti and then questions about technical and economic infrastructures.  We will have more open discussion and the next question about proposals, practical proposals.
    The Secretariat of the IGF wants us to also ask for voluntary commitments.  Anriette, if you're still paying attention, do you want to explain more about what voluntary commitments are?
    >> Milton, I can say this is an initiative, not from the IGF MAG, but from the UN.
    And it is the idea that make some kind of commitment towards taking an action forward.  And this will be documented in a database and one can then come back and reflect.  It is really quite open.  You can propose to continue research or in this area, or build partnership or have a follow-up session.  It is really quite open.
    The idea is that it gets participants in the process to think about what they can do, post IGF, to build on whatever content was discussed during the workshop.  I hope that helps.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  It does.  So people can be thinking about that, what they can do, what they can propose.
    It could be anything from a follow-up session, which I would certainly be interested in, to particular proposals or ideas that they can take forward in their own country or institution.
    We'll set aside some time for that.
    It's ten after.
    >> I would like to say a couple of words to congratulate everybody to be here and remind everyone that this meeting is being recorded.  And we will be available at YouTube.  We are under United Nations regulations.  And rules.  And IGF cold.  Thank you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  All right.  Well, thank you very much, everybody, for attending.  Today we are discussing, I think, an issue that is really at the centre of Internet Governance worldwide.  That is the conflict that is evolving between the world's two biggest economies, the world's two biggest sort of Internet powers, and of course it is affecting the rest of the world as well.
    I am Milton Mueller, a Professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology and I run a project called the Internet Governance project, along standing project in IGF and ICANN and other Internet Governance institutions.
    I believe that the U.S.-china relationship is extremely important.  It has been particularly painful and difficult to watch the deterioration of the relationship between the two over the past really more than the last four years.  The past ten years I think things have gone downhill.
    Now, we are on the cusp of a somewhat new situation, of course.  We have a new president-elect in the United States.  We don't know exactly how that new person will change or maintain existing policy.  We still have an unresolved trade war.  We still have a blockade on chip technology between the United States and China.  And very recently we have a very interesting conflict between a major Chinese, Jack Ma of Ant group and the Chinese Communist party that indicates that not all is similar and uniform in China itself.
    It seems like maybe the platforms in China are in some ways as disruptive of government as they have been in the United States and are becoming as controversial as they are in the United States.
    Of course, the U.S. has just had a major hearings attacking the platforms for antitrust purposes and some mentions of section 230 which are mostly domestic U.S. issues.  Again, they show a general global trend.
    What we are going to do today is foster a dialogue, a reasonable and mutual understanding from the U.S. and China.  We want to understand how the rest of the world is affected by this conflict.  We really do want to come up with some practical and feasible proposals for moving forward and making the Internet whole, if you will.
    Those are my introductory comments.  Let me turn it over to my co-organiser of this panel, Dr. Peixi Xu.
    >> PEIXI XU:  Thank you, Milton.  Thank you for putting us together.  This is a really challenging topic.
    Basically I have two points in mind to approach this topic about overcoming China-U.S. Cold War.  The first point is that in spite of the huge differences between the Internet Governance models between China and the United States, I think it is also equally important to pay attention to the similarities.  And I think it seems to be very reasonable assumption or perception to say that the two countries are very different.  However, I think it might be to some extent mistaken, if we really accept this kind of presumption.
    The fact is that the two countries actually face many of the same general challenges and many of the same specific programmes.  For example, in terms of how the digital economy should be governed, the nationality or the central or the federal level of government have some conflicting views with the local authorities of the state level or at the provincial level.
    Also there is a kind of a dispute, also the same challenge that is shared by both countries.  That is building a single digital market or having a very fragmented way of decision making in terms of sharing the economy, like ride sharing and home sharing, and also eCommerce taxation.
    I think the two countries have a lot of similarities.
    The first point is that we should start are from the similarities.  By looking at the similarities, I think it can help us to understand the drivers and the people behind the notion of a digital Cold War.  And why did it happen?  Such a way globally that there is a notion of a digital Cold War?
    I think it is true that Internet Governance has covered a lot of dimensions including a military dimension.  But it is more true, or truer that the digital Cold War notion was to some degree imagined or conjured up by politicians or think tankers or security minded personalities.  That is not very constructive in looking at the Internet Governance in such a way.
    And point number two is that we should distinguish higher values from lower values.  I would say that the common narratives are higher values in terms of Internet Governance.  However, the sovereignty narratives are lower values.  So it is happy to observe that beyond the sovereignty narratives, including digital sovereignty or cyber sovereignty or technology sovereignty, there are voices about global commerce or Internet commerce or cyber commerce or digital commerce.
    So all global public good.  In that case I would mention the example of the Cybersecurity Act.  It is at the core of public resources as a public good.  That is a very good practice.  If we can put more things of Internet Governance into such a basket of commerce narrative, it can be more constructive.
    With that I give the floor back to you, Milton.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Thank you.  Yes.  I think that the similarities between the U.S. and China are actually pretty interesting.  Both of us are actually kind of revolutionary countries with gigantic domestic markets.  There are similarity although there are huge differences in values.
    With that let's get into our first question.  That is, do we see the rise of China's digital economy as a threat to the values and standards of the open global Internet?  Or could we say the same thing about the clean networks initiative of the U.S.?  Are we promoting the open global Internet or is the rise of China a threat to it?
    Let's begin with Stephen Anderson of the U.S. State Department.  And he is -- well, I'll let him introduce himself in terms of his exact title.  Yes, let's go for about five minutes, Stephen.  Thanks.
    >> STEPHEN ANDERSON:  Great.  Thank you very much, Milton.  Really it is a pleasure for me to be here with the Internet Governance Forum.  I'm the acting deputy sis secretary for international communications and information policy at the State Department.  I'm a career official who has been with the State Department since 1994.
    Although I had to launch into my comments, again it really is a pleasure to be here at the IGF.  The IGF is known as as open, inclusive and transparent Forum for dialogue on Internet related policy issues.  It really is great to be a part of that dialogue.
    So for the last three decades the Internet has been an engine of global economic growth and innovation.  In fact, the Internet's value stems from the fact that it provides an interoperable platform for all of us to connect with each other, to do business, share opinions and exchange information exactly like we are doing here today.
    The United States government promotes a vision for the Internet that is consistent with its core values, as were mentioned before.  And we share those with so many of our partners and allies:  Respect for human rights, belief in democratic principles an faith in the power of a market-led economy.  That is we support a reliable and secure and interoperable Internet.  Like minded countries around the world have in fact embraced this vision.  The best way in our vision to govern such a network is through the multi-stakeholder model.  Many diverse voices get their say and no one stakeholder should have the ability to reshape the Internet entirely according to its designs.
    Recently, however, the multi-stakeholder model has come under increasing pressure and threat from those including the people's Republic of China promoting a state centric and authoritarian approach to Internet Governance.
    Detrimental, to prosperity and freedom including those of the Chinese people.  Now, to be clear, picking up on a point already mentioned, we do not consider this to be a conflict between the United States and China.  As secretary of stake.  Mike Pompeo has said, the choice is not between the United States and anyone else.  It is between freedom and tyranny.  The CCP espouses a concept of cyber sovereignty that a State has absolute authority over Internet activity and technical architecture within its borders.  Cyber sovereignty is in our view antithetical to the reality and spirit of a multi-stakeholder Internet Governance.
    It is no secret that the CCP seeks to control the flow of information into and inside of China.  It is well-known how the so-called great firewall inhibits the free flow of data cross borders, stifles open discussion internally and limits the ability of the Chinese people to access outside information.
    However, let's not forget the repress I have force it represents within its own borders.  The CCP censors the flow of croargs among its own people and curtails the ability to freely communicate with each other.  The people's Republic of China's national security law requires private companies to hand over any data requested by the Chinese government.  They have to do this without regard for due process, little transparency, no account interestibility or respect for individual privacy.
    Further, the massive state-backed investments like the belt and rolled initiative and opaque in trade agreements, in our view the PRC unfairly will twartses champions oversee seas allowing them to, a top will which our sensitive data runs.  The new information property call or new IP proposal that they've put before the international telecommunications union is in our view an attack on the very foundations of the Internet.  Quite simply, the new IP proposal attempts to inject the PRC's will digital authorityitarian into the very protocols that govern the global Internet.
    If implemented, the Chinese new IP would turn the multi-stakeholder Internet not a top down model granting significant control to state actors.  This would represent in fact a deliberate shift away from the existing multi-stakeholder model and would disenfranchise non-state actors from the prossments even though the majority of Internet infrastructure remains with the private sector.
    If I haven't been clear although I think it is, in the Internet we have come to rely on is penitentiary to be open, interoperability, and secure.  It is for a multi-stakeholder community to assure that it remains that way.  The positive values that the IGF fourth supports and believes in are engineered right into the logic of the Internet's protocols.  A state centric authoritarian model of Internet Governance represents in our view an existential threat to the current model.  I'm sure we are going to have an exciting discussion now.  I look forward to that.  Thank you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Thank you, Stephen.  You are right on time and now I will turn it over to Feng Guo, who I know from his position in ICANN as part of the GAC.  Let's hear what you have to say.
    >> FENG GUO:  Thank you, Professor.  Hello, everybody.  My name is Guo Feng from the china CAD my of ICT.  I am also a member of the China IGF community.  I would like to thank Professor Milton Mueller and the Professor Peixi Xu for the invitation to participate in this workshop.
    Taking this opportunity I would like to say something about the latest development of China in terms of digital economy and Internet Governance.  From my view, from my observation that most of government officials, industry leaders and scholars in China view that the global digitalisation has made a profound influence on the economic globalisation and establishment of a smart society.  The scale of 47 major countries digital economy hit 31.8 trillion last year, accounting for almost 41.5 percent of the global GDP.
    And the digital economy not only improves the industrial efficiency and the social wellbeing, but also enhances the releases of economic society.  Thanks to the great invention of the Internet, the society has not been fully stopped in the face of the global coronavirus-19 pandemic and the economy has still been running.
    The Internet has played a key role in the operation of society.  The digital economy has become a stabilizer against the downward pressure of the global economy and important engine for the current global economy recovery.
    And I would like to take this opportunity to give you some figures about the overview of the digital economy development in China.  The digital economy is developing and contributes more to the whole Chinese economy.  In 2019, which is last year, China's digital economy scale reached up to 35.8 trillion RMB, accounting for almost 37 of the GDP.
    And China's digital economy increased by 15 in last year.  The growth is about 8 percent points higher than the GDP growth in the same period.
    In addition, I would like to bring your attention to the global initiative on China's on data security put forward by the Chinese government.  As you may know, you will see that the Chinese government launched an initiative on cybersecurity in 2020.  This mainly includes several points.  The first one is approach data security with an objective and rational attitude and to maintain an open and secure and stable global supply chain.
    Number two is oppose using information and communication technology activities to impair other states critical infrastructure or steal important data.
    Third, take actions to prevent and put an end to activities that infringe upon personal information or pose using ICT to conduct mass surveillance against other states or engage in also rise the correction of personal information of other states.
    Number four, ask companies to respect the laws of countries, desist from coercing domestic companies into storing data, generated and obtained overseas in one's own territory.
    Number five, risk factor is a sovereignty and restrict the data of other states.  Avoid asking companies or individuals to provide data located in other states without the latter's permission.
    Six, meet law enforcement needs for overseas data through judicial assistance or other appropriate channels.
    Number seven, ICT products and service providers should not install back doors in their products an services to illegally obtain user data.
    Number eight.  ICT companies should not seek illegitimate its by taking advantage of users' dependence on their products.
    According to Chinese government, these initiatives will serve as the basis for international consultation on data security and may mark the start of a global process in this area.
    The Chinese government looks forward to the participation of nationality governments, international organisations and all other stakeholders and co-owned states to support the commitments and layout in the initiative through the bilateral or regional agreements.
    So thanks for your attention.  This is basically what I would like you to know at this stage.  So I stop here to move to the next speaker.  Thank you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Great.  Thank you very much, Feng.  And that is I think interesting and hopefully we can come back to some of the issues on your initiative on data security when we get time.
    Right now I want to turn to a different perspective, you might say somebody in between China and the U.S. in the sense of western values and Chinese values.  So Charles, tell us what this conflict looks like from the perspective of Hong Kong.  We know that some of your traditional freedoms have been compromised recently.  We would like to hear about your perspective on this.  Thank you.
    >> CHARLES MOK:  Thank you, Milton.  I like you saying that we are somewhat squeezed in the middle.
    Well, my current capacity for however long it will last is legislator in Hong Kong.  But my previous life, I had been an Internet service provider more than 20 years ago.  So I was in industry.  I also started the ISOC in Hong Kong more than ten years ago.  I have been in different capacity, industry, government, and civil society.  I hope I can give you somewhat of a rounded view of what has been happening photograph using Hong Kong maybe as a case to look at what is going to happen for an Internet conflict between the U.S. and China.
    Well, for Hong Kong, weeviled a free Internet.  No censorship, no filtering of website or IP addresses no Internet services being banned for any reasons, Facebook or Gmail or whatever.  It is all here.
    However, as some of you might have heard, we had recently an implementation of a national security law in Hong Kong.  I am not going to be here to discuss or to argue for or against the law.  The law is the law in Hong Kong.
    But basically the law would grant vast power for the authorities to seize servers and records of any online service providers or virtually any corporate or individual entities without any scrutiny or gate keeping by the judicially, with global jurisdiction.
    So to be fair to the Hong Kong authorities I have to say that to this stage to my knowledge the authorities have not used these powers against any of the global platforms or even local companies.  Now, that might be because of the fact that they would be able to gather evidence through other means without going to the servers of each companies.  But anyway, that is the fact.
    So part of that might also be because of the sensitivity towards if they go after the some of these servers of the big American companies, will it cause yet another political stand-off between the two countries?  Maybe that is something that they are sensitive about too.  It hasn't happened yet, to be fair to the government in Hong Kong.
    For Internet users here, however, there is already an overriding climate of chilling effect and self censorship.  A lot of people are deleting their Facebook posts or their whole profile in the last several months.
    While we haven't seen the implementation of a China style firewall in Hong Kong yet, maybe because it is because of the economic past of doing that.  For Hong Kong is a financial international centre, just too large.  Maybe there are other means to search the kind of assert the kind of control that the authorities would like without having to go that far.  There are talks that, for example, will the government here implement somewhat like Singapore stime fake news laws that will allow the government to take down certain messages that they don't like.
    On the other hand, I think it is inevitable that Hong Kong's digital economy is moving closer to the Chinese digital economy.  They are talking about extending the experiments for the digital currency to Hong Kong.  There are mack, U. the one that has been can seltd for financial.  In one sense that might be one of the areas of the common interest and similarities that Professor Xu talked about in the beginning that I like, if we can find some of those.  Maybe making money is one of them.
    So maybe, you know, Hong Kong's digital economy in some ways moving closer to the Chinese digital economy may not be a bad thing by itself.  But the problem is if you look at it from the angle of if we in Hong Kong have to make a choice and go one way or the other, that might be a problem.  In the past we used to enjoy the best of both worlds.  Now are we going to say likewise for the global Internet we have to choose one or the other?
    So I think the question is are we going to end up with two Internets, two infrastructures, two standards or more than two standards or infrastructures and so on?  My answer or my guess is yes and no.  First, some of these conflicts as far as the Internet is concerned between the west and China, isn't anything new.  For anybody who has been to IGF or ICANN meetings or so on they have always been there.  On the other hand they might be enhanced firewall that will happen or all over the wall because China is also going to be influencing many countries in the rest of the world as well, in addition to those traditional American and western influenced parts of the world.
    There might be -- this kind of an enhanced firewall that I'm talking about may be extended to ideas such as using hardware platforms and software platforms to identify or carry out surveillance and so on that will be enabling these platforms to capture data and provide back doors and so on.  Of course, to be fair, there are also a lot of western companies and western governments who try to tell their companies to put in firewalls as well which I personally would oppose.
    These are the kinds of trends that you see.  Also I'm very glad that Mr. Guo mentioned about the digital cyber sovereignty laws and so on that has been recently put on the table or legislated in China.  I think the key that we should look into these laws in addition to the features and protections that Mr. Guo mentioned is also about local jurisdiction.  I think that is a new concept for many people outside of China.  And then again, I have to say that China can only say that they learned from the U.S. law, they learned it from the European laws such as EU's GDPR and so on.  Global jurisdiction is going to be another issue that Internet players in the world will have to face.
    Finally, I do want to address the point about the U.S. clean network initiative.  Is it going to become a threat to the global Internet values and standards.  Now, personally I don't think it will make a lot of immediate difference right away because in principle, in reality it is simply the U.S. government or U.S. using China's past great firewall tactics back on China.  In principle, we disagree with the great firewall of China, we should probably also disagree with the clean networks as well.
    If you look at it as simply a form of trade retaliation, as China has been banning many of these services from the U.S. like Facebook and Google and so on, you could consider this as a reciprocal trade measure.
    In closing instead of one world, many Internet and all separate on their own we may end up with pretty much one Internet but a lot of bull canisation and each trying to influence and control the other.  So that might be the new normal of the Internet that we have to face.  Thank you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  I want to follow up a little bit and get more engagement between Stephen and Feng before we move to the next topic.
    So let me just recall that Stephen was really attacking this notion of cyber sovereignty and, of course, if you know me I have a lot to say about cyber sovereignty.  I'm not a big fan of it.  In fact, I think it's impossible.
    But isn't the U.S. moving in that direction, Stephen, with the Trump Administration's bans on apps, its chip export controls and so on?  And if the new IP -- by the way, I think you have misconstrued the new IP.  I don't think it's a new IP and I don't see values engineered into the Internet protocol, that is a fallacy.  But if in fact there is a new IP coming from China at some point, wouldn't it be better to just have a technical competition over the merits of the standard rather than damning it because it is from China?
    And before Stephen, to bel Guo I want to get some direct engagement.  So the global initiative on data security does indealed emphasize the principles of cyber sovereignty again and again.  I have read them and there are some good things in them but they are very much focused on drawing national boundaries around data.  How does that work in the global Internet?  Don't you see why the U.S. would be a little bit worried about Chinese assertions of sovereignty in cyberspace?
    Okay.  Let's start with Stephen and then go to Guo Feng.
    >> STEPHEN ANDERSON:  Thanks.  You gave me a virtual smorgasbord of issues to comment on there.
    I'm going to start just by highlighting one of your own points, which is that my comments were really focused on the threat proposed, or posed by the digital sovereignty and the digital authoritarianism that exists within China and that China has been trying to export through a variety of ways that I explained during my opening remarks.
    Then, of course, my Panelist from China in his remarks specifically outlined a proposal that is exactly that which I criticized, focusing on sort of giving states all of the power.
    Despite the rhetoric about not wanting to, about protecting Intellectual Property rights and so on and so forth given the history that we have with large Chinese companies operating in the United States who have either stolen IP or the forced technology transfers that we've seen for American companies operating within China, I find it euphemism is particularly ironic that those exist in the proposal.
    Regarding the clean network, it is a very different concept from the GDSI or any of the ysh proposals that the Chinese government has put forward.  It is based on the simple concept that when you have as you pointed out or one of the other Panelists pointed out, we have two large economies in the world and one of them has shown through behavior over the last several years that it cannot be trusted.  Xi Jinping recently said we must build a backbone of private business people that is dependable and quote usable in key moments.  Adding to that the various national scwiewrt laws that we've 16, it is quite simple from our perspective that a lot of these Chinese companies that we found fault with are untrusted operators.  What we con included based on our analysis is that they should not form the backbone of basic infrastructure, especially 5G, given the whole range of attack surfaces and present in that new technology.
    The clean network is really just an initiative that the United States is putting forward to ask countries that have the same concerns that we do about the security of their networks, problems with having companies beheld into a regime that as was mentioned recently, where there is no judicial review.  That is not something that we would want in our networks.  It is not a trade action.  It is not a retaliation or attempt to gain leverage.  It is quite simply the belief that the economic consequences and the national security consequences of including untrusted vendors in our networks or the networks of our friends and allies, that it is a cost that the countries need to keep in mind.
    I'll go ahead and stop there so we have time for conversation.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  All right.  So Peixi Xu, you want to respond to that first an we'll go to Feng Guo if he wants to respond.
    >> PEIXI XU:  Thank you.  A moment from my past, I have to say a few words about what Stephen has said about his understanding about the Chinese Internet Governance model.  So it is about this very old debate about multi-stakeholder model and China has repeatedly expressed its support about multi-stakeholder model from the low officials to the Presidents, the multi-stakeholder has been reeled the same way as multilateralism in official documents.  Though these voices are not very well heard.
    By the way in ferms much ysh we had a debate, in the digital sovereignty session.  We argued last year that it is actually the United States that the United States is the big cyber sovereignty instead of China.  The United States is the biggest supporter of multi-stakeholder.  That doesn't mean the United States is not the supporter of cyber sovereignty.  It is the biggest supporter of cyber sovereignty.  The result will be decided by the cyber sovereignty and the multi-stakeholders in the United States, is actually a domestic issue.  China is somehow a supporter for both.  But I would say that the military extension into the cyberspace is the kind of symbol of cyber sovereignty.  So that is a kind of feedback to what Stephen has said about cyber sovereignty.  And multi-stakeholder.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Okay.  Feng Guo, did you want to come in and respond a bit to Stephen?
    >> FENG GUO:  Okay, thank you.  I would like to comment very briefly.  But before my intervention I would like to say that in in workshop, in this discussion I am not representing the Chinese government.  Because indeed I am a representative of the MIT in the Governmental Advisory Committee in the ICANN.  But in other location I am not representing the government.  So I would like to comment totally in my personal capacity.
    Just perhaps in responding to the intervention by Stephen, I would like to talk about two points.  The first one is about whether there is a cyber sovereignty.  I think in the cyberspace there does exist the concept or the cyber sovereignty because in the real world we have the sovereignty.  Because each state, each country claims it has its own sovereignty.  In cyberspace in the era of the Internet, because the country or the state doesn't vanish, it still exists in cyberspace.
    So I think it is a proper, perhaps a proper claim by the by son country that it has a level of cyber sovereignty.
    And another point is that no matter a country or a government stake or not, the term of cyber sovereignty it does exist because perhaps from my personal view there is a clear evidence that the clean network initiative is a clear evidence of the cyber sovereignty.
    Also the GDPR from the European, Europe initiative on the GDPR, the law, European law is another evidence of the cyber sovereignty.  So this is my observation.  Thank you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Okay.  So Charles, you want to jump in quick?
    >> CHARLES MOK:  Yes.  I just want to add a word or two saying that I wish all these barriers would go away, as a user.  I mean, I probably am an idealist and old school person as far as the Internet goes.  I was the first to use the Internet in 1982.  We believed at the time that there was a network of networks not run by any government.
    Unfortunately the cyberspace of today is not the same.  I do still wish as a user all this censorship and surveillance would go away by everybody.  It hurts me as a user to see the powers of both sides pointing fingers at each other and saying you are better than I am.  That is not finding common similarities, right?
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Right.  I think that's absolutely true.  I really want to get the last word here.  When Stephen said that he doesn't trust China and can't allow their quilt into the network -- equipment into the network and China says they don't allow Facebook and Google into their market they are pretty much saying the same thing and they are both in my opinion upholding some notion of territorialisation or cyber sovereignty.
    Like Charles we are not so enthusiastic about these barriers.  We have to move on.  We have some interesting commentators who are not from the U.S. or China.  We have Iginio Gagliardone from South Africa, we have Jyoti Panday from India, and Joanna Kulesza from Eastern Europe.  They are going to grapple with a question for four minute on what the U.S. China conflict has on the rest of the world.  I was astounded by the degree of interest in the U.S. election that I saw happening and now I guess the issue is this conflict between the U.S. and China does affect the rest of the world as much if not more than the election outcome.
    We'll start with Iginio and then to Joanna and then to Jyoti.
    >> IGINIO GAGLIARDONE:  Thank you very much, Milton.  Thank you, everyone, for a fascinating, a bit of a heated conversation and that's what makes it interesting.
    Since we have limited time, I will wrap my remarks around three points.  This is not half, this comes from like ten years of different countries in Africa that emerge in books publish, it is a book that is a result of that kind of engagement.  So being on the ground.  Right and having this kind of rhetorical battles between standards and ideals, talking with interpreters, engineers, and so forth.
    My first remark, it is often a fear that China is going to promote its own model of the Internet as was mentioned.  In my research I have seen that that is very much not the case.  And China has developed their different relationships and approaches with different countries from Ethiopia where they received the largest loan in telecommunications in Africa, more than $3 billion from, to democratic Kenya where China played a very small role in a liberalized market.
    To point to one of the remarks made by our colleague from the State Department, when authoritarian states decided to promote legislations or policies or interventions that have constrained the Internet, it is often the securitisation agenda that stems from the United States after 9/11 that was used to justify those kind of initiatives.  And the fact that the Chinese model is not put on users, government and so forth doesn't mean that China's spread is not relevant.  We referred to the market, China tended to help governments in developing their own digital Information Society.  So empowering one actors over, and this has consequences for sure.
    My second point based on more recent research is that interestingly Chinese company, mostly Huawei WAI and CD developed a different approach when they marketed their own projects, projects like safe CD and smart CD, combination of IoT and different moldings of surveillance to help like traffic but also to improve control over crime and so forth.
    And it is interesting to see how these companies have actually marketed their stemming from China as a reason from a country that is doing well with surveillance and maintaining public order to convince African cot to prepare their economies compared to others.
    This introduces an interesting contradiction when we say that Hauwei are obt in the Chinese face.  The Chinese face has pre-Africaned from imposing or suggesting its own models actually companies for commercial gains eventually said we are from China.  We are good at it.  Why wouldn't we look at ours compared to our Japanese competitors or American competitors?  This is an interesting point to disentangle.
    The final point that I want to make is that like with Charles, I was, when my modem was cracking in my house I was so empowered to feel part of the global Internet where I could hide and be free and so forth.  This was taken politically to frame these freedom of technology and we are rnlt fortunate unfortunately saw how they did a -- they did it for a while and power was brought back in the case of those who had it before, Egypt is one case.
    Kind of like expectation that where technology of freedom has failed, technology of unfreedom will succeed.  Like because of their more like secretive evil natures and so forth.  In research that stems from Pakistan, so not my area but also from Uganda and Kenya, we have seen that ZTE smart says or Huawei's smart cities have failed miserably.  The idea that Chinese coming incoming in and going to produce surveillance in the totalitarian regimes, we don't take into consideration the different technopolitical regimes that exist in these countries.  Chinese and clean and consistent, the last technology to work in certain ways for social norms, but the technology in Mombasa, it is going to mess up as the technology of freedom has done in the past.
    What I am suggesting we have to be more nuanced and like from this part about freedom, if we look at things on the ground, the picture that emerges is very different and more nuanced allows more room for maneuvering and conversation from different actors.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Very good.  Thank you, Iginio.  Very good points.  Let's move quickly to Joanna from Europe.
    >> JOANNA KULESZA:  Thank you, Milton, thank you for having here.  Fascinating discussion.  Four minute, I'm going to be very brief and start with the conclusion just to try to join in the discussion.
    Thank you very much for those controversial statements.  They kind of make my job much easier.  If I was to say where and how Europe finds itself in that global discussion, I would use an old Polish proverb, we would be, we would be saying this face-to-face.  The proreesh translates to two actors fighting and a third one taking the cake.  This is the position that Europe is currently trying to play.  When you look at this essential Cold War between two very different approaches, what Europe is trying to do is, it is trying to offer a third way.
    Now, we heard this said very clearly from Stephen that either U.S. or the highway.  The U.S. way or the highway.  Anything else is nondemocratic.
    Let me go back to the speech by President Macron in 2018 where he clearly emphasized that there is indeed a third way.  One that is based on human rights, on co-regulation and open markets.  That is more concerned with individual rights including privacy, with consumer protection, more so than would be the case in the U.S.  But at the same time prioritizes the multi-stakeholder model of governance.
    So I would view the impact that this discourse has in Europe in that context.
    If I was to give you a very brief recap on what happened in the last three years since that speech, since the Paris call that incorporated these principles, I would say that what is happening currently in Europe is a very intense process of testing what this means in practice.  I will add links to the chat.  The key term if you want to research it would be strategic economy.  It is not cyber sovereignty.  I'm fascinated with the notion.  I love having discussions around sovereignty online, but I agree with Milton, it is tremendously challenging.
    What we are looking into in Europe right now would be strategic autonomy.  What we must do is we want to take the principles you have seen in the NIS directive.  We want to see how the GDPR and the NIS directive translate on to individual national decisions that still, for example, would buy IT equipment.  I strongly support Iginio in supporting that these projects come frl highly nationality politics.
    Europe is a wonderful testing ground because we are so diverse.  The coherence of the decision making is the highest of anywhere in the world.
    I would argue that the take-away from this battle, from this potential Cold War for Europe would be a unique opportunity to push the discussion forward in a third way, one that is based on a human rights friendly approach, protecting individuals.  We have an intense history that has led us to GDPR.  I would argue that the GDPR was not so much be an example in the boundary of law making but rather a spillover effect.  Look at what is happening in the U.S. in California where the GDPR has had a very strong and yet voluntary effect.
    I know it's just four minute and I could go on to four details.  I will add a few links to the chat to give you more reference.  But I would view this specific discussion as an opportunity for Europe to move on at a very steady pace that we have done in the last two years in going forward in finding the balance between those two contrasting approaches.
    I will stop here.  I'm looking forward to questions and further discussion.  Thank you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Thank you very much, Joanna.  That is a very stimulating perspective.  I wish we -- I hope we do have time to follow up.
    Let's turn to Jyoti Panday day, a researcher at the internet governance project.  She has a unique perspective on this because of the relationship with India and other large national markets and something that has some tensions with both the U.S. and China, but seems to again exist in some kind of state of its own.
    I'll turn it over to you, Jyoti.
    >> JYOTI PANDAY:  Thanks, Milton.  I think the state that best describes India's stance at the moment is swinging because it certainly hasn't found its legs, whether to support the U.S. or to support the Chinese model.
    In terms of what is the back of impact of U.S. China conflict on India's internet governance, two effects that this conflict has added to.  The first is that that India because of this U.S. China conflict is moving away from the multi-stakeholder model.  We could see that in 2016, 2017.  It came forward in support of adopting a more open multi-stakeholder approach to participating in Internet Governance processes.  But as it has seen the U.S. China trade war pick up, it started focusing more on the Security ication of technology governance issues and using national security as a justification to reign in foreign firms.
    What is interesting in the Indian context is that while we are seen as two of Chinese hegemony, Facebook and Google are viewed as American hegemony, India, although it has not adopted that particular term but with keeping with what Joanna pointed out about Europe, a lot of India's response to this conflict is about retaining its strategic autonomy.
    The entire debate on Internet Governance and technology governance is also really shamed by the fact that India and China share a border.  The national security issues are transfer trumped up within the domestic politics a lot.  We have seen that play out with the recent bans on Chinese apps in India.
    But again there is another aspect to it where Chinese investment in Indian tech startups is actually quite significant and the Indian government has not tackled that aspect yet.  We see the Indian government moving towards the recognition that we probably want to be very careful about who we, which country is being allowed to invest in our growing ecosystem.  India is also adopting tactics from both the U.S. and China.  They haven't entirely given up the idea of an open Internet and globally connected world.  But they are also really em boldened by the Chinese approach of creating national champions.  You can see this in efforts such as data localisation or making changes to the foreign direct investment policy where they specifically target countries that they share a border with, which is probably in China.
    Another issue that I think is worth pointing out, it is usually -- in most debates tech nationalism is called out as grand standing.  From the Indian perspective there is growing consensus that it should also be viewed as an acknowledgment that the current status quo doesn't work for nondominant countries.
    The U.S. is a leader and the U.S. companies, for the U.S. companies India is a huge market.  But India views, wants to move beyond being just a huge market for either China or the U.S. and wants to participate and shape how -- and play a greater role in Internet Governance.  A lot of this move reflects the shifting tendency towards this.
    Again, like Joanna, I can add a lot more.  On 5G specifically there has been, following the recent border clashes, I believe the Indian government was not really clear about the participation of Chinese firms.  It was in a confused state for a very long time, but following recent border clashes there is some sort of consensus developing there where we have had state telecom operators closing off contracts with Chinese companies.  It is likely that India will keep china way from its 5G ecosystem.
    Then this is not limited to just -- you know, we have seen India be wary of Chinese influence and it walked away from the belt and rolled initiative, away from the international partnership, the trade policy with China is making India choose sides at the moment, but India's stance is more geared towards retaining space for itself to take decisions for shipping its own markets rather than choosing the U.S. model of Internet Governance versus the Chinese model of Internet Governance.
    Happy to expand on any of these issues.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Okay, good.
    So I am going to quickly scan the questions here.  I wonder if anybody wants to follow up on what was said by the others or answer any particular question before we move on.
    (Pause.)
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  In that case we will move on to the next question.  This is where we will allow comments from anybody willing.  This question is, does the conflict between the U.S. and China actually threat to create separate knock economic infrastructures.  We touched on this a little bit at the beginning when we talked about a new IP.  I want to say we have been following new IP very closely and would reiterate it is not a new protocol.  It is not a protocol yet.  As it was described by one study, it is a list of desired features and what kind of requirements might be needed to attain them.  It is not a standard.
    The concept of new IP or the label new IP has been backed away from by the people in Huawei who promoted it.  I think the more interesting question here is the chip war, the export controls on integrated circuits which, for example, does not allow Huawei's smartphones to use the Android operating system because they cannot -- Google and others, the entity list prevents them from doing any kind of an agreement with the Chinese providers.  So Huawei is forced to develop its own operating system.  China is forced to develop its own integrated circuit technology.  So we see what could be the beginnings of a serious split in the very technical underpinnings which could eventually lead to a new IP or alternative IP that could be incompatible with the one that we have now.
    So who wants to address this issue of technical fragmentation or technical evolution?
    Stephen?
    >> STEPHEN ANDERSON:  I'll jump, although the smart move on my part would have been just to wait a little bit, but I am going to go ahead and address your comments about new IP.  First I'm going to wholesale endorse your characterization of new IP.  You showed a sophistication in your description of it which I would also call a criticism of it as well.
    The most important concept about new IP is that it is an example of Forum shopping.  Huawei took it to the place where it should.  The engineering task force, it was not considered a viable option there.  So they tried to bring it to another Forum where they thought they might have a better showing.
    Again, I don't think that what the United States, I wouldn't characterize this as a conflict between the United States and China.  This is, as I said before, it is about the United States trying to defend a system that has worked so well at all layers of the stack, from the infrastructure layer up to the application layer with the protocol layer in between.  We want it to remain as interoperable, reliable, secure and we have concerns about the use of Chinese vendors, untrusted vendors within the stack.  And the decision that we've made is that we want to exclude that because we don't believe that it can be trusted.
    The entities list is an extension of that tool.  We don't believe that untrusted vendors should be able to benefit from our technology in order to continue to purvey their product.  And as Iginio pointed out, in Africa they used that technology in order to create smart cities which are unsafe cities in terms of Chinese propaganda and efforts to export their technology and de fact dreet standards by creating facts under ground.
    I'm going to stop there and just sum it up by saying the United States is about defending the current system, keeping it open, keeping it interoperable but also perhaps more than we would have a couple years ago weighing the reliable and secure component.  Thank you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Go ahead, Iginio.
    >> IGINIO GAGLIARDONE:  Just two points.  One in response to Stephen, that is not what I was trying to say.  I'm saying there is a lot of of fear in think tank reports about the Chinese are coming with their authoritarian technologies.  These authoritarian technologies are going to enslave people.  These technologies, it just not working very well.  They are not doing what they are supposed to be doing.  They are sold for a lot of money and places in Nairobi or Mombasa as a they don't work and crime doesn't go down.  It goes up.
    As much as like other technologies before haven't worked.  I am not saying it is because of the authoritarianism.  It is the opposite.  There is fear they will work.  So far they get stuck in the mud.
    The second point is, this policy needs to be short sighted because the chip war affects Huawei, but in Africa, the largest producer of handsets is transient, is technothat passed in 2017.  Now almost like 50 percent of the handsets used by African users are produced in China and by technoor transient, transient is bigger.  Huawei represents like five, six, 7 percent of the market, maybe in some the cans it is more.
    At the end of the day, the battle that attacks the bigger most visible players but if the Chinese government wanted to reach out and to   transient to develop the same policies, it would be able to do so because they are not part of the ban.
    Again when we get into closing a tap, there are so many holes and things happen anyway.  You leave everything open it is much easier to just all look into it and try to fix it together.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  So I think some discussion in the chat and elsewhere is about the nature of these barriers.  Are they trade barriers?  Are they something else?
    And I think this relates to something that Stephen said.  So the chip war I think is very hard to make a case that that is a trade move.  I think it is fundamentally an attempt to cripple Chinese manufacturers.  I mean, this is basically saying we have an essential technology that sort of the U.S. dominates it in terms of the Intellectual Property and the manufacturing capabilities.  And we are going to use that leverage to essentially disable Chinese manufacturers.
    I view that as a move that does lead to fragmentation, a kind of sovereignist fragmentation which is based either on some kind of national security or military competition, but it has nothing to do with trade.
    We are hurting ourselves, the U.S. leads the world in chip technology.  We are doing nothing but hurting our market share and our sales and our exports by this chip war.  So the only goal must be to somehow cripple the Chinese manufacturers.  But of course, the long-term result of that is simply forcing them to develop their own capables, which instead of buying them from us.  I'm not sure I get it.  Charles?
    >> CHARLES MOK:  Yes.  I want to follow on on that point that you just raised, Milton.  To be honest I'm not a chip person.  I don't really know that industry as well as I would probably for telecom and software and so on.
    But we do see a lot of commentary here in Asia, in Hong Kong and China that this chip war is actually helping China.  It helps them to expedite their internal development of these standards or technologies that they are way behind the U.S.  But now in areas such as the basic technology to the supply chain they are convinced that they can no longer rely on foreign, especially probably U.S. suppliers.
    So whether or not they can accomplish it in a short period of time or even in the longer period of time, that I don't know.  I don't think anybody knows.  But there is, of course, one school of thought that would say that this is actually helping them.
    Then again I have to say what is the alternative?  How do you deal with these suppliers that the U.S. would consider to be unsafe and so on and you continue to sell them chips.  What are the alternatives from the American point of view?  I don't know.  But there is a possibility of a actually helping our competitor in that sense ultimately.  But yeah.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  I would say the alternative is that you sell them the chips.  You continue the interdependence of the Chinese and American economies and I mean, --
    >> CHARLES MOK:  But you can sell them the chip, but they will continue to make the equipment and this equipment has other features such as surveillance and so on.  How do you balance that?
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Well, surveillance is a social phenomenon and legal and political phenomenon.  You are not going to stop surveillance by denying any vendor chips, right?  And the people who buy and make European equipment will be creating surveillance capabilities as well.  I don't think I need to remind anyone that the U.S. is kind of the world champion when it comes to Internet surveillance.  Europeans have some problems with that, which is leading to some barriers to data flow between the U.S. and Europe as well as problems between the U.S. and China.
    So the idea that if somebody somewhere is going to make a piece of equipment that enables surveillance is true, but it is not something that is going to stop with an economic sanction on American chips.  I don't think that is how it works.
    So I don't see a lot of discussion here about the separate technoeconomic infrastructure.  I'm going to go on and now we are going to move to what I hope will be the constructive part of our conversation.  I'm going to actually cycle through all of the Panelists now.
    How do we get the trust needed for China, the U.S., and Europe to open their digital economies to each other?  Do we have specific practical proposals?  Maybe some first steps?  Maybe some more comprehensive visions of how this could be accomplished?  So let's start and kind of reverse order here.  Let's start with Jyoti and then go to Iginio, Joanna, Peixi, Charles, Feng and Stephen.
    >> JYOTI PANDAY:  Thanks, Milton.  I think we definitely need global rules for data governance.  I think in the absence of some sort of agreed-upon standard between countries and how they are going to treat data, you know, these conflicts will continue to play out.  Tellingly, there doesn't seem to be any sort of movement to create global rules for cross-border data flows.  I think in terms of practical first steps that is something that countries should definitely focus on.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Global rules for data.  Where do they come from?  Who enforces them?  Not to ask too easy a question.
    >> JYOTI PANDAY:  The Indian bureaucracy would probably argue forsying it under the UN or creating some sort of convention for data.  But again we don't know if this is the most multilateral order for Internet Governance is most appropriate way forward.  But certainly the status quo where every country is drafting its own rules and closing off markets because it is not trusting other countries to handle its citizens' data properly can't continue either.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Okay.  I saw somebody in the chat suggested a new data ICANN.  We'll have to take that up later.
    Iginio, let's go to you.  Practical proposals, solve our problems for us.  We are counting on you.
    >> IGINIO GAGLIARDONE:  It is over optimistic and very impractical.
    One suggestion would be to root the debate more radically on user.  I think there is a lot of finger pointing.  And we are like excited about it, but at the end of the day if we root, if we ask whether or not, no matter who is doing it, the users is more surveilled, its liberties are more constrained and we protect the users, things will happen from the users upwards rather than impinging, imposing restriction or standards or one or the other.
    For example, I am going tock back to the case of Ethiopia.  There was a lot of anxiety because of China coming to Ethiopia and so forth.  Because of China Ethiopia is doing this and that.  But it is such a complex landscape.  Because of this relation, we know now it was the Americans that trained Ethiopia Indian spies in the digital surveillance.  It was Europeans that sold technologies for surveillance to the Ethiopia Indian government and the Chinese built the infrastructure.
    You're trained by the Americans on equipment made by the Europeans to send the information to Chinese.
    The Europes are not fixing to their own standards and the Chinese are doing their thing, so let's consider the user as the starting point and bring the development from that point onward.  And I think not everything is -- hopefully something will fall in line.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  It resonates with an idea I was going to propose.  If we talk about sovereignty in cyberspace, it would be popular sovereignty in cyber state which is Eurocentric.  Joanna?
    >> JOANNA KULESZA:  Power to the people, that's the only way to do it.  If I was to look for a standard for data, again trying to -- I'm wearing my European halt here.  I would say we have the GDPR which seems to reflect the consensus we have around privacy and personal data.  The spill over effect is evident.  But then again as an academic I am aware that it is not the perfect solution.  There are serious concerns.  We have them echo in this discussion here as well.
    If I can give examples coming from Europe, we do have around an IS Director framework.  We are providing guidelines on 5G.  GDPR is another standard we are using.  It is the way that data is being processed and saved.  I believe that there are international laws standards we could fall back on.  That would be the thematic a propose.
    But if I was to give a very pragmatic reply and I am a pragmatic person myself I would say that we would indeed kneeled more transparency and I applaud plod the discussion that is going on here in the chat.  What about the IGF picking up that job and trying to build global consensus around how we perceive data, whether it is personal or nonpersonal and where do we draw the line and what can be those standards for trust?
    The European experience is with co-regulation.  Not so much the top down but rather working together with different stakeholders, which goes in mind with the idea of multi-stakeholder governance.
    I would say it is more transparency that will hopefully lead us to practical, tangible solutions.  Thank you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Let's go on to Charles.
    You're muted, Charles.
    >> CHARLES MOK:  Yes.  So setting global rules is a good idea, but it might be difficult especially in an environment when governments are actually pulling themselves farther and farther apart.  It is difficult enough for them to get them to sit at the same table and especially with so much talk about cyber sovereignty.  That means that it is going to be localized.  In the short-term we might be moving a different direction.
    I would want to offer -- actually, I like the idea of user, people's sovereignty very much.  I would add that perspective about using technology to solve these problems, some of these problems as well, these issues as well.
    Okay, it is a great idea for people, users to hold on to their own data and their own identity and their sovereignty and so on.  How do you do it?  In fact, there might be emerging standards in different areas using blockchain, cryptography and so on to do some of those things, like sovereign identity and so on that people are starting to talk about.
    I would probably look also, in addition to what has been mentioned, also possibly using technology to emerging technology to solve some of these problems, to really put the control back in the hands of the users themselves, from data to the identity to and so on.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Very good.  Peixi Xu, a lot of what we have heard is very global, user powers and global rules.  Do you have anything specific to say about what China can do to help solve this problem?
    >> PEIXI XU:  Thank you, Milton.  In terms of the global roles, I think we indeed have a very practical and specific rules already existing.  For example, Joanna mentioned the Paris accord which has how many points?  Nine points?  And also the global commission of stability of cyberspace has this eight points ready.  About cyber norms.  And also China has also proposed something very specific that my colleague has mentioned.  It is the global initiative on data security.  It is very expect, by the way.  It is not abstract.
    And in addition to that, the U.S. has a new President.  I think there might be a very good basis for, to find some coexisting or overlapping points in terms of cyber norms.
    However, I also, I think it is more important to think about the Internet Governance, global Internet Governance from a world view perspective.  It is important to avoid or reject this kind of really good guy versus bad guy narrative.  The good versus the evil narrative.  I think that is is not very constructive.  Whatever the situation or the policy is, the Chinese students are visiting websites in the United States and in Europe.  And the American students don't visit the website in China or in Africa or in Vietnam.  That is a kind of structural problem.  It is not a kind of very much a policy.  Situation.
    I would also emphasize, to summarize what you have said in the background document a little bit, I think it is important to have a kind of initiative to deemphasize technical issues so the governments reduce the ideological kind of supply in this method.  So this is basically what I think, Milton.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Can you give me a specific example of how we would take one of those steps?  Reducing the ideological, as a very practical step?  What would Stephen do or what would GL Guo do tomorrow?  Peeks peck for example, the paradox about the chip dispute is completely unnecessary and somehow outdated way of dealing with these challenges.  It is not good for the U.S., not good for China an not good for the world.
    So this is something that should be given up tomorrow specifically.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  That is very specific, very good.
    Guo Feng, your turn.
    >> FENG GUO:  Thank you very much.  For this specific question, my response would be just some initial thoughts.
    My response would be that first perhaps conducting dialogue between each other or among different stakeholders.  And try to understand different positions of each other and be ready to compromise.  Perhaps then take a different position and then take action.
    Perhaps this is the methodology to cooperate.  When we have different views to face a specific issue.
    So with regard to the specific scenario, among China, U.S., Europe.  So my suggestion would be to host for the three parties to discuss the digital completed issues.  Perhaps we can have, develop a track for governments and also develop a track for think tank and industry.  Perhaps IGF would serve as a good occasion.  Thank you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  I missed a little bit of what you said about the track.  Talking about tracks for doing what?  For discussing or negotiating?
    >> FENG GUO:  Yes, track for discussion, perhaps we can have discussion among or between governments.  The discussion, that is for the government people and another track for think tank and a third track for the industry.  Leaders of industry.  So this is my suggestion.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Suppose it is Stephen in the next segment totally agrees with Peixi Xu that we should call off the chip war, what would China offer in return?  What kind of concession or step would China make that would give incentive for them to do that?
    >> FENG GUO:  I would anticipate that China company would buy a lot of chips in the future.
    (Laughter.)
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Okay.  Nothing related to opening the market for information?
    >> FENG GUO:  At this moment I don't have a specific comment regarding this issue.  But my hope is that I want to see a more open market in China.  Much more free flow of information within China and from China, within China and outside China.  Within China and outside China.
    This is my personal hope.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Good, okay.  Stephen?
    >> STEPHEN ANDERSON:  I would like to begin by complimenting my Chinese colleague.  They taught us in young diplomat school never to answer hypotheticals.  So I see that I got the exact same training.
    To respond to your question, so I grew up a convinced Transatlantickist.  I believe that when the United States and Europe work together to face global challenges, that is when we work at our best.  The first issue that I actually had to deal with, however, as a transat lactickist was banana wars back in the 1990s.  For those of you who aren't familiar with that, that was actually a very heated trade dispute between the United States and Europe.  And from the expressions I see on the Panelists' faces, yes, it was absolutely bananas that the Europe and the United States would have a serious conflict over what was a minor irritant.
    What I would say as the first step, what the United States needs to do is we have irritants right now.  That is what I would call them with Europe in the digital space.  Some of those irtants are very expensive for American companies.  And we are more than a little bit upset by them.  But what we need to do is we need to work with Europe and other like minded nations, including countries like India, I think, a lot of other countries in the IndoPacific region and come together to strike the proper balance between data privacy, national security and economic growth.
    And have that balance be struck within the context of the values that I described at the beginning of my presentation today.  From that basis I think that we can work outwards with very concrete proposals.
    Completely consistent with the multi-stakeholder molted, completely consistent with the idea of governance of the Internet that leads to an open, interoperable reliable and secure Internet.  Thank you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  All right!  So I am now going to go fishing for voluntary commitments.  I think it is only fair that I start making a voluntary commitment.  I am voluntarily committing to continue to harass everybody on this panel about addressing this problem.  And I think that I will make a voluntary commitment, provided I get the approval from Peixi Xu and Guo Feng to hold educational sessions on multi-stakeholder governance directed towards a Chinese audience.  I think I need to work on my Chinese language skills to pull that off accurately, but I think we can do some translation.
    And are there any other sorts of commitments any of us would like to propose at this time to make the United Nations happy?
    (Pause.)
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  Joanna?
    >> JOANNA KULESZA:  Yes.  I would like to emphasize the opportunity to advance that NGOs disorchty focus within ICANN on behalf of the end user community.  I think that is something we can definitely pick up so we can have a discussion focused on the Internet users.  That is something that can be relatively easily done.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  You would do this discussion within the framework of ICANN meetings?
    >> JOANNA KULESZA:  At large community, I certainly would be happy to.  Reiterate this would be helpful.  With your kind participation.  Those have proven exciting and at the same time informative in trying to identify what the end user interest is.  I'm certain that there is room for that geo political department.  We have host the events before and that's something that we can look into again.  I'm not certain if that is something that they are excited about but I will take it upon myself to have that organised.  Will that help?
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  That's a voluntary commitment.  Iginio had his hand up and then he disappeared.  I don't know if he is still here.  If he is, I will turn over the microphone to him.
    (Pause.)
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  He seems to have disappeared.
    >> PEIXI XU:  Milton, this is not meant to make the United Nations happy but it is some kind of an observation.  I think this high level panel on the digital economy somehow was led by the Secretary General and there is this notion about digital interdepend ensure.  That might be very helpful for a kind of concept to summarize a little bit.  So instead of digital divisions, we are promoting, the UN is promoting digital interdependence.  It is a difference from coexistence.  It is somehow interdependency.  That might be good to build peace in cyberspace.
    Back to you.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  All right.  I think our time is up.  It is 10:40.  I really appreciate the presence of the government people here who are putting themselves on the line a bit more than the rest of us.  So particularly Stephen, since we have a new administration and presumably he has no idea what the new policy is going to be.  Although I'm sure there will be some continuity.
    And Guo Feng, thank you very much.  You made it clear you don't speak for the Chinese government but you, you know, do represent the Chinese perspective within the Ministry of IT.
    And Charles Mok, again the status of Hong Kong is very risky and shaky right now.  I appreciate you being willing to come here and speak out and not worry about getting arrested for it or anything like that.
    And I think we all have to -- we have to focus more on concrete steps that could be taken.  Obviously this is a very deep division and it is affecting the rest of the world.  I was impressed by the way it plays out in Africa as described by Iginio in which he is going like:  Let's look at what is happening on the ground.  Let's look at how the technology actually gets implemented.  In some ways it looks like some of these global south countries are actually benefiting from the competing systems here.  Hopefully we can keep it at peaceful competition and go forward with a unified Internet in which we do have lots of different states, lots of different users exerting their own autonomy, their own freedom over what they do online.
    With that, would you like any last words, peeks Xu?
    >> PEIXI XU:  No, Milton.  Thank you so much for putting us together and actually we have some old friends, and some new friends.  There are lots of very good insights.  I am watching this chat and trying to also find some insights this these questions.  Thank you for the kind of brilliant organisation of this workshop.
    >> MILTON MUELLER:  All right.  Good night or good day all.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-7-ws71-building-trust-through-responsible-response-to-global-crises^^

 
    >> BARBARA WANNER: -- in so doing create a framework of trust.  I'm your remote moderator.  I will be watching the chat room and feeding those questions to our moderators and speakers.  There have been a few changes in the speaker lineup since we first filed this workshop.
    Our moderator will be Chris Boyer who is Vice-President of global security and technology policy at AT&T.
    And our speakers today will be Doreen Bogdan-Martin whom many of you know, Director of the ITU Telecommunications Development Bureau; Kathryn Condello, Senior Director for National Security and Emergency Preparedness at Lumen; and Professor Toshiya Jitsuzumi, from Japan.
    A very important person who maybe is not on the screen before you now but will be playing an important role is our substantive rapporteur who will be preparing the report of this workshop for the IGF archives and all of posterity.  That is Susan Moore, also from Lumen.
    As many of you probably have observed and maybe even been recipient of a question, the UN has asked IGF speakers and IGF participants to state their voluntary commitment to carry forward the goals and objectives of the IGF as carried in the Tunis Agenda.  I would ask everyone to avail themselves of that opportunity and I will be posting a link for you to do that in the chat.
    I will wait for Chris.  I invite everybody to have a really stimulating discussion and I look forward to all of your comments.  Thank you.
    (Pause.)
    >> BARBARA WANNER:  Chris, you should be able to speak.  I just promoted you to speaker.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  I have to figure out, is my video coming through?
    >> BARBARA WANNER:  Not yet.  On the lower left-hand side you'll see a video camera.  Click on that and you should be able to ...
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Hold on a second.  I've used Zoom a bunch of times.  I don't know why -- this is weird.  It usually has me in there.  Select microphone.
    Audio settings.  Hmm.  Weird.
    >> BARBARA WANNER:  In terms of the ground rules, everyone, if you would like to make a comment when Chris invites participants to make a comment, just raise your hand.  I will acknowledge it and give you an opportunity to make your statement.
     just a ground rule I wanted to clarify.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Barbara, are you still there?
    >> BARBARA WANNER:  I am.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Cool.  Just making sure --
    >> BARBARA WANNER:  You're on mute now.
    Chris, why don't you just get started.  We can figure out a way to get you up and running.  Let's see.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  There it goes.
    >> BARBARA WANNER:  There you go.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Got it, cool.
    >> BARBARA WANNER:  Great.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  All right.  Well, welcome, everyone.  This morning, this is Chris Boyer from AT&T, moderating today's session.
    And Barbara, do you want to do a quick kick off?
    >> BARBARA WANNER:  Actually, I did already.  I went through the ground rules.  The speakers will have the floor when you indicate they are trying to -- their turn to speak.  For people participating as attendees, I will watch the chat and if they use the raise hand function I will give them an opportunity to pose their question or they can pose their question in the chat.  Back to you.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  We have three great panelists today.  We have Mr. -- I'm going to make sure I get the name right, correct me.  Toshiya-san from Japan.  Doreen Bogdan-Martin from the UN, ITU.  We have Kathryn Condello from Lumen joining us today.
    And really, the topic that we are going to talk about today is focused on three core areas.  One is an overview of the problems created by the COVID crisis and the role of the Internet.
    Another one is on stakeholder collaboration an mitigation strategies and the last, best practices to inform future crisis response.  Those are three core topics we are going to cover.  I will ask even of the panelists a few questions in each of those categories.  After we work our way through that we'll open it up for audience questions.  I think as Barbara mentioned, please use the chat function to send any questions in.  Then I'll make sure I direct them to the appropriate panelist.
    Jumping into the very first question on the overview of the problems created by the COVID crisis and the role of the Internet, Doreen, I wanted to start with you and ask the question of Doreen, during the COVID crisis, obviously digital connectivity has ascended to the top of every nation's list:  What is the position of the ITU to meet demand on one hand and how does it approach the challenges to connect the unconnected on the other?
    >> DOREEN BOGDAN-MARTIN:  Thank you so much, Chris and good afternoon from Geneva.  Thank you, Barbara, for the invitation.
    Of course, when we were all together last year in Berlin, it was certainly a different world.  Weapon were trying to make the case for connectivity and little did we know that the COVID-19 pandemic would come and make that case very clear for all of us.
    As we struggle to maintain our connections to the world in this new landscape of socializisation, I think digital has been called the hidden hero.  Digital connectivity kept us going, kept our societies going, it kept us working from home, studying from home, socializing from home, shopping from home, everything from home.  And it just became our new life, right?
    This, of course, resulted in network surges, demand spikes.  And I think we should kind of take a pause and actually commend the Valiant efforts of the digital community to keep us all, everyone connected.
    As is the case with the whole economy, the pandemic also had a big impact on the will financial performance of digital infrastructure companies.  Some experts are predicting an annual negative revenue impact on telecommunications operators that could be up to 10 percent with some services requiring 18 to 24 months to return to pre-COVID-19 levels.  It is important to note that economic impact because that will likely have impacts on efforts to get to the unconnected.  In our efforts to extend connectivity to everyone, as operators' ability to invest will become constrained.
    For example, if we look in Africa, for example, the top five African operators spent between five and a half to $6 billion last year in infrastructure investment.  That has been estimated to drop toll four and a half to 5 billion this year due to the impacts of the crisis.
    COVID-19 has exposed significant inequalities in terms of connectivity.  I would say while overall telecommunications networks have exhibited consistent resilience in the face of the changes in traffic, countries with the largest deployments of accessible ultra broadband exhibited less flow-down in latency and download speeds.  More generally while in Developed Countries 87 percent of individuals use the Internet in 2019, in the Least Developed Countries, only 19 percent did.
    And I think it is really important when we focus on the divide that it is even starker when we look at the underlying infrastructure.  For example, a user in an LDC has access to nine times less international Internet bandwidth available than one in a developed country.  I think it is also important to note that over 12 percent of the global unconnected population lives in rural and remote locations where traditional networks are not easily accessible.  Most of them are living in Sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia.  And the connectivity gap is also exacerbated by other factors like the gender digital gap which stands at something around 17 percent.  That gap is still there and it is not shrinking.
    These digital gaps will have a strong impact on our response and our ability to recover from this pandemic.  Leading economic experts gathered a couple months ago at the ITU and suggested that in the medium term countries with top connectivity infrastructure could mitigate up to half of its negative economic impact.  Also countries with higher digitisation of their economy tend to be associated with a smaller downturn GDP adjustment in 2021 as IMF has forecasted.
    The COVID-19 experience also brings, I would say, new urgency in our efforts to make sure that no one is left behind and that also means no one is left offline.
    If I can come to the second part of your question, how has that changed our approaches?  I think it made us realise that business as usual is not an option.  And 35 years ago since Sir Donald Maitland issued the famous missing link report and made the case for University connectivity as the foundation for economic and social prosperity, 2015 came along where we had our SDG 9C calling for affordable access to the Internet in Least Developed Countries by 2020.  And yet here we are at the end of 2020, nine years away from when the SDG should be achieved in 2030, and we have one in five people connected in LDCs.
    So it is time for urgent action.  We really need to pull together to connect the unconnected.  To do that we need to deal with some critical barriers, the key barriers to connectivity that include affordability.  We know that broadband commission set that 2 percent monthly GNI.  We know in some countries affordability can be 40 percent of monthly income.  We know that skills is another barrier.  Less than half of the world's population have the needed basic skills for computer-based activities.  Less than 30 percent of the world's population is proficient in standard ICT skills.
    We also have a challenge with access to devices.  For example, 9.5 percent of households in LDCs have access to a computer.  Whereas in the developed country 82 percent do.  This has had a big impact when we look at school closures and the number of kids who are out of school.
    Also getting the policy and regulatory framework right is an essential prerequisite.  That will help us to address these kinds of barriers that I just mentioned.  Decisive actions are needed by policymakers and regulators.  This needs to be supported by broad collaboration from all stakeholders.
    And I think I'll conclude here, but COVID-19 has demonstrated the urgency for every country to put digital inclusion at the top of their agendas.  This urgency will not go away when COVID leaves us.  On the encouraging front I would say international financial institutions and national governments are recognizing the importance of broadband in their economic recovery plans with billions of dollars allocated to digital infrastructure investments.  Those amounts may not be sufficient, but I'm optimistic, it's a start.
    I'll stop there, Chris, thank you.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Thank you very much, Doreen.  I really appreciate it.  Certainly everything I have been hearing is that broadband will continue to be a priority, I know in the U.S. and other countries, coming off of the pandemic.  
    Professor Jitsuzumi-san, I would like to turn it over to you with the perspective from Japan.  From your standpoint, how do you evaluate the effectiveness of Japan's soft approach which relies on instructions as opposed to other countries that adopted a harder approach in response to the COVID-19.
    >> TOSHIYA JITSUZUMI:  Hello, my name is Jitsuzumi-san from Japan, where it is 1 in the morning.  It is my honour to be invited to this session and have the opportunity to extend my views as a expert with.
    According to the announcement from my government, from the outset Japanese has a two-prong approach --  maintaining social activities as much as possible while fighting the disease.  The first several weeks the Japanese -- focused on stopping the spread of COVID-19.  After that it focused more strategically to promoting economic recovery right now.
    Anyway, the 28th of January 2020 is a day when the first domestic transmission of COVID-19 was confirmed in Japan and the day when the government passed cabinet orders that enforces compulsory hospitalization of the patient and inspection of the people entering our country.  Meaning that this is day one of the Japanese anti-COVID measures.
    After that on 7th of April, the government declared a State of emergency requesting people to restrain from going out.  For schools to close for two weeks and business sectors to stop holding large events and shorten their business hours.
    Important thing to mention here is that since Japanese government does not have a legal tools that allows to order compulsory doctrine on our society, all of these treatment also have to be based on voluntary contributions.  Based on this process, in order to motivate the whole society to cooperate, building trust in the government's anti-COVID measures has become a goal. The US, communication is one of the most important keys.  This is where I believe that broadband Internet creates an critical role.  For example, the Ministry of Health provided necessary information through its website and opened special pages for COVID-19.  Also many local governments did the same thing too.
    And for avoiding unintentional spreading of the virus, contact information, COCOA, was developed by the Ministry with the help of civil engineers.  This lets people know if they were in close proximity to infected people in the last 14 days and more than 16 million people voluntarily installed this application on the smartphone and they are using the power of this mobile broadband without receiving any meaningful compensation.
    The answer to that as Doreen mentioned, the Internet played and important role in maintaining minimal -- activity during this period.  Various processes that previously involved physical movements or direct physical contact are now conducted virtual over the Internet.  Important examples are teleworking.  In my case all of my classes in 2020 in the University are conducted over Zoom or Webex.
    The result of this voluntary based soft approach is I think which is a surprising enough to the press of the world, this voluntary approach scored a huge success.  According to locational behavior, the degree of behavior in Japan was stronger than other countries that did not adopt a soft approach such as Sweden and others.
    Our effect was smaller compared to that of other decentralized country where the government did not introduce voluntary lock down.  Based on the number of victims, I have to give Japan a fair amount of credit for the response against COVID so far.  It is true that not a small number of people expressed their dissatisfaction with the government approach or voluntary lock down without providing any compensation, but thanks to the mutual trust that is cultivated throughout the whole process, their voices is not able in the large scale demonstration like we saw in many other countries.  Then on May 25, the Prime Minister Abe declared the end of the emergency saying that Japan has been able to achieve the number of infections and by far less than other Developed Countries.  But I have to point out that all of these are activities in Japan are not at all free from problems.  But I will cover this point later.
    That's all I want to point out in this beginning part.  I will stop here.  Thank you.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Thank you, Professor Jitsuzumi-san.  I appreciate your remarks on the experience in Japan.
    Now I turn it over to Kathryn who can provide the industry perspective from the U.S. side.  Kathryn, can you talk a little bit about the U.S. industry perspective on key digital and Internet develops that stemmed from the COVID-19 crisis?
    >> KATHRYN CONDELLO:  Certainly, thank you.  Thank you very much for inviting me to participate in this panel.
    Lumen is a global Tier 1 ISP.  We are in your countries.  We have been working this since day one.  But I would comment when we stand back and sort of look at this, you know, from the perspective of the ICT industry, the global scale, the nationwide scale, presented its own unique and somewhat unprecedented challenges.
    So the ICT sector's response sort of focused on two key areas.  One, we had to keep provisioning additional capacities and capabilities for our customers, whether the business customers or our consumer customers, who were also sort of scaling their own systems so that they could work and learn and shop from home.
    But at the same time we also had to be managing sort of globally the very rapidly changing volumes and the usage patterns of traffic globally.
    So despite these challenges, you know, reliable and distributed connectivity was maintained certainly across the United States and across the globe.  There were some important lessons learned around proving both how we coordinate our response to incidents at this scale and potentially what we will be looking at going forward.
    The degree to which certainly the U.S. and globally was able to learn the ICT ecosystem to support our respective economies while in physical isolation certainly reflects the progress that globally we have achieved towards becoming a more digital economy.  And both of my fellow panelists have spoken to this.
    However, in speaking to the operational process, it was also coupled with the efforts that the nations took to recognize and expand the understanding of certainly essential worker functions.  The people who needed to continue to work during this isolation environment.  This is where nationally and globally we really started to demonstrate both economic and societal resilience at a macro level.
    So this event certainly highlights how the continuity of the digital economy is not only the unspoken hero as Doreen said, but also a major factor in supporting the country's national and economic security posture.  Our societal behaviors stemming from this event will not be changing.  There will be, I think, significant changes in how we continue to work from home, learn from home, do medicine from home, how we are going to embrace the economy.
    And we also are now going to be facing potentially some economic impacts globally.  So we will need to reassess again not only how we address the security implications of all these changes, but also how we are going to continue to address access to this digital economy.
    Back to you, Chris.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Thanks, Kathryn.  I agree with that.  There are issues that this pandemic shined a light on that have been out there for a while.  Doreen talked about how broadband has.  It brings those problems to the forefront.  That will be critical going forward.
    The next agenda was to talk about stakeholder collaboration and how we can work together on mitigation strategies.
    So on this particular question, Professor Jitsuzumi-san I would like to start with you.  How has the Japan niece government east declaration of a State of emergency changed the behavior of the Japanese people?
    >> TOSHIYA JITSUZUMI:  Thank you, Chris.  And as I said before, we achieved the policy target of controlling the COVID-19 outbreak.  We have to have compliance among stakeholders.  Japanese government does not have any legal tool to order lockdown to the society as a whole.  In response to the government's requests, in order to mitigate the possible pandemic, we need to reduce the physical contact by 80 percent.  People are asked to change their daily behavior without any amount of compensation.  And many people did actually change their daily pattern.
    And according to Google, while there were changes in the use of use of pharmacies, a significant decrease in the number of people in the train and subway stations were observed.
    I would like to share some slides.  Let me share the slides right here.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  I may need to give you -- I can share the slides too, Professor.  I have them on as well.  You have it.
    >> TOSHIYA JITSUZUMI:  Yes.  This is a very popular place for everybody, Shibuva.  Foreign tourists and students are gathered here and Japanese culture, and Japanese good food.
    This is actually before the COVID-19 crisis.  People are gathered day and night and especially for the festivals like New Year's festival or Halloween.  Lots of people are gathered here.
    And this data is a number of people who gathered in the Shibuva areas.  This information is provided by the a group, the name of the company Agoop.  This is based on mobile phone applications.  They utilize this data to generate the number of people who gathered in this particular area.  This is the Shibuva area.
    During the State of emergency, from April 7 to May 21st, the number of people observed in this area was decreased by 75 percent.  It is amazing.  You know, in the usual case we get a lot of area in the Shibuva area.  But during this emergency period there is nobody.
    And interestingly, after the state of emergency period, the number of people is still about half of the pre-pandemic period.  I think this represents good cooperation or collaboration from the society to the government of policies.
    And a similar situation was observed in other areas of Japan too.  People are now, do not go outside and are spending their work and daily time at home.  Broadband usage from home is increasing dramatically.  This is the traffic data provided by NT East that provided fixed line to the east part of Japan.  The blue line represents the traffic pattern before the pandemic, before the state of emergency.  And during the period of emergency in the weekday, daytime, the traffic increased by 66 percent.  And in the nighttime it increased by 14 percent and weekend traffic increased also to 18 percent and 12 percent.
    And this has a huge impact to the network companies, whether they could manage this huge increase of traffic.
    I think that this result, lots of people follow the request from the government, are the products of the government's efforts which tried to provide necessary information to each and every member of society and make them understand the reason and the necessity of the proposed measures and cultivate the public trust for the broad cooperation.
    And this is where the Japanese state of information infrastructure worked extremely well, I believe.  The ubiquitous availability of broadband across the country as well as the widespread adoption of high broadband smartphones by people -- the information was enjoyed by society and achieving consensus.  By taking full advantage of this, I believe our Ministry of Health, all local governments have done a good job in this regard.
    That's my comment.  Thank you.  Back to you, Chris.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Thank you, Professor.  I really appreciate that.  That is interesting information and data around how the State of emergency impacted especially the traffic flows.  It's interesting information.  Appreciate you sharing that with the audience.
    Let's see.  So next I would like to turn to Kathryn to give a similar discussion around how the pandemic has impacted the private sector.  So Kathryn, can you talk a little bit about how the high level concepts discussed in the UN and ITU meetings have discussed at an operational level and how U.S. carriers have partnered with some of the major platforms during the first four to eight weeks of the COVID crisis?
    >> KATHRYN CONDELLO:  Certainly.  I think it might sort of swap the order around slightly.
    The social distancing techniques that were used to mitigate COVID, as articulated, did create a significant shift in the global Internet traffic pattern certainly in the first six months of 2020 driving increased demand for both connectivity and bandwidth.
    Now, the ICT entities that supported this shift largely the network ISPs, the cloud providers, content providers, collaboration providers, were the major enablers of that capability.  We each have very strong kind of bilateral customer provider partner relationships with each other and regularly engage over the course of day-to-day business for the collective good of our customers.
    But during this time, the dynamic shift and the dynamic nature of all these global traffic shifts actually led to not only increased collaboration but multilateral information sharing and operational coordination.  Along the large multinational providers so that we could anticipate the shifts and adapt and balance our respective networks to make these changing demands.
    Within the U.S. specifically the largest eight ISPs as well as the major cloud content collaboration providers that were supporting the work from home, learn from home and live from home environment got together on a regular basis in addition to the bilateral relationships that we had, to sort of do a level setting about how things were going, what was coming up.
    I would like to remind everyone that during the same time that we were dealing with COVID we also had major, major sort of media releases, game releases and the addition of sort of new media platforms during this time which were all being accommodated during this time.
    This coordination between the ISPs and these major content providers allowed us to do a quick check.  We think everything is okay.  Is everything working the way we think?  Are we prepared to go?  That we had not experienced at this scale in the past.
    Now, we have certainly worked with these same providers in a cyber environment.  But still once again not at a global scale that we experienced here.  So at least domestically we leveraged this multilateral coordination mechanism.  It was industry alone.  We leveraged this to not only inform government of our operational status but also to communicate important industry priorities such as the need for personal protective equipment, masks.  We worked with government decision makers to mitigate those concerns so that we could continue to work.
    Now, while the global traffic and union patterns significantly increased due to the pandemic, at least domestic we and our industry peers were prepared for this increase which did lead as has been stated to a largely seamless experience for our customers.
    Now, so how does this relate?  Well, as one of the largest Internet backbone providers in the world Lumen has an interest investment in an open and secure Internet, especially in the time of crises.  Whether we are responding whether or not from COVID-19 or cyber threats, allowing for multistakeholder partners is essential.  We saw that manifested and highly successful during this time frame.  Consistent with the theme of trust for this year's IGF and certainly in support of the Tunis Agenda to foster sustainability, robustness, security, stability in the development of the Internet, Lumen certainly affirms its commitment to continue to engage in meaningful, multilateral information sharing and operational coordination, certainly among the multinational providers and our government partners to further develop this responsible response.  
    Back to you, Chris.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Thanks, Kathryn.  I think I can speak from an AT&T perspective.  Kathryn is the cord 98er.  That and others have worked closely with the U.S. government and other industry segments outside of communications and I actually think the pandemic response has been a big success story in terms of how we have been able to keep everything up and running even when challenged by fairly significant issue with the pandemic.  It doesn't mean that everything is perfect an we'll take lessons learned from this, but it shows that the process of collaboration actually does work.  And it doesn't mean we won't be challenged and won't have to address the digital divide as Doreen mentioned.  But AT&T is seeing a similar thing in this area in agreeing to make the process work.
    Doreen, on the last subject, turning to you.  Given the comments of Professor Jitsuzumi-san and Kathryn, digitalisation has become more issue than others.  What kind of initiatives has the ITU taken to foster collaboration, for the COVID-19 or future initiatives, whether cybersecurity or otherwise.
    >> DOREEN BOGDAN-MARTIN:  Thank you, Chris; and thank you, Kathryn.  I fully agree with your points.  Professor, great to understand more about how Japan has been tackling their approach.
    So I would say as I mentioned before, collaboration definitely is key.  Has been and will continue to be as we navigate and recover hopefully soon from this crisis.  For many years we have highlighted the vital importance of digital networks, the development of our societies and our economies, including through our annual symposium for regulator series where we have been advocating for collaborative regulatory approaches.  
    But I guess COVID comes and makes us question everything.  It makes us question our approaches to connectivity that are they fit for purpose, agile, forward-looking and are we ready to tackle another pandemic should it come in.
    COVID has really been an inflection point for our sector as a whole because connectivity is now understood not as a nice to have but as essential.  It is an essential digital lifeline.
    Our response to the pandemic, I would say right from the very start, has been multi-stakeholder.  One of the very first initiatives that we took at the ITU to help countries to cope was to set up the global network resilience forum called Reg for COVID.  Through them we have been collecting experiences, ongoing initiatives, innovative regulatory and policy measures to especially ensure that communities remain connected and that connectivity gets extended to those who don't have it.
    Our reg for COVID platform brings hundreds and hundreds of practices from all over the world and really shows ways that countries, communities, have taken steps, things like ways they have increased Internet speeds, abolishing consumption caps and charges, cutting roaming rates, introducing spectrum innovations and also ways that educational resources have been made available.
    We also convened a Special Session of the UN Broadband Commission to address the pandemic and we prepared our action plan for faster and better recovery.  We joined forces with the World Bank, GSMA, with WEF and came up with a digital development action plan which called for new urgency to address digital inclusion.  And to ensure that we are promoting network resilience, looking at affordability issues and access issues.
    We convened together with the UN 75th Global Governance Forum a partnership dialogue for connectivity and that dialogue laid out concrete actions to accelerate digital connectivity in the wake of COVID.
    We did a series of digital cooperation dialogues.  I think on Thursday there is a Special Session of the IGF on the UN SG digital cooperation, high level panel and subsequent roadmap.  So we joined forces with the UN SG's under secretary and did a series of multi-stakeholder dialogue link to COVID and impact on digital cooperation.
    The other point I wanted to mention is that we stepped up our efforts with UNICEF and many other partners on school connectivity.  We have an initiative called GIGA which is about connecting every school in the world to the Internet and with 1.6 billion learners out of school that initiative took on new importance and a new level of excitement.  And we are pleased to be advancing that as we move forward.
    I would simply conclude by saying all of these tools and partnerships really I think underscore how important collaboration and cooperation is.  It is key at the global level, at the regional and national level, not just for this pandemic but for future crises, health-related or otherwise.
    Thank you.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Great.  Thank you.  Thanks for the comments, Doreen.
    All right.  So that takes us through the first two topics.  The last topic is on best practices that could be used to help inform a response to a future crisis.  So best practices, lessons learned from the COVID response.  
    I guess I will start with Kathryn from the industry side.  Kathryn, you recently worked on a variety of things in the U.S. including an NSTAC response to the President and it raised similar issues we talked about here on the panel this morning.  Can you talk about ways to address the issue?  And what have we seen in terms of lessons learned and the possibility of best practices to cross-sectoral responses, both in COVID and that could be useful for the future?
    >> KATHRYN CONDELLO:  Yes, certainly.  Thank you.
    For those that don't know, NSTAC is the National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee, a long-standing committee, over five years, and generally comprised of the CEOs of arguably up to 30 as the largest ICT companies in the United States.  Their focus is very much at a strategic level and ultimately focused on being able to advise the Presidents throughout all administrations, what does the government need to be thinking about so that we can better assure the security and the resiliency of the ICT environment.
    So I did have the opportunity to work on one recent very fast turn around discussing the ICT resiliency during COVID.  We already discussed the fact that in general we were resilient, but it did bring up a number of points.  I want to talk a little bit about three of them.  We already touched on the first one, which is that access to broadband in underserved areas or rural areas in particular is a prerequisite to fully leveraging the digital economy.  It will support the national resilience goals association with economic continuity.
    So we've already touched on that a great deal.  Since we haven't touched on the other two points I think I will spend some of my time there.
    The other thing we discovered or we thought was worthy of further thought and kind of touched on here a little bit is that things are going to continue.  Things that we do differently, work from home, learn from home, whatever.  I think that's going to remain.  I think we have had enough time to create a new pattern societally.  Yes, access to that capability is clearly important.  But there were a couple other things that bubbled up.
    One, when you transition enterprise workloads to residential and remote settings, we have now potentially created an environment that is vulnerable to certainly cyber threats.  As such, the strengthening the cybersecurity readiness or preparedness of this remote workforce becomes now critical to ensuring again the security and resiliency of both critical infrastructure but also the digital economy, which is in our case the U.S. economy.
    Given the speed of transition to this work from home environment, it is not clear that all enterprises have fully thought out what does it mean to work from home.  And how does one treat the remote location or your home location as being a digital end point in your corporate enterprise.
    So we think as a government we need to be, as a nation and globally we need to be rethinking what does it mean to protect the corporate enterprise when the workers are sitting at home.  I think this is going to unpack a lot of issues that we will need to think about, address and potentially mitigate certainly in the years to come.
    The third point that I want to touch on because again there has been a the love discussion about the access to broadband issue.  We did have an opportunity to work jointly as industry and government on our disaster response and coordination protocols.  
    Now we have substantive experience.  You know, working with certainly the U.S. government and other governments when it's a natural disaster, a hurricane, a tornado, a fire.  But this was a whole of nation response.  And what we came to unpack is that the disaster response coordination and alignment, that's the emphasis word, alignment across at least in the U.S. federal, state, local, tribal, territorial partners needed to be reassessed so we could better assure not only unity of messaging and unity of do we know where we are going, how we are going, how we are going to do it.  But also be able to ensure unity of effort for whole of nation events.
    Generally and historically disasters are managed at the lowest level possible.  If it's a town, it gets managed in the town, if it's large, it's managed at the county, larger, it gets managed at the state.  We started lowest because it's good best practice.
    Nonetheless at a time and size and scale as the one we experienced with COVID, I think there's an opportunity to relook at some of those to be able to assure ourselves that will any distinctions at lower levels of government, say at the federal level are at least aligned and reconciled so it's better understood.
    If this this not been -- this was an environment where there was no impact to infrastructure.  There was no devastation.  There were no disasters.  There were no floods.  There was no impact to infrastructure.
    So in that respect for us to take this opportunity to reassess the alignment of once again federal, state, local, tribal, territorial or for that matter nation to nation or region to region alignment under this sort of circumstances provides a good opportunity for future thought.  Back to you, Chris.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Great.  Thanks, Kathryn.  I really appreciate that.  So Professor Jitsuzumi-san, building off the initial question about being prepared for future crises, do you think Japan is going to be able to respond effectively to the next outbreak?
    >> TOSHIYA JITSUZUMI:  It's a really tough question.  The first world I would like to stress that is that it is very clear that digital transmission does make it much easier for everybody but based on the record in mitigating COVID-19 in Japan even our country has a lot of problems regarding the digital infrastructure.  For example, the standard that many schools lack network capacity to accommodate the demand of the distant learning of students, and laws and regulation still require paperworks.  And it also came as a great surprise to discover that the communication link between some public institutions is still dependent on the fax machines of the previous century.  How to deal with these missing links are the challenges that our society has to deal with right now.  This is why the digital transformation of the government is at the top of the list of our current administration.  So assuming that the current efforts of our government everybody successful in transforming the government to be a fully digital ready, I think that by next summer we will have our amount of preparation in place.  But if the outbreak occurs before then, Japan will have a very difficult time because the data prepared is not perfect.  That is the short answer I can give right now.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Thank you.  I really appreciate your feedback.
    All right.  So the last question here an then we'll turn it over to the audience, Doreen, you get to bring in the last question here.  So on the same topic area of best practices for future response, we have had many lessons learned in the crisis.  Obviously there is bound to be quite a few more.  In the context of harnessing best practices for future responses are there any plans, toolkits and approaches that the ITU can advise on as we anticipate the recovery phase of COVID and can you further reflect on the ITU's recovery plans in this context?
    >> DOREEN BOGDAN-MARTIN:  Thank you, Chris.  As today's crisis has shown, the fundamental importance of digital connectivity and we cannot continue to do business as usual.  As I mentioned in the beginning, we must seize this moment and really review our strategy and our business models based on the lessons that we've learned from COVID to speed up the development of the digital society and to accelerate progress towards bridging the digital divide.
    Yesterday as some of you may have heard, as the IGF was officially opening, we were launching our Road to Addis, which is kicking off our preparatory process for our world telecommunications conference next year.  We are working to build momentum to ensure that this world conference really charts a new path forward for digital development for all.
    So coming to connect to recover, so with the kind support of Japan and also support of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia we recently launched a new initiative called connect to recover.  It is a global initiative that aims to reinforce the digital infrastructure and ecosystems of less connected countries.  So we are first targeting Africa so that they are able to better cope with COVID and to reinforce their recovery efforts and better prepare for the new normal.
    Under the connect to recover initiative we will be developing a methodology for identifying gaps and bottlenecks in the use of digital networks and technologies at the country level.  We will be assisting countries in assessing their digital infrastructures and developing robust strategies to address any shortcomings.
    We are also going fob implementing pilot projects to test expect solutions that will help strengthen and expand digital infrastructure.
    Connect to recover really seeks to, what I would say galvanize or re-galvanize action for affordable and reliable connectivity.  As part of COVID-19 recovery strategies.  And we are very encouraged by the positive response that we have received from so many stakeholders around the world.  They have been reaching out to us with the aim of working together to make sure that everyone has access to reliable and affordable digital technologies exactly when they need them most.
    Connect to recover is building on other solid actions including the GIGA effort that I mention that we have with UNICEF.  I mentioned our reg for COVID platform as well and I wanted to mention as Kathryn pointed out we are also looking at this as an opportunity to reinforce our support in the space of national emergency telecommunications plan.  So we assist countries to better manage disaster response and when COVID hit we made sure that we were able to include tailored contingency plans and essential requirements to articulate a national strategy using ICTs when disaster strikes, such as an em dem I can.
    We also leveraged our be healthy be mobile collaborative effort with WHO.  This time we teamed up and we brought UNICEF into the MIC.  We were able to work with mobile operators and get text messaging out to the Mass to those that didn't have access to the Internet.
    We have also stepped up efforts in the face of cybersecurity.  We launched our CYB-CIB for COVID to help countries, industries an citizens to be respond to amplified and new threats in the space during COVID.  We updated our online child protection guidelines.  As everyone knows, many children came on to the Internet earlier than perhaps their parents would have anticipated.  We launched our new guidelines to help children, parents, educators and industry and policymakers to make sure that we could help make cyberspace as safe and empowering as possible.
    We've also paid special attention to building digital skills.  Skills such as remote teaching has become a key focus for us in our digital transformation centres initiative that we developed together with NORAD and Cisco.  We also developed a digital skills assessment toolkit which I think has been very useful to a lot of countries.  And I also wanted to again stress getting that right policy mix that is something that when we think about lessons and look forward to the future regulators and policymakers need to focus on driving inclusive and cross sectoral approaches and collaboration.  So that really all players can have their voice in decision making on current and future efforts.
    Our GSR guidelines I also mentioned.  I think that's a critical component.  We have in terms of other tools our digital regulation handbook and online platform that is also the fruit of another collaborative effort that we have done with the World Bank as well as our recent connecting humanity study that we did together with Saudi Arabia, with insights on the impact of COVID-19 on the digital economy, as well as the role of digital infrastructure in mitigating the consequences as well as the recovery from the pandemic.
    Thank you, Chris.  I'll stop there.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  All right.  Thank you, Doreen.  I really appreciate it.  That takes me to the end of our prepared questions.  We have about maybe ten minutes left here.  So I wanted to turn it over to the audience to see if we have any questions.  I do see that we had at least one question came in.  This was directed, Doreen, to you.  So the question is:  Has the ITU participated or contributed in any way to ongoing discussions at the OEWG or UNGGE on building digital trust?
    >> DOREEN BOGDAN-MARTIN:  Yes.  Okay, thank you, Chris.  Thank you for the question.
    So of course, the group of government experts is a group that is comprised of governments.  We have followed and contribute as appropriate to the open ended Working Groups.
    What we do essentially as many of you know, is that we facilitate multi-stakeholder discussions and dialogue.  We do that largely through our facilitation group at C5.  We've spoken a lot about the Tunis Agenda.  We bring all of the stakeholders together under the action line C5 and of course through our annual convening of the WSIS Forum which, of course, was also held virtually this year.  Much, much our efforts in building trust and confidence in the ITU focused largely on capacity-building.  We have just run two months of a cyber drill online which was lots of fun.  We helped countries in setting up their certs and we do have global, we have the cybersecurity strategy guidelines that we have also contributed together with our Member States through our Study Groups.  I hope that's helpful.  Thank you.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Great.  Thank you.
    Let's see.  Looking for any other questions.  One other question that we did receive, I'm not sure if this is rhetorical or not, but what would the world have been like without the Internet during COVID?
    Done not very well, I think is the short answer to that question.  If anyone else wants to comment?  
    (Laughter.)
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Clearly our reliance on the Internet has been demonstrated over the past few weeks.
    >> KATHRYN CONDELLO:  Can I take a quick stab at that?  Within my family, my grandmother was a nurse during the 1918 pandemic.  And so there's a lot of family stories about how did they get through the 1918 pandemic to the point that my grandmother when she would get back from the hospital with her mask she would stay in the front room and everybody else in the house came in through the back door.
    So it was kind of a family folklore.
    But snapping forward, I mean even ten, 12 years ago the sector was planning for pandemic.  It was a different variation on a theme, but still we were planning for a pandemic.  At that point we were still kind of at a different stage in terms of our adoption of the digital economy.
    So certainly we had Internet ten years ago.  Did we have Internet that we were using for shopping, for schooling, for collaboration?  No, it was very pick up the phone and talk.
    Even at that stage, even with Internet, the plans were made to assure that the resiliency of being able to pick up the phone and talk and communicate and to be able to coordinate activities was in place.
    So all to say that I think that the impact of this COVID environment would have certainly had been more devastating in terms of the health of our citizens.  I'm not trying to dismiss that.
    In terms of the ICT space, I think we would have simply adjusted for where we were at that time.  The plans were in place and we have continued to build on those plans with each roughly five years of iteration and hopefully with this experience we will be planning for how we will address something like this eight to ten years out.  Back to you, Chris.
    >> DOREEN BOGDAN-MARTIN:  Chris, could I jump in on that one too?
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Go for it.
    >> DOREEN BOGDAN-MARTIN:  I also wanted to highlight -- of course, it would have been very difficult without the Internet.  I think we are fortunate, those of us who are connected.  But half the world not, right?
    But I think what is interesting we have seen some really creative approaches.  There's been lots of innovation to respond to the entire COVID crisis.  And one thing that is striking is that many countries, developed and developing, have used radio and television to help mitigate the impact of the crisis.  I was in a session last week where a Minister was talking about how they have used television for education.  So they are holding classrooms using different TV stations to gather pupils in local communities and get the education out there because those kids or those communities don't have access to the Internet.
    So simply to say let's not forget about the role of television and radio.  Thank you.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Great.  Thank you.  
    >> TOSHIYA JITSUZUMI:  May I?
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Yes, go ahead!
    >> TOSHIYA JITSUZUMI:  You know, ten years ago Japan had a huge tsunami and at that time there was no smartphones.  But we had Internet.
    The big difference is that in the constitution we have tools to connect and browse information from the Internet.  Ten years ago we had just mobile phones and personal computers.  Personal computers because of the lack of's electricity.
    The only thing we get about the situation of the tsunami that they are broadcasting and the announcement of the government was from the local police.
    But in this times of COVID, people can search for the information they need.  They can ask for help through the Internet and to call for help to the other side of the globe in some cases.  So that the Internet is okay, but the big difference that we have are small computers named smartphone in our hand.  It really helps the mitigation of the pandemic.  That is my impression.  Thank you.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Great.  Thanks, everyone, for your comment on the question.
    I don't see any other questions.  So let me ask the audience if there are any other questions.  Barbara, have you seen anything?
    >> BARBARA WANNER:  I haven't seen any other questions in the chat or this Q&A function.  For some reason it isn't working.  If you do have a question, please use the chat.
    Just a very quick question for Doreen, because I know you mentioned the Addis conference next year, 2021, WTDC.
    That seems to be, yes, just in terms of taking the theme of trust and trust in your ICTs, trust in your strength and resiliency of your network, will of have panels that enable stakeholders to come together and talk about that?  A more broad, different country audience.
    >> DOREEN BOGDAN-MARTIN:  Thank you so much for that question, Barbara.  We are trying to have a different kind of conference.  We have understood that it can't just be all talk.  It's really got to be about actions.  It has to be solutions-oriented.  So we are in the process of inventing a very inclusive preparatory process.  In our Road to Addis we will be having a series of at least eight events that will be opened to all stakeholders.  We hope to engage all of you.  We are planning a special partnership track in the beginning of the WTDC.  There is certainly space for all of us to come together for that conference.  Thank you.
    >> CHRIS BOYER:  Great.  I think that takes us to the end of our allotted time.  I really want to thank everyone for joining us today.  And to all the speakers, I think it was a good discussion about the impacts of COVID.  I hope at the next IGF we will not becoming off of a worldwide pandemic.  It is good to be prepared.  So there are a lot of lessons we can take from this experience as we move forward.  Thank you for joining us.  I hope everyone has a great morning or afternoon.  I know, Jitsuzumi-san, what is it, 1 in the morning now?  Maybe 2 now?  Thanks for joining us so early in the day.
    >> KATHRYN CONDELLO:  Thanks.
    >> DOREEN BOGDAN-MARTIN:  Thank you very much.
    >> TOSHIYA JITSUZUMI:  Thank you, goodbye.
    >> BARBARA WANNER:  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-7-ws81-overcoming-the-us-china-digital-cold-war^^

     >> MILTON MUELLER:  We're all here.  We all know the organisation.  The panel has four sort of areas we'll discuss.  Peixi and I will make introductory comments, about three minutes.
     We'll start with the first question which will feature Stephen Anderson, Feng Guo and Charles mock and we'll go to the rest of the world where we go to Joanna, Iginio and Jyoti and then questions about technical and economic infrastructures.  We will have more open discussion and the next question about proposals, practical proposals.
     The Secretariat of the IGF wants us to also ask for voluntary commitments.  Anriette, if you're still paying attention, do you want to explain more about what voluntary commitments are?
     >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Milton, I can say this is an initiative, not from the IGF MAG, but from the UN.
     And it is the idea to make some kind of commitment towards taking an action forward.  And this will be documented in a database and one can then come back and reflect.  It is really quite open.  You can propose to continue research or in this area, or build partnership or have a follow-up session.  It is really quite open.
     The idea is that it gets participants in the process to think about what they can do, post IGF, to build on whatever content was discussed during the workshop.  I hope that helps.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  It does.  So people can be thinking about that, what they can do, what they can propose.
     It could be anything from a follow-up session, which I would certainly be interested in, to particular proposals or ideas that they can take forward in their own country or institution.
     We'll set aside some time for that.
     It's ten after.
     >> IGF SUPPORT STAFF:  I would like to say a couple of words to congratulate everybody to be here and remind everyone that this meeting is being recorded and will be available at YouTube.  We are under United Nations regulations and rules and IGF code.  Thank you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  All right.  Well, thank you very much, everybody, for attending.  Today we are discussing, I think, an issue that is really at the centre of Internet Governance worldwide.  That is the conflict that is evolving between the world's two biggest economies, the world's two biggest sort of Internet powers, and of course it is affecting the rest of the world as well.
     I am Milton Mueller, a Professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology and I run a project called the Internet Governance Project, a long-standing project in IGF and ICANN and other Internet Governance institutions.
     I believe that the US-China relationship is extremely important.  It has been particularly painful and difficult to watch the deterioration of the relationship between the two over the past really more than the last four years.  The past ten years I think things have gone downhill.
     Now, we are on the cusp of a somewhat new situation, of course.  We have a new president-elect in the United States.  We don't know exactly how that new person will change or maintain existing policy.  We still have an unresolved trade war.  We still have a blockade on chip technology between the United States and China.  And very recently we have a very interesting conflict between a major Chinese, Jack Ma of Ant Group and the Chinese Communist party that indicates that not all is similar and uniform in China itself.
     It seems like maybe the platforms in China are in some ways as disruptive of government as they have been in the United States and are becoming as controversial as they are in the United States.
     Of course, the US has just had a major hearings attacking the platforms for antitrust purposes and some mentions of Section 230 which are mostly domestic US issues.  Again, they show a general global trend.
     What we are going to do today is foster a dialogue, a reasonable and mutual understanding from the US and China.  We want to understand how the rest of the world is affected by this conflict.  We really do want to come up with some practical and feasible proposals for moving forward and making the Internet whole, if you will.
     Those are my introductory comments.  Let me turn it over to my co-organiser of this panel, Dr. Peixi Xu.
     >> PEIXI XU:  Thank you, Milton.  Thank you for putting us together.  This is a really challenging topic.
     Basically I have two points in mind to approach this topic about overcoming China-US Cold War.  The first point is that in spite of the huge differences between the Internet Governance models between China and the United States, I think it is also equally important to pay attention to the similarities.  And I think it seems to be very reasonable assumption or perception to say that the two countries are very different.  However, I think it might be to some extent mistaken, if we really accept this kind of presumption.
     The fact is that the two countries actually face many of the same general challenges and many of the same specific programmes.  For example, in terms of how the digital economy should be governed, the nationality or the central or the federal level of government have some conflicting views with the local authorities of the state level or at the provincial level.
     Also there is a kind of a dispute, also the same challenge that is shared by both countries.  That is building a single digital market or having a very fragmented way of decision making in terms of sharing the economy, like ride-sharing and home-sharing, and also eCommerce taxation.
     I think the two countries have a lot of similarities.
     The first point is that we should start are from the similarities.  By looking at the similarities, I think it can help us to understand the drivers and the people behind the notion of a digital Cold War.  And why did it happen?  Such a way globally that there is a notion of a digital Cold War?
     I think it is true that Internet Governance has covered a lot of dimensions including a military dimension.  But it is more true, or truer that the digital Cold War notion was to some degree imagined or conjured up by politicians or think tankers or security minded personalities.  That is not very constructive in looking at the Internet Governance in such a way.
     And point number two is that we should distinguish higher values from lower values.  I would say that the common narratives are higher values in terms of Internet Governance.  However, the sovereignty narratives are lower values.  So it is happy to observe that beyond the sovereignty narratives, including digital sovereignty or cyber sovereignty or technology sovereignty, there are voices about global commerce or Internet commerce or cyber commerce or digital commerce.
     So all global public good.  In that case I would mention the example of the Cybersecurity Act.  It is at the core of public resources as a public good.  That is a very good practice.  If we can put more things of Internet Governance into such a basket of commerce narrative, it can be more constructive.
     With that I give the floor back to you, Milton.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Thank you.  Yes.  I think that the similarities between the US and China are actually pretty interesting.  Both of us are actually kind of revolutionary countries with gigantic domestic markets.  There are similarity although there are huge differences in values.
     With that let's get into our first question.  That is, do we see the rise of China's digital economy as a threat to the values and standards of the open global Internet?  Or could we say the same thing about the clean networks initiative of the US?  Are we promoting the open global Internet or is the rise of China a threat to it?
     Let's begin with Stephen Anderson of the US State Department.  And he is -- well, I'll let him introduce himself in terms of his exact title.  Yes, let's go for about five minutes, Stephen.  Thanks.
     >> STEPHEN ANDERSON:  Great.  Thank you very much, Milton.  Really it is a pleasure for me to be here with the Internet Governance Forum.  I'm the acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Communications and Information Policy at the State Department.  I'm a career official who has been with the State Department since 1994.
     Although I had to launch into my comments, again it really is a pleasure to be here at the IGF.  The IGF is known as open, inclusive and transparent FORUM for dialogue on Internet related policy issues.  It really is great to be a part of that dialogue.
     So for the last three decades the Internet has been an engine of global economic growth and innovation.  In fact, the Internet's value stems from the fact that it provides an interoperable platform for all of us to connect with each other, to do business, share opinions and exchange information exactly like we are doing here today.
     The United States government promotes a vision for the Internet that is consistent with its core values, as were mentioned before.  And we share those with so many of our partners and allies:  Respect for human rights, belief in democratic principles an faith in the power of a market-led economy.  That is we support a reliable and secure and interoperable Internet.  Like minded countries around the world have in fact embraced this vision.  The best way in our vision to govern such a network is through the multi-stakeholder model.  Many diverse voices get their say and no one stakeholder should have the ability to reshape the Internet entirely according to its designs.
     Recently, however, the multi-stakeholder model has come under increasing pressure and threat from those including the People's Republic of China promoting a state centric and authoritarian approach to Internet Governance.
     Detrimental, to prosperity and freedom including those of the Chinese people.  Now, to be clear, picking up on a point already mentioned, we do not consider this to be a conflict between the United States and China.  As secretary of stake.  Mike Pompeo has said, the choice is not between the United States and anyone else.  It is between freedom and tyranny.  The CCP espouses a concept of cyber sovereignty that a State has absolute authority over Internet activity and technical architecture within its borders.  Cyber sovereignty is in our view antithetical to the reality and spirit of a multi-stakeholder Internet Governance.
     It is no secret that the CCP seeks to control the flow of information into and inside of China.  It is well-known how the so-called great firewall inhibits the free flow of data cross borders, stifles open discussion internally and limits the ability of the Chinese people to access outside information.
     However, let's not forget the repress I have force it represents within its own borders.  The CCP censors the flow of information among its own people and curtails the ability to freely communicate with each other.  The People's Republic of China's national security law requires private companies to hand over any data requested by the Chinese government.  They have to do this without regard for due process, little transparency, no accountability or respect for individual privacy.
     Further, the massive state-backed investments like the Belt and Road Initiative and opaque in trade agreements, in our view the PRC unfairly will thwarts champions overseas allowing them to -- a top which our sensitive data runs.  The new information property call or new IP proposal that they've put before the International Telecommunications Union is in our view an attack on the very foundations of the Internet.  Quite simply, the new IP proposal attempts to inject the PRC's digital authoritarian into the very protocols that govern the global Internet.
     If implemented, the Chinese new IP would turn the multi-stakeholder Internet not a top-down model granting significant control to state actors.  This would represent in fact a deliberate shift away from the existing multi-stakeholder model and would disenfranchise non-state actors from the process, even though the majority of Internet infrastructure remains with the private sector.
     If I haven't been clear although I think it is, in the Internet we have come to rely on is penitentiary to be open, interoperability, and secure.  It is for a multi-stakeholder community to assure that it remains that way.  The positive values that the IGF fourth supports and believes in are engineered right into the logic of the Internet's protocols.  A state-centric authoritarian model of Internet Governance represents in our view an existential threat to the current model.  I'm sure we are going to have an exciting discussion now.  I look forward to that.  Thank you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Thank you, Stephen.  You are right on time and now I will turn it over to Feng Guo, who I know from his position in ICANN as part of the GAC.  Let's hear what you have to say.
     >> FENG GUO:  Thank you, Professor.  Hello, everybody.  My name is Guo Feng from the China Academy of ICT.  I am also a member of the China IGF community.  I would like to thank Professor Milton Mueller and the Professor Peixi Xu for the invitation to participate in this workshop.
     Taking this opportunity I would like to say something about the latest development of China in terms of digital economy and Internet Governance.  From my view, from my observation that most of government officials, industry leaders and scholars in China view that the global digitalisation has made a profound influence on the economic globalisation and establishment of a smart society.  The scale of 47 major countries digital economy hit 31.8 trillion last year, accounting for almost 41.5 percent of the global GDP.
     And the digital economy not only improves the industrial efficiency and the social wellbeing, but also enhances the releases of economic society.  Thanks to the great invention of the Internet, the society has not been fully stopped in the face of the global coronavirus-19 pandemic and the economy has still been running.
     The Internet has played a key role in the operation of society.  The digital economy has become a stabilizer against the downward pressure of the global economy and important engine for the current global economy recovery.
     And I would like to take this opportunity to give you some figures about the overview of the digital economy development in China.  The digital economy is developing and contributes more to the whole Chinese economy.  In 2019, which is last year, China's digital economy scale reached up to 35.8 trillion RMB, accounting for almost 37 of the GDP.
     And China's digital economy increased by 15 in last year.  The growth is about 8 percent points higher than the GDP growth in the same period.
     In addition, I would like to bring your attention to the global initiative on China's on data security put forward by the Chinese government.  As you may know, you will see that the Chinese government launched an initiative on cybersecurity in 2020.  This mainly includes several points.  The first one is approach data security with an objective and rational attitude and to maintain an open and secure and stable global supply chain.
     Number two is oppose using information and communication technology activities to impair other states critical infrastructure or steal important data.
     Third, take actions to prevent and put an end to activities that infringe upon personal information or pose using ICT to conduct mass surveillance against other states or engage in also rise the correction of personal information of other states.
     Number four, ask companies to respect the laws of countries, desist from coercing domestic companies into storing data, generated and obtained overseas in one's own territory.
     Number five, risk factor is a sovereignty and restrict the data of other states.  Avoid asking companies or individuals to provide data located in other states without the latter's permission.
     Six, meet law enforcement needs for overseas data through judicial assistance or other appropriate channels.
     Number seven, ICT products and service providers should not install back doors in their products an services to illegally obtain user data.
     Number eight.  ICT companies should not seek illegitimate its by taking advantage of users' dependence on their products.
     According to Chinese government, these initiatives will serve as the basis for international consultation on data security and may mark the start of a global process in this area.
     The Chinese government looks forward to the participation of national governments, international organisations and all other stakeholders and co-owned states to support the commitments and layout in the initiative through the bilateral or regional agreements.
     So thanks for your attention.  This is basically what I would like you to know at this stage.  So I stop here to move to the next speaker.  Thank you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Great.  Thank you very much, Feng.  And that is I think interesting and hopefully we can come back to some of the issues on your initiative on data security when we get time.
     Right now I want to turn to a different perspective, you might say somebody in between China and the US in the sense of western values and Chinese values.  So Charles, tell us what this conflict looks like from the perspective of Hong Kong.  We know that some of your traditional freedoms have been compromised recently.  We would like to hear about your perspective on this.  Thank you.
     >> CHARLES MOK:  Thank you, Milton.  I like you saying that we are somewhat squeezed in the middle.
     Well, my current capacity for however long it will last is legislator in Hong Kong.  But my previous life, I had been an Internet service provider more than 20 years ago.  So I was in industry.  I also started the ISOC in Hong Kong more than ten years ago.  I have been in different capacity, industry, government, and civil society.  I hope I can give you somewhat of a rounded view of what has been happening photograph using Hong Kong maybe as a case to look at what is going to happen for an Internet conflict between the US and China.
     Well, for Hong Kong, we have had a free Internet.  No censorship, no filtering of website or IP addresses no Internet services being banned for any reasons, Facebook or Gmail or whatever.  It is all here.
     However, as some of you might have heard, we had recently an implementation of a national security law in Hong Kong.  I am not going to be here to discuss or to argue for or against the law.  The law is the law in Hong Kong.
     But basically the law would grant vast power for the authorities to seize servers and records of any online service providers or virtually any corporate or individual entities without any scrutiny or gate keeping by the judicially, with global jurisdiction.
     So to be fair to the Hong Kong authorities I have to say that to this stage to my knowledge the authorities have not used these powers against any of the global platforms or even local companies.  Now, that might be because of the fact that they would be able to gather evidence through other means without going to the servers of each companies.  But anyway, that is the fact.
     So part of that might also be because of the sensitivity towards if they go after the some of these servers of the big American companies, will it cause yet another political stand-off between the two countries?  Maybe that is something that they are sensitive about too.  It hasn't happened yet, to be fair to the government in Hong Kong.
     For Internet users here, however, there is already an overriding climate of chilling effect and self-censorship.  A lot of people are deleting their Facebook posts or their whole profile in the last several months.
     While we haven't seen the implementation of a China style firewall in Hong Kong yet, maybe because it is because of the economic past of doing that.  For Hong Kong is a financial international centre, just too large.  Maybe there are other means to search the kind of assert the kind of control that the authorities would like without having to go that far.  There are talks that, for example, will the government here implement somewhat like Singapore's fake news laws that will allow the government to take down certain messages that they don't like.
     On the other hand, I think it is inevitable that Hong Kong's digital economy is moving closer to the Chinese digital economy.  They are talking about extending the experiments for the digital currency to Hong Kong.  There are, unfortunately, the one that has been canceled for financial.  In one sense that might be one of the areas of the common interest and similarities that Professor Xu talked about in the beginning that I like, if we can find some of those.  Maybe making money is one of them.
     So maybe, you know, Hong Kong's digital economy in some ways moving closer to the Chinese digital economy may not be a bad thing by itself.  But the problem is if you look at it from the angle of if we in Hong Kong have to make a choice and go one way or the other, that might be a problem.  In the past we used to enjoy the best of both worlds.  Now are we going to say likewise for the global Internet we have to choose one or the other?
     So I think the question is are we going to end up with two Internets, two infrastructures, two standards or more than two standards or infrastructures and so on?  My answer or my guess is yes and no.  First, some of these conflicts as far as the Internet is concerned between the west and China, isn't anything new.  For anybody who has been to IGF or ICANN meetings or so on they have always been there.  On the other hand they might be enhanced firewall that will happen or all over the wall because China is also going to be influencing many countries in the rest of the world as well, in addition to those traditional American and western influenced parts of the world.
     There might be -- this kind of an enhanced firewall that I'm talking about may be extended to ideas such as using hardware platforms and software platforms to identify or carry out surveillance and so on that will be enabling these platforms to capture data and provide back doors and so on.  Of course, to be fair, there are also a lot of western companies and western governments who try to tell their companies to put in firewalls as well which I personally would oppose.
     These are the kinds of trends that you see.  Also I'm very glad that Mr. Guo mentioned about the digital cyber sovereignty laws and so on that has been recently put on the table or legislated in China.  I think the key that we should look into these laws in addition to the features and protections that Mr. Guo mentioned is also about local jurisdiction.  I think that is a new concept for many people outside of China.  And then again, I have to say that China can only say that they learned from the US law, they learned it from the European laws such as EU's GDPR and so on.  Global jurisdiction is going to be another issue that Internet players in the world will have to face.
     Finally, I do want to address the point about the US clean network initiative.  Is it going to become a threat to the global Internet values and standards.  Now, personally I don't think it will make a lot of immediate difference right away because in principle, in reality it is simply the US government or US using China's past great firewall tactics back on China.  In principle, we disagree with the great firewall of China, we should probably also disagree with the clean networks as well.
     If you look at it as simply a form of trade retaliation, as China has been banning many of these services from the US like Facebook and Google and so on, you could consider this as a reciprocal trade measure.
     In closing instead of one world, many Internet and all separate on their own we may end up with pretty much one Internet but a lot of Balkanisation and each trying to influence and control the other.  So that might be the new normal of the Internet that we have to face.  Thank you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  I want to follow up a little bit and get more engagement between Stephen and Feng before we move to the next topic.
     So let me just recall that Stephen was really attacking this notion of cyber sovereignty and, of course, if you know me I have a lot to say about cyber sovereignty.  I'm not a big fan of it.  In fact, I think it's impossible.
     But isn't the US moving in that direction, Stephen, with the Trump Administration's bans on apps, its chip export controls and so on?  And if the new IP -- by the way, I think you have misconstrued the new IP.  I don't think it's a new IP and I don't see values engineered into the Internet protocol, that is a fallacy.  But if in fact there is a new IP coming from China at some point, wouldn't it be better to just have a technical competition over the merits of the standard rather than damning it because it is from China?
     And before Stephen, to Feng Guo I want to get some direct engagement.  So the global initiative on data security does indeed emphasize the principles of cyber sovereignty again and again.  I have read them and there are some good things in them but they are very much focused on drawing national boundaries around data.  How does that work in the global Internet?  Don't you see why the US would be a little bit worried about Chinese assertions of sovereignty in cyberspace?
     Okay.  Let's start with Stephen and then go to Guo Feng.
     >> STEPHEN ANDERSON:  Thanks.  You gave me a virtual smorgasbord of issues to comment on there.
     I'm going to start just by highlighting one of your own points, which is that my comments were really focused on the threat proposed, or posed by the digital sovereignty and the digital authoritarianism that exists within China and that China has been trying to export through a variety of ways that I explained during my opening remarks.
     Then, of course, my Panelist from China in his remarks specifically outlined a proposal that is exactly that which I criticized, focusing on sort of giving states all of the power.
     Despite the rhetoric about not wanting to, about protecting Intellectual Property rights and so on and so forth given the history that we have with large Chinese companies operating in the United States who have either stolen IP or the forced technology transfers that we've seen for American companies operating within China, I find it euphemism is particularly ironic that those exist in the proposal.
     Regarding the clean network, it is a very different concept from the GDSI or any of the cyber sovereignty proposals that the Chinese government has put forward.  It is based on the simple concept that when you have as you pointed out or one of the other Panelists pointed out, we have two large economies in the world and one of them has shown through behavior over the last several years that it cannot be trusted.  Xi Jinping recently said we must build a backbone of private business people that is dependable and quote usable in key moments.  Adding to that the various national security laws that we've seen, it is quite simple from our perspective that a lot of these Chinese companies that we found fault with are untrusted operators.  What we concluded based on our analysis is that they should not form the backbone of basic infrastructure, especially 5G, given the whole range of attack surfaces and present in that new technology.
     The clean network is really just an initiative that the United States is putting forward to ask countries that have the same concerns that we do about the security of their networks, problems with having companies beholden to a regime that as was mentioned recently, where there is no judicial review.  That is not something that we would want in our networks.  It is not a trade action.  It is not a retaliation or attempt to gain leverage.  It is quite simply the belief that the economic consequences and the national security consequences of including untrusted vendors in our networks or the networks of our friends and allies, that it is a cost that the countries need to keep in mind.
     I'll go ahead and stop there so we have time for conversation.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  All right.  So Peixi Xu, you want to respond to that first an we'll go to Feng Guo if he wants to respond.
     >> PEIXI XU:  Thank you.  A moment from my past, I have to say a few words about what Stephen has said about his understanding about the Chinese Internet Governance model.  So it is about this very old debate about multi-stakeholder model and China has repeatedly expressed its support about multi-stakeholder model from the low officials to the presidents, the multi-stakeholder has been read the same way as multilateralism in official documents.  Though these voices are not very well heard.
     By the way in terms of cyber sovereignty we had a debate, in the digital sovereignty session.  We argued last year that it is actually the United States that the United States is the big cyber sovereignty instead of China.  The United States is the biggest supporter of multi-stakeholder.  That doesn't mean the United States is not the supporter of cyber sovereignty.  It is the biggest supporter of cyber sovereignty.  The result will be decided by the cyber sovereignty and the multi-stakeholders in the United States, is actually a domestic issue.  China is somehow a supporter for both.  But I would say that the military extension into the cyberspace is the kind of symbol of cyber sovereignty.  So that is a kind of feedback to what Stephen has said about cyber sovereignty.  And multi-stakeholder.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Okay.  Feng Guo, did you want to come in and respond a bit to Stephen?
     >> FENG GUO:  Okay, thank you.  I would like to comment very briefly.  But before my intervention I would like to say that in this workshop, in this discussion I am not representing the Chinese government.  Because indeed I am a representative of the MIT in the Governmental Advisory Committee in the ICANN.  But in other location I am not representing the government.  So I would like to comment totally in my personal capacity.
     Just perhaps in responding to the intervention by Stephen, I would like to talk about two points.  The first one is about whether there is a cyber sovereignty.  I think in the cyberspace there does exist the concept or the cyber sovereignty because in the real world we have the sovereignty.  Because each state, each country claims it has its own sovereignty.  In cyberspace in the era of the Internet, because the country or the state doesn't vanish, it still exists in cyberspace.
     So I think it is a proper, perhaps a proper claim by the country that it has a level of cyber sovereignty.
     And another point is that no matter a country or a government stake or not, the term of cyber sovereignty it does exist because perhaps from my personal view there is a clear evidence that the clean network initiative is a clear evidence of the cyber sovereignty.
     Also the GDPR from the European, Europe initiative on the GDPR, the law, European law is another evidence of the cyber sovereignty.  So this is my observation.  Thank you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Okay.  So Charles, you want to jump in quick?
     >> CHARLES MOK:  Yes.  I just want to add a word or two saying that I wish all these barriers would go away, as a user.  I mean, I probably am an idealist and old school person as far as the Internet goes.  I was the first to use the Internet in 1982.  We believed at the time that there was a network of networks not run by any government.
     Unfortunately the cyberspace of today is not the same.  I do still wish as a user all this censorship and surveillance would go away by everybody.  It hurts me as a user to see the powers of both sides pointing fingers at each other and saying you are better than I am.  That is not finding common similarities, right?
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Right.  I think that's absolutely true.  I really want to get the last word here.  When Stephen said that he doesn't trust China and can't allow their equipment into the network and China says they don't allow Facebook and Google into their market they are pretty much saying the same thing and they are both in my opinion upholding some notion of territorialisation or cyber sovereignty.
     Like Charles we are not so enthusiastic about these barriers.  We have to move on.  We have some interesting commentators who are not from the US or China.  We have Iginio Gagliardone who is a professor from South Africa, we have Jyoti Panday from India, and Joanna Kulesza from Europe, Poland.  
      They are going to grapple with a question for four minutes on what the US-China conflict has on the rest of the world.  I was astounded by the degree of interest in the US election that I saw happening and now I guess the issue is this conflict between the US and China does affect the rest of the world as much if not more than the election outcome.
     We'll start with Iginio and then go to Joanna and then to Jyoti.
     >> IGINIO GAGLIARDONE:  Thank you very much, Milton.  Thank you, everyone, for a fascinating, a bit of a heated conversation and that's what makes it interesting.
     Since we have limited time, I will wrap my remarks around three points.  This is not off the cuff.  This emerges from like ten years of looking at different countries in Africa that resulted in a book published last year.  I don't want to promote it. It is a book that is a result of that kind of engagement.  So being on the ground, right, and having this kind of rhetorical battles between standards and ideals, speaking with a lot of African leaders, entrepreneurs, engineers, computer scientists, and so forth.
     My first remark, it is often a fear that China is going to promote its own model of the Internet as was mentioned.  In my research I have seen that that is very much not the case.  And China has developed their different relationships and approaches with different countries from authoritarian Ethiopia where they received the largest loan in telecommunications in Africa, more than $3 billion from, to democratic Kenya where China played a very small role in a liberalized market.
     To point to one of the remarks made by our colleague from the State Department, when authoritarian states decided to promote legislations or policies or interventions that have constrained the Internet, it is often the securitisation agenda that stems from the United States after 9/11 that was used to justify those kind of initiatives.  And the fact that the Chinese model is not put on users, government and so forth doesn't mean that China's spread is not relevant.  We referred to the market, China tended to help governments in developing their own digital Information Society.  So empowering one actors over, and this has consequences for sure.
     My second point based on more recent research is that interestingly Chinese company, mostly Huawei and CD developed a different approach when they marketed their own projects, projects like Safe CD and Smart CD, combination of IoT and different models of surveillance to help like traffic but also to improve control over crime and so forth.
     And it is interesting to see how these companies have actually marketed their stemming from China as a reason from a country that is doing well with surveillance and maintaining public order to convince African cot to prepare their economies compared to others.
     This introduces an interesting contradiction when we say that Huawei are not in the Chinese face.  The Chinese face has refrained from imposing or suggesting its own models.  Actually, companies for commercial gains eventually said we are from China.  We are good at it.  Why wouldn't we look at ours compared to our Japanese competitors or American competitors?  This is an interesting point to disentangle.
     The final point that I want to make is that like with Charles, I was, when my modem was cracking in my house I was so empowered to feel part of the global Internet where I could hide and be free and so forth.  This was taken politically to frame these freedom of technology and we unfortunately saw how they did a -- they did it for a while and power was brought back in the case of those who had it before.  Egypt is one case.
     Kind of like expectation that where technology of freedom has failed, technology of unfreedom will succeed.  Like because of their more like secretive evil natures and so forth.  In research that stems from Pakistan, so not my area but also from Uganda and Kenya, we have seen that ZTE smart cities or Huawei's smart cities have failed miserably.  The idea that Chinese coming incoming in and going to produce surveillance in the totalitarian regimes, we don't take into consideration the different technopolitical regimes that exist in these countries.  Chinese and clean and consistent, the last technology to work in certain ways for social norms, but the technology in Mombasa, it is going to mess up as the technology of freedom has done in the past.
     What I am suggesting we have to be more nuanced and like from this part about freedom, if we look at things on the ground, the picture that emerges is very different and more nuanced allows more room for maneuvering and conversation from different actors.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Very good.  Thank you, Iginio.  Very good points.  Let's move quickly to Joanna from Europe.
     >> JOANNA KULESZA:  Thank you, Milton, thank you for having us here.  Fascinating discussion.  Four minute, I'm going to be very brief and start with the conclusion just to try to join in the discussion.
     Thank you very much for those controversial statements.  They kind of make my job much easier.  If I was to say where and how Europe finds itself in that global discussion, I would use an old Polish proverb, we would be, we would be saying this face-to-face.  The proverb translates to two actors fighting and a third one taking the cake.  This is the position that Europe is currently trying to play.  When you look at this essential Cold War between two very different approaches, what Europe is trying to do is, it is trying to offer a third way.
     Now, we heard this said very clearly from Stephen that either US or the highway.  The US way or the highway.  Anything else is nondemocratic.
     Let me go back to the speech by President Macron in 2018 where he clearly emphasized that there is indeed a third way.  One that is based on human rights, on co-regulation and open markets.  That is more concerned with individual rights including privacy, with consumer protection, more so than would be the case in the US  But at the same time prioritizes the multi-stakeholder model of governance.
     So I would view the impact that this discourse has in Europe in that context.
     If I was to give you a very brief recap on what happened in the last three years since that speech, since the Paris call that incorporated these principles, I would say that what is happening currently in Europe is a very intense process of testing what this means in practice.  I will add links to the chat.  The key term if you want to research it would be strategic economy.  It is not cyber sovereignty.  I'm fascinated with the notion.  I love having discussions around sovereignty online, but I agree with Milton, it is tremendously challenging.
     What we are looking into in Europe right now would be strategic autonomy.  What we must do is we want to take the principles you have seen in the NIS directive.  We want to see how the GDPR and the NIS directive translate on to individual national decisions that still, for example, would buy IT equipment.  I strongly support Iginio in supporting that these projects come from highly nationality politics.
     Europe is a wonderful testing ground because we are so diverse.  The coherence of the decision making is the highest of anywhere in the world.
     I would argue that the take-away from this battle, from this potential Cold War for Europe would be a unique opportunity to push the discussion forward in a third way, one that is based on a human rights friendly approach, protecting individuals.  We have an intense history that has led us to GDPR.  I would argue that the GDPR was not so much be an example in the boundary of law making but rather a spillover effect.  Look at what is happening in the US in California where the GDPR has had a very strong and yet voluntary effect.
     I know it's just four minute and I could go on to four details.  I will add a few links to the chat to give you more reference.  But I would view this specific discussion as an opportunity for Europe to move on at a very steady pace that we have done in the last two years in going forward in finding the balance between those two contrasting approaches.
     I will stop here.  I'm looking forward to questions and further discussion.  Thank you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Thank you very much, Joanna.  That is a very stimulating perspective.  I wish we -- I hope we do have time to follow up.
     Let's turn to Jyoti Panday, a researcher at the internet governance project.  She has a unique perspective on this because of the relationship with India and other large national markets and something that has some tensions with both the US and China, but seems to again exist in some kind of state of its own.
     I'll turn it over to you, Jyoti.
     >> JYOTI PANDAY:  Thanks, Milton.  I think the state that best describes India's stance at the moment is swinging because it certainly hasn't found its legs, whether to support the US or to support the Chinese model.
     In terms of what is the back of impact of US-China conflict on India's internet governance, two effects that this conflict has added to.  The first is that India because of this US-China conflict is moving away from the multi-stakeholder model.  We could see that in 2016, 2017.  It came forward in support of adopting a more open multi-stakeholder approach to participating in Internet Governance processes.  But as it has seen the US-China trade war pick up, it started focusing more on the securitisation of technology governance issues and using national security as a justification to reign in foreign firms.
     What is interesting in the Indian context is that while we are seen as two of Chinese hegemony, Facebook and Google are viewed as American hegemony, India, although it has not adopted that particular term but with keeping with what Joanna pointed out about Europe, a lot of India's response to this conflict is about retaining its strategic autonomy.
     The entire debate on Internet Governance and technology governance is also really shamed by the fact that India and China share a border.  The national security issues are transfer trumped up within the domestic politics a lot.  We have seen that play out with the recent bans on Chinese apps in India.
     But again there is another aspect to it where Chinese investment in Indian tech startups is actually quite significant and the Indian government has not tackled that aspect yet.  We see the Indian government moving towards the recognition that we probably want to be very careful about who we, which country is being allowed to invest in our growing ecosystem.  India is also adopting tactics from both the US and China.  They haven't entirely given up the idea of an open Internet and globally connected world.  But they are also really emboldened by the Chinese approach of creating national champions.  You can see this in efforts such as data localisation or making changes to the foreign direct investment policy where they specifically target countries that they share a border with, which is probably in China.
     Another issue that I think is worth pointing out, it is usually -- in most debates tech nationalism is called out as grandstanding.  From the Indian perspective there is growing consensus that it should also be viewed as an acknowledgment that the current status quo doesn't work for nondominant countries.
     The US is a leader and the US companies, for the US companies India is a huge market.  But India views, wants to move beyond being just a huge market for either China or the US and wants to participate and shape how -- and play a greater role in Internet Governance.  A lot of this move reflects the shifting tendency towards this.
     Again, like Joanna, I can add a lot more.  On 5G specifically there has been, following the recent border clashes, I believe the Indian government was not really clear about the participation of Chinese firms.  It was in a confused state for a very long time, but following recent border clashes there is some sort of consensus developing there where we have had state telecom operators closing off contracts with Chinese companies.  It is likely that India will keep china way from its 5G ecosystem.
     Then this is not limited to just -- you know, we have seen India be wary of Chinese influence and it walked away from the Belt and Road Initiative, away from the international partnership, the trade policy with China is making India choose sides at the moment, but India's stance is more geared towards retaining space for itself to take decisions for shipping its own markets rather than choosing the US model of Internet Governance versus the Chinese model of Internet Governance.
     Happy to expand on any of these issues.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Okay, good.
     So I am going to quickly scan the questions here.  I wonder if anybody wants to follow up on what was said by the others or answer any particular question before we move on.
     (Pause.)
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  In that case we will move on to the next question.  This is where we will allow comments from anybody willing.  This question is, does the conflict between the US and China actually threat to create separate economic infrastructures.  We touched on this a little bit at the beginning when we talked about a new IP.  I want to say we have been following new IP very closely and would reiterate it is not a new protocol.  It is not a protocol yet.  As it was described by one study, it is a list of desired features and what kind of requirements might be needed to attain them.  It is not a standard.
     The concept of new IP or the label new IP has been backed away from by the people in Huawei who promoted it.  I think the more interesting question here is the chip war, the export controls on integrated circuits which, for example, does not allow Huawei's smartphones to use the Android operating system because they cannot -- Google and others, the entity list prevents them from doing any kind of an agreement with the Chinese providers.  So Huawei is forced to develop its own operating system.  China is forced to develop its own integrated circuit technology.  So we see what could be the beginnings of a serious split in the very technical underpinnings which could eventually lead to a new IP or alternative IP that could be incompatible with the one that we have now.
     So who wants to address this issue of technical fragmentation or technical evolution?
     Stephen?
     >> STEPHEN ANDERSON:  I'll jump, although the smart move on my part would have been just to wait a little bit, but I am going to go ahead and address your comments about new IP.  First I'm going to wholesale endorse your characterization of new IP.  You showed a sophistication in your description of it which I would also call a criticism of it as well.
     The most important concept about new IP is that it is an example of forum shopping.  Huawei took it to the place where it should.  The engineering task force, it was not considered a viable option there.  So they tried to bring it to another forum where they thought they might have a better showing.
     Again, I don't think that what the United States, I wouldn't characterize this as a conflict between the United States and China.  This is, as I said before, it is about the United States trying to defend a system that has worked so well at all layers of the stack, from the infrastructure layer up to the application layer with the protocol layer in between.  We want it to remain as interoperable, reliable, secure and we have concerns about the use of Chinese vendors, untrusted vendors within the stack.  And the decision that we've made is that we want to exclude that because we don't believe that it can be trusted.
     The entities list is an extension of that tool.  We don't believe that untrusted vendors should be able to benefit from our technology in order to continue to purvey their product.  And as Iginio pointed out, in Africa they used that technology in order to create smart cities which are unsafe cities in terms of Chinese propaganda and efforts to export their technology and de facto standards by creating facts underground.
     I'm going to stop there and just sum it up by saying the United States is about defending the current system, keeping it open, keeping it interoperable but also perhaps more than we would have a couple years ago weighing the reliable and secure component.  Thank you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Go ahead, Iginio.
     >> IGINIO GAGLIARDONE:  Just two points.  One in response to Stephen, that is not what I was trying to say.  I'm saying there is a lot of fear in think tank reports about the Chinese are coming with their authoritarian technologies.  These authoritarian technologies are going to enslave people.  These technologies, it just not working very well.  They are not doing what they are supposed to be doing.  They are sold for a lot of money and places in Nairobi or Mombasa as a they don't work and crime doesn't go down.  It goes up.
     As much as like other technologies before haven't worked.  I am not saying it is because of the authoritarianism.  It is the opposite.  There is fear they will work.  So far they get stuck in the mud.
     The second point is, this policy needs to be short-sighted because the chip war affects Huawei, but in Africa, the largest producer of handsets is Transient, is Techno that passed in 2017.  Now almost like 50 percent of the handsets used by African users are produced in China and by Techno or Transient, Transient is bigger.  Huawei represents like five, six, 7 percent of the market, maybe in some the cans it is more.
     At the end of the day, the battle that attacks the bigger most visible players but if the Chinese government wanted to reach out and to Transient to develop the same policies, it would be able to do so because they are not part of the ban.
     Again when we get into closing a tap, there are so many holes and things happen anyway.  You leave everything open it is much easier to just all look into it and try to fix it together.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  So I think some discussion in the chat and elsewhere is about the nature of these barriers.  Are they trade barriers?  Are they something else?
     And I think this relates to something that Stephen said.  So the chip war I think is very hard to make a case that that is a trade move.  I think it is fundamentally an attempt to cripple Chinese manufacturers.  I mean, this is basically saying we have an essential technology that sort of the US dominates it in terms of the intellectual property and the manufacturing capabilities.  And we are going to use that leverage to essentially disable Chinese manufacturers.
     I view that as a move that does lead to fragmentation, a kind of sovereignist fragmentation which is based either on some kind of national security or military competition, but it has nothing to do with trade.
     We are hurting ourselves, the US leads the world in chip technology.  We are doing nothing but hurting our market share and our sales and our exports by this chip war.  So the only goal must be to somehow cripple the Chinese manufacturers.  But of course, the long-term result of that is simply forcing them to develop their own cables, which instead of buying them from us.  I'm not sure I get it.  Charles?
     >> CHARLES MOK:  Yes.  I want to follow on on that point that you just raised, Milton.  To be honest I'm not a chip person.  I don't really know that industry as well as I would probably for telecom and software and so on.
     But we do see a lot of commentary here in Asia, in Hong Kong and China that this chip war is actually helping China.  It helps them to expedite their internal development of these standards or technologies that they are way behind the US.  But now in areas such as the basic technology to the supply chain they are convinced that they can no longer rely on foreign, especially probably US suppliers.
     So whether or not they can accomplish it in a short period of time or even in the longer period of time, that I don't know.  I don't think anybody knows.  But there is, of course, one school of thought that would say that this is actually helping them.
     Then again I have to say what is the alternative?  How do you deal with these suppliers that the US would consider to be unsafe and so on and you continue to sell them chips.  What are the alternatives from the American point of view?  I don't know.  But there is a possibility of a actually helping our competitor in that sense ultimately.  But yeah.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  I would say the alternative is that you sell them the chips.  You continue the interdependence of the Chinese and American economies and I mean -- 
      >> CHARLES MOK:  But you can sell them the chip, but they will continue to make the equipment and this equipment has other features such as surveillance and so on.  How do you balance that?
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Well, surveillance is a social phenomenon and legal and political phenomenon.  You are not going to stop surveillance by denying any vendor chips, right?  And the people who buy and make European equipment will be creating surveillance capabilities as well.  I don't think I need to remind anyone that the US is kind of the world champion when it comes to Internet surveillance.  Europeans have some problems with that, which is leading to some barriers to data flow between the US and Europe as well as problems between the US and China.
     So the idea that if somebody somewhere is going to make a piece of equipment that enables surveillance is true, but it is not something that is going to stop with an economic sanction on American chips.  I don't think that is how it works.
     So I don't see a lot of discussion here about the separate technoeconomic infrastructure.  I'm going to go on and now we are going to move to what I hope will be the constructive part of our conversation.  I'm going to actually cycle through all of the Panelists now.
     How do we get the trust needed for China, the US, and Europe to open their digital economies to each other?  Do we have specific practical proposals?  Maybe some first steps?  Maybe some more comprehensive visions of how this could be accomplished?  So let's start and kind of reverse order here.  Let's start with Jyoti and then go to Iginio, Joanna, Peixi, Charles, Feng and Stephen.
     >> JYOTI PANDAY:  Thanks, Milton.  I think we definitely need global rules for data governance.  I think in the absence of some sort of agreed-upon standard between countries and how they are going to treat data, you know, these conflicts will continue to play out.  Tellingly, there doesn't seem to be any sort of movement to create global rules for cross-border data flows.  I think in terms of practical first steps that is something that countries should definitely focus on.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Global rules for data.  Where do they come from?  Who enforces them?  Not to ask too easy a question.
     >> JYOTI PANDAY:  The Indian bureaucracy would probably argue for situating it under the UN or creating some sort of convention for data.  But again we don't know if this is the most multilateral order for Internet Governance is most appropriate way forward.  But certainly the status quo where every country is drafting its own rules and closing off markets because it is not trusting other countries to handle its citizens' data properly can't continue either.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Okay.  I saw somebody in the chat suggested a new data ICANN.  We'll have to take that up later.
     Iginio, let's go to you.  Practical proposals, solve our problems for us.  We are counting on you.
     >> IGINIO GAGLIARDONE:  It is over optimistic and very impractical.
     One suggestion would be to root the debate more radically on user.  I think there is a lot of finger pointing.  And we are like excited about it, but at the end of the day if we root, if we ask whether or not, no matter who is doing it, the users is more surveilled, its liberties are more constrained and we protect the users, things will happen from the users upwards rather than impinging, imposing restriction or standards or one or the other.
     For example, I am going to go back to the case of Ethiopia.  There was a lot of anxiety because of China coming to Ethiopia and so forth.  Because of China Ethiopia is doing this and that.  But it is such a complex landscape.  Because of this relation, we know now it was the Americans that trained Ethiopian spies in the digital surveillance.  It was Europeans that sold technologies for surveillance to the Ethiopia Indian government and the Chinese built the infrastructure.
     You're trained by the Americans on equipment made by the Europeans to send the information to Chinese.
     The Europeans are not fixing to their own standards and the Chinese are doing their thing.  So let's consider the user as the starting point and bring the development from that point onward.  And I think not everything is -- hopefully something will fall in line.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  It resonates with an idea I was going to propose.  If we talk about sovereignty in cyberspace, it would be popular sovereignty in cyber state which is Eurocentric.  Joanna?
     >> JOANNA KULESZA:  Power to the people, that's the only way to do it.  If I was to look for a standard for data, again trying to -- I'm wearing my European hat here.  I would say we have the GDPR which seems to reflect the consensus we have around privacy and personal data.  The spillover effect is evident.  But then again as an academic I am aware that it is not the perfect solution.  There are serious concerns.  We have them echo in this discussion here as well.
     If I can give examples coming from Europe, we do have around an IS Director framework.  We are providing guidelines on 5G.  GDPR is another standard we are using.  It is the way that data is being processed and saved.  I believe that there are international laws standards we could fall back on.  That would be the thematic a propose.
     But if I was to give a very pragmatic reply and I am a pragmatic person myself I would say that we would indeed kneeled more transparency and I applaud the discussion that is going on here in the chat.  What about the IGF picking up that job and trying to build global consensus around how we perceive data, whether it is personal or nonpersonal and where do we draw the line and what can be those standards for trust?
     The European experience is with co-regulation.  Not so much the top down but rather working together with different stakeholders, which goes in mind with the idea of multi-stakeholder governance.
     I would say it is more transparency that will hopefully lead us to practical, tangible solutions.  Thank you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Let's go on to Charles.
     You're muted, Charles.
     >> CHARLES MOK:  Yes.  So setting global rules is a good idea, but it might be difficult especially in an environment when governments are actually pulling themselves farther and farther apart.  It is difficult enough for them to get them to sit at the same table and especially with so much talk about cyber sovereignty.  That means that it is going to be localized.  In the short-term we might be moving a different direction.
     I would want to offer -- actually, I like the idea of user, people's sovereignty very much.  I would add that perspective about using technology to solve these problems, some of these problems as well, these issues as well.
     Okay, it is a great idea for people, users to hold on to their own data and their own identity and their sovereignty and so on.  How do you do it?  In fact, there might be emerging standards in different areas using blockchain, cryptography and so on to do some of those things, like sovereign identity and so on that people are starting to talk about.
     I would probably look also, in addition to what has been mentioned, also possibly using technology to emerging technology to solve some of these problems, to really put the control back in the hands of the users themselves, from data to the identity to and so on.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Very good.  Peixi Xu, a lot of what we have heard is very global, user powers and global rules.  Do you have anything specific to say about what China can do to help solve this problem?
     >> PEIXI XU:  Thank you, Milton.  In terms of the global roles, I think we indeed have a very practical and specific rules already existing.  For example, Joanna mentioned the Paris Accord which has how many points?  Nine points?  And also the global commission of stability of cyberspace has this eight points ready.  About cyber norms.  And also China has also proposed something very specific that my colleague has mentioned.  It is the global initiative on data security.  It is very expect, by the way.  It is not abstract.
     And in addition to that, the US has a new President.  I think there might be a very good basis for, to find some coexisting or overlapping points in terms of cyber norms.
     However, I also, I think it is more important to think about the Internet Governance, global Internet Governance from a world view perspective.  It is important to avoid or reject this kind of really good guy versus bad guy narrative.  The good versus the evil narrative.  I think that is not very constructive.  Whatever the situation or the policy is, the Chinese students are visiting websites in the United States and in Europe.  And the American students don't visit the website in China or in Africa or in Vietnam.  That is a kind of structural problem.  It is not a kind of very much a policy.  Situation.
     I would also emphasize, to summarize what you have said in the background document a little bit, I think it is important to have a kind of initiative to deemphasize technical issues so the governments reduce the ideological kind of supply in this method.  So this is basically what I think, Milton.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Can you give me a specific example of how we would take one of those steps?  Reducing the ideological, as a very practical step?  What would Stephen do or what would Guo do tomorrow?
     >> PEIXI XU:  For example, the paradox about the chip dispute is completely unnecessary and somehow outdated way of dealing with these challenges.  It is not good for the US, not good for China and not good for the world.
     So this is something that should be given up tomorrow specifically.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  That is very specific, very good.
     Guo Feng, your turn.
     >> FENG GUO:  Thank you very much.  For this specific question, my response would be just some initial thoughts.
     My response would be that first perhaps conducting dialogue between each other or among different stakeholders.  And try to understand different positions of each other and be ready to compromise.  Perhaps then take a different position and then take action.
     Perhaps this is the methodology to cooperate.  When we have different views to face a specific issue.
     So with regard to the specific scenario, among China, US, Europe.  So my suggestion would be to host for the three parties to discuss the digital completed issues.  Perhaps we can have, develop a track for governments and also develop a track for think tank and industry.  Perhaps IGF would serve as a good occasion.  Thank you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  I missed a little bit of what you said about the track.  Talking about tracks for doing what?  For discussing or negotiating?
     >> FENG GUO:  Yes, track for discussion, perhaps we can have discussion among or between governments.  The discussion, that is for the government people and another track for think tank and a third track for the industry.  Leaders of industry.  So this is my suggestion.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Suppose it is Stephen in the next segment totally agrees with Peixi Xu that we should call off the chip war, what would China offer in return?  What kind of concession or step would China make that would give incentive for them to do that?
     >> FENG GUO:  I would anticipate that China company would buy a lot of chips in the future.
     (Laughter.)
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Okay.  Nothing related to opening the market for information?
     >> FENG GUO:  At this moment I don't have a specific comment regarding this issue.  But my hope is that I want to see a more open market in China.  Much more free flow of information within China and from China, within China and outside China.  Within China and outside China.
     This is my personal hope.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Good, okay.  Stephen?
     >> STEPHEN ANDERSON:  I would like to begin by complimenting my Chinese colleague.  They taught us in young diplomat school never to answer hypotheticals.  So I see that I got the exact same training.
     To respond to your question, so I grew up a convinced Trans-Atlanticist.  I believe that when the United States and Europe work together to face global challenges, that is when we work at our best.  The first issue that I actually had to deal with, however, as a Trans-Atlanticist was banana wars back in the 1990s.  For those of you who aren't familiar with that, that was actually a very heated trade dispute between the United States and Europe.  And from the expressions I see on the Panelists' faces, yes, it was absolutely bananas that the Europe and the United States would have a serious conflict over what was a minor irritant.
     What I would say as the first step, what the United States needs to do is we have irritants right now.  That is what I would call them with Europe in the digital space.  Some of those irritants are very expensive for American companies.  And we are more than a little bit upset by them.  But what we need to do is we need to work with Europe and other like-minded nations, including countries like India, I think, a lot of other countries in the IndoPacific region and come together to strike the proper balance between data privacy, national security and economic growth.
     And have that balance be struck within the context of the values that I described at the beginning of my presentation today.  From that basis I think that we can work outwards with very concrete proposals.
     Completely consistent with the multi-stakeholder model, completely consistent with the idea of governance of the Internet that leads to an open, interoperable reliable and secure Internet.  Thank you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  All right!  So I am now going to go fishing for voluntary commitments.  I think it is only fair that I start making a voluntary commitment.  I am voluntarily committing to continue to harass everybody on this panel about addressing this problem.  And I think that I will make a voluntary commitment, provided I get the approval from Peixi Xu and Guo Feng to hold educational sessions on multi-stakeholder governance directed towards a Chinese audience.  I think I need to work on my Chinese language skills to pull that off accurately, but I think we can do some translation.
     And are there any other sorts of commitments any of us would like to propose at this time to make the United Nations happy?
     (Pause.)
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  Joanna?
     >> JOANNA KULESZA:  Yes.  I would like to emphasize the opportunity to advance that end user sovereignty focus within ICANN on behalf of the end user community.  I think that is something we can definitely pick up so we can have a discussion focused on the Internet users.  That is something that can be relatively easily done.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  You would do this discussion within the framework of ICANN meetings?
     >> JOANNA KULESZA:  At large community, I certainly would be happy to.  Reiterate this would be helpful.  With your kind participation.  Those have proven exciting and at the same time informative in trying to identify what the end user interest is.  I'm certain that there is room for that geo political department.  We have host the events before and that's something that we can look into again.  I'm not certain if that is something that they are excited about but I will take it upon myself to have that organised.  Will that help?
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  That's a voluntary commitment.  Iginio had his hand up and then he disappeared.  I don't know if he is still here.  If he is, I will turn over the microphone to him.
     (Pause.)
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  He seems to have disappeared.
     >> PEIXI XU:  Milton, this is not meant to make the United Nations happy but it is some kind of an observation.  I think this High Level Panel on the Digital Economy somehow was led by the Secretary General and there is this notion about digital interdependence.  That might be very helpful for a kind of concept to summarize a little bit.  So instead of digital divisions, we are promoting, the UN is promoting digital interdependence.  It is a difference from coexistence.  It is somehow interdependency.  That might be good to build peace in cyberspace.
     Back to you.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  All right.  I think our time is up.  It is 10:40.  I really appreciate the presence of the government people here who are putting themselves on the line a bit more than the rest of us.  So particularly Stephen, since we have a new administration and presumably he has no idea what the new policy is going to be.  Although I'm sure there will be some continuity.
     And Guo Feng, thank you very much.  You made it clear you don't speak for the Chinese government but you, you know, do represent the Chinese perspective within the Ministry of IT.
     And Charles Mok, again the status of Hong Kong is very risky and shaky right now.  I appreciate you being willing to come here and speak out and not worry about getting arrested for it or anything like that.
     And I think we all have to -- we have to focus more on concrete steps that could be taken.  Obviously this is a very deep division and it is affecting the rest of the world.  I was impressed by the way it plays out in Africa as described by Iginio in which he is going like:  Let's look at what is happening on the ground.  Let's look at how the technology actually gets implemented.  In some ways it looks like some of these global south countries are actually benefiting from the competing systems here.  Hopefully we can keep it at peaceful competition and go forward with a unified Internet in which we do have lots of different states, lots of different users exerting their own autonomy, their own freedom over what they do online.
     With that, would you like any last words, Peixi Xu?
     >> PEIXI XU:  No, Milton.  Thank you so much for putting us together and actually we have some old friends, and some new friends.  There are lots of very good insights.  I am watching this chat and trying to also find some insights in these questions.  Thank you for the kind of brilliant organisation of this workshop.
     >> MILTON MUELLER:  All right.  Good night or good day all.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-8-ws129-the-revolution-wont-be-televised-but-social-mediatised-raw^^

>> SABRINA VORBAU: Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to this IGF workshop, titled, The Revolution Won't Be Televised but Social Mediatised.  Thank you for joining.  My name is Sabrina Vorbau, a project manager at European Schoolnet in Brussels.  European Schoolnet coordinates the Insafe network of European Safe for Internet Centre, who is also the host of today's workshop.  I will be moderating today's session together with my colleague, Niels Van Paemel.  I hope we catched your attention with this very short video clip that we just played now and you surely have understood that the lyrics of this song are somehow connected with today's workshop title.  And I'm handing over to Neils now who will be setting the scene and telling us a bit more about today's theme and the connection between the video and today's discussion.  Over to you.
>> NIELS VAN PAEMEL: Hello.  Can you hear me well?  So good afternoon from Belgium.  The revolution will not be televised, is a poem and a song made in 1969.  The song's title was originally a popular slogan among the 1960s black power movement in the United States.  The poem offered a pointist critique of the relationship between the media and the reality of change and revolution taking place in the streets and on the campuses in America.
And I hear you think out loud, the 60s.  That's a long time ago.  Well, it actually still feels more than relevant today.  Consider the influence of television.  Even in digital age.  Just think about last week.  And consider the power that networks like fox and CNN continue to read over the nebulous thing, called public opinion.  Even on social media, the same divide seems to be reflected in the same way.
Since televised media has almost everywhere been into the hands of the people in power and not necessarily of those who transferect.  The big question of today is, is it different now?  Did everything change with the rise of social media?  Or are people still living in bubbles, maybe even without knowing so?  With today's session we will discuss a very popular and timely issue, namely the power of social media.  We'll talk about the way individual users or groups use social media platforms to influence and shape the public opinion of users and their followers.
The session will offer an interesting discussion between different stakeholders and experts in the fields ranging from Facebook representatives to children's rights advocates.  Topical and interactive and revolutionary.  Over to you, Sabrina.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you for setting the scene and I'm very delighted to welcome a diverse Panel of experts with us today and I thank everybody for accepting our invitation to join this revolutionary discussion.  I welcome -- advocates for children's rights in the digital world and Project Manager at the digital opportunities foundations also the Chairwoman of the board.  Jutta is also a member of several steering groups and advisory boards of the European and International level.  She works also in close elaboration with the Council of Europe, the European Commission, IGF MEK and UNESCO.  Welcome and thank you very much for joining us today.  I also welcome Magdelena Duszyñska, a psychologist and trainer by passion and profession.  She is President of a foundation in Poland and on a daily basis she runs her own training company and corporates closely with local authorities on projects related to cyberbullying and new technologies.  Thank you very much, Magdelena and welcome.  I also welcome Anastasiya Dzyakava who was appointed as advisor on on line safety at the Office of the Vice Prime Minister at the Ministry of Digital Transformation in the Ukraine.  She took a leading role in the development of the National Strategy on Child Protection in the Digital Environment 2020-2026.  She also closely collaborates with relevant NGOs and industry Partners in the field at national and International levels.  Welcome Anastasiya.  Thank you very much for joining us.  Also warm welcome to David Miles the Head of Safety at Facebook for Europe Middle East and Africa.  He has more than 20 years of executed management experience within technology, regulatory and charitable work including experiences at IBM, Compaq and the British Board of the Classification.  David is also former member of the Expert Panel for UNICEF Global Fund to End Violence Against Children and worked as part of the We Protect Global Alliance and the Child Dignity Alliance.  He is also a former member of the UK Council for Child Internet Safety.  Welcome, David.  And last but surely not least, Ricardo Campos Director of Legal Grounds for Privacy Design in San Paulo, Brazil and Chair of Public Law, Legal Theory and Media at University of Frankfurt in Germany.  Welcome Ricardo.  Thank you to all of our experts for joining us today and we are very thrilled to have you with us.
Before we kick off today's discussion, I'm also very excited to welcome two of our Internet for Kids Youth Ambassadors, Kathrin from Germany and João from Portugal, extremely active within the Youth IGF.  I'm sure you have seen them in previous sessions already.
The next part of this workshop will be mod rated by Kathrin and João.  We have prepared some interactive opportunities for our audience today to join the Panel Discussions with our experts right from the beginning.  As is the tradition for the IGF.
As we are talking and we mentioned already about the role of social media today, it is important and the power to influence our opinion or possible our decision as we are in a revolution, we are also letting young people take the floor because we find it extremely important to involve children and young people into the discussion as they have been growing up with technology and unfortunately, also very often exposed to the technology.
In addition to these interactive opportunities that everyone will receive throughout the discussion, we also encourage our audience to post your comments and questions throughout the workshop in the chat.  Neils and myself will be monitoring and there will be time towards the end of the workshop to flag your comments and questions to the expert Panel.
Without adieu I'm handing over to Kathrin and Joao
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: So happy to be here.  Just a short introduction on how the next minutes will go.  So we want to show you some pictures because we decided that we want to talk with you in the language that young people are using, which is basically pictures and peoples and we want to show you some of them.  Also our Panelists haven't seen them in case you wondered.  And we prepared some questions as Sabrina said, for all of you and we would be really happy for you to participate and also we have some questions for our Panel.  We want some chart answers and I'm looking forward to it and I think we can get started with the presentation of the pictures.  And the first pop question.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: I'm from Portugal and will be co-moderating with Kathrin.  As Kathrin said, we will try to change a little bit the paradigm of both how we discuss this topic but also a little bit influencing the way we are doing discussions and debates at the broader level.  So feel free to take some ideas from what we are doing.
I guess we'll start with the first picture.  And the first question.  We want to show you some briefly this example.  Sabrina, I don't know if you can bring it up?
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: Yes, please put up the poll for the first picture.  But maybe we just wait a second until you can see the picture because only then the question is making sense, probably.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Can you see it?
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: Yes, we can.  Thank you.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: So basically on this first picture what we want to discuss here is the idea that nowadays we are seeing these movements and trying to stay in touch with these ideas through social media.  First question for you to think and look about it is just, order by ascending responsibility.  What you're seeing here.  So what you can see is, someone that was on the street and was just getting robbed and ended up in the death of a woman.  You also see on this building, the idea of people retweeting and reposting things about it but perhaps not doing what should be doing.  Briefly, you could vote for it and we would like to see the results.  The idea is to have a little bit of a conversation now and jump to the question.  We'll be specifically asking for input from Ricardo and Magdelena about what they saw.  So social media is definitely an amazing space for spreading the word and calling to action on society issues.  But how far are we from the connection between this virtual activism and, which is definitely enhanced by our comfort behind the screen, and always this changing our behavior.
The question is, to what extent can we support or say that Internet and social media is supporting or hindering actionism in the off-line reality?
>> MAGDELENA DUSZYÑSKA: I'll start.  The first thing that popped in my mind when I was looking that the picture was a bystander effect.  And you used that bystander in the poll, right?  I don't know -- you all know what the bystander effect is, actually.  So I will just explain shortly.  So when there are a lot of people present and it's emergency situation and like then the more people are actually present at the scene, the less likely somebody will try to help.  So I can see all the bystanders in the windows and they actually are doing something, right?  They are posting, reposting, sharing, but actually doing nothing.  So when we connect the bystander effect with the social media, then we can see that there is really bad influence on the bystander effect.
I can remind myself a situation in Poland which happened recently.  Are 3 or 4 girls had a really huge fight outside of the school and they weren't alone there.  There was quite a big crowd around them but no one helped them.  No one stopped the fight.  No one intervened.  And why it was happening?  Why no one did nothing?  So then the question maybe bystander effect explain.  But actually we need to think about young people are more posting something in the Internet and less likely doing something actual.  So I'm thinking about maybe need for approval, which can be hiding behind that not doing anything.  And when I talk with my kids on the lessons and the workshops I'm doing, they are talking about the click biting.  What is the most click biting thing?  I think it's violence, like sexual content, and something outrageous they are witnessing.  So probably it can be bad.
And the other thing I'm just thinking about, it's like actual events that are happening in Poland, because I'm from Poland, so I'm just saying that vividly.  I don't know if you all know that we have like women's strikes now in Poland, and we are like truly fighting for our right to choose about terminating pregnancy.  I'm not going to talk about the abortion right now but it's a really big issue now here in Poland.  It was a along for a long time -- it was allowed for a long time and now it was banned and so a lot of people went outside to the streets protesting.  And there was a that comes with it and it is #women hell, written in Polish.  Last week there was like 70 million views on tick tock on that.  So it's a quite bic amount.  The same thing happened on Facebook because all celebrities and all influencers were using the same #.  And because of them, there was in the culminating moment about 100,000 people on the street in Warsaw, in the Capital City of Poland.  And we have a pandemic time, right?  So people are afraid of crowds and now they are on the streets and all because of the #.
So I can see like two sides of it.  Like plus and minus.  I have another bad thing with the hashtags.  We have like this issue of celebrities and influencers who are using these hashtags but sending something outside of the idea, right?  Not only the idea of women hell and for the strikes but actually we have these people who are trying to promote themselves because of it.  So we have hashtags for calling for action, calling for movement, and now we are going further and we are sending something outside of the idea, doing something commercially.
So I don't know is it ethical for me or not?  Thank you.
>> RICARDO CAMPOS: Thank you.  So I'd like to thank to Sabrina and João Pedro Martins for the invitation to participate another year in the IGF with safer Internet.  It's a pleasure to me.
Just to make a remark, I'm not the Chair of EA Frankfurt of Public Law but I'm assistant, a kind of lecture in the English system, the educational system.
It was interesting in both in the first picture is about the change in roles of the communication in the society.  So we have maybe for 20 years ago the mass media in the middle of the communication in the society and now we have much more of the social media.  So taking this place of the mass communication media.
Nicholas, a famous sociologist from Germany wrote a book on the reality of the mass media, and the first phrase of this book, the -- the book was published at the beginning of the 90s, I think 93.  And the first phrase, he begins his book with this phrase, "All we know about the world and about the society we know through the mass media."
And we could, today, rewrite this sentence and say, all we know about the world and about the society we know through social media.  And that is about our Panel today.  When we talk about the revolution, we are not taking place anymore being filmed and communicated through the television as a mass media, but through social media.  We are talking about this changing roles in the society.
And I would like to say some sentences on the picture.  I think the picture shows both the limits of the on-line communication.  I think that's the point.  So we have a kind of -- we are taught in last 10 years that off-line world would be great to the on-line world.  So all of our relationships, our bank, our education was degrading to the on-line world and we talked about the off-line and on-line world not existing anymore.  And I think now, about all we talk about social movements, we are seeing that also the off-line world is too important for bringing social movements into same.  I think the picture shows exactly the limits of thinking of the world as only an on-line world.  That will be my point on the picture.
>> MAGDELENA DUSZYÑSKA: Can I add something?  Because the first sentence in the book you said, Ricardo, is actually relates to this situation here in Poland because like people are really recording the strikes and the protests and they are sharing that on the Internet, and actually Public Television isn't doing that.  So it is really all we know through social media and it's helping us.
I'm wondering if we are going to discuss about also basketball on social media, right -- babble -- all we see is the only truth.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Let's hope to have images for everyone.  Do you want to add something?  So that is going to be really quick so we can move to the next one.
>> JUTTA CROLL: I want to say I don't think it's social media as a replacement for activism but a compliment to activism.  So people act in social media and they compliment their activism in real life with social media.  So if I come back to that image, I would say I'm pretty sure that some of the people would have left the house and gone out to help the person.  But also they would have taken a video and spread the message of what had happened in their street and what they have faced and so they would also plea for the people to also react to such a situation.  So it's complementary to each other.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Okay.  So next going further in our discussion, I'll share with you again my screen.  And we have another one.  Kathrin?
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: Just to be clear on what happened with the questions, it seems that you get all the questions at one time, which of course doesn't make so much sense because we want to answer the question which is with the picture.  So if we pull up the next question, please just answer the question 2 and not the others so we can get your opinion.  And if this is working, okay, if not, we will kindly ask you to put all your opinions about that into the chat.
So what you see is a famous picture and maybe you haven't seen it from other famous people who are doing this action a year ago or something.  And we were thinking that maybe behind this there is a bigger or more serious problem because at first this is different on line personas.  But what comes with that is that we have the necessity or feel the necessity of maintaining different personas on different social media platforms and because we feel that necessity, we may be at best much, much time in our digital selves, which we want to promote.  And I would really like to have a comment on that from Anastasia and Magdelena.
>> Thank you very much for inviting me for this event.  It's a pleasure for me to take a part.  And coming back to this picture, I think it's really important to add tick tock to this picture because linked in is early for children to use and Facebook sometimes -- I'm sorry it's dated but not for children.  Mostly used by adults in Ukraine it's really popular as well.  For example, everybody should have dignity in Ukraine started from Facebook not from Twitter.  As in a lot of countries, Twitter is political but for Ukraine it's Facebook.  So coming back to this picture, I think you expect from my side comment according to children and I think it will be happy to join and discuss situation for the last 12 year I live in Ukraine but originally I'm from Belarus and in August, we hold really big initiative for Belarus watch to support protest in Belarus.  So it will be really interesting to discuss as well and telegram involvement in these issues.
But coming back to this picture, I think it's really interesting how different we look in different social networks and how children has to present themselves differently in different networks, for example in tick tock and Instagram as well, but for me, it's maybe even more not according to different social networks but difference in off-line life and on-line reality.  And we really talk with children how they appreciate and evaluate quantity of likes they receive from social networks and I just finished to write my first book for parents about the children on-line safety and how the range of Internet is with children and I ask them, is it important for them to know how many likes they received?  And most of them told yes, it's real important.  And when I ask, okay, when do you feel okay?  What quantity of likes?  And some children told me when I receive 100 -- 150 likes, it's okay.  But if less, I'm really upset.  So it was really interesting experiment that Facebook hold in Australia when they don't show quantity of likes and children and parents can only see other liked photos.  I think it's a good idea.
And one more point, adding fortress when children doesn't force the real photos so they add their face or clothes or anything around them.  And I always ask them, why do you do this?  They told because all of our friends do this first of all, and second because I know in what way my photos has to look like so I will receive more likes.
And one more point maybe the last one.  It's fear of missing out or our understanding that maybe some people have better lives than I have.  Then because children can see on social networks only the realities that other people would like to show.  And it's no question to social network, it's question to users what we show on social networks and maybe it's a question as well to adults and communication with children that usually it's like not maybe bab nel a way we usually discuss but babble of the children see and sometimes after users in social networks, they really feel upset because they think all these people on essential networks really only have this kind of brilliant life.  But all of us, they have really bad days.  But usually people don't show this.
So this case is when bloggers shows their reality and tell them, okay, can you see this photo where I'm really smiling?  And now I show you what I really day had in this day.  So it's like showing like on line on my view and reality and identity and off-line reality.  And show children that it's not like this life, it's only part of my life you see.  I think it's really important because it also influences children self-esteem and their friendships.  So I think it's really valuable.  So thank you David and Facebook and Instagram for this experiment with these likes.  I think it's really brilliant idea and children really appreciate this.  Thank you.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Just a note from the youth.  The question we put up was tricky because on line personality disorder could be a thing when we have several profiles on the same network, which I know that by some Terms and Conditions it's not allowed but it's what we are seeing children doing just to filter what they share with the audience they have.  I don't know if that helps to the conversation but let's see.
>> MAGDELENA DUSZYÑSKA: Thank you.  So, I will start with the question, I think, because when we see like Oprah profiles, the first question comes my mind is like what is the need behind this profile?  This profile, these networks just they are on the Internet for a reason.  They were made up for a reason.  So when we are up loading our pictures on tinder, what is the need for it?  Maybe it's the need for love.  Maybe it's a need for closeness, and maybe it's a need for feeding our ego.  And the same thing with the Instagram.  Maybe the need for acceptance and for Facebook maybe the need for affiliation so there are different needs so maybe that's why we need different profiles for fulfilling our needs, probably.
But you were talking for children.  I think about the youth because with teenagers and I'm talking mostly, so they are doing a lot of comparisons and they compare themselves.  Probably, that is true, they compare themselves to reality world and what they can see in Instagram but actually when I think about myself, I compare to myself too when I was there.  I compare myself to schoolmates, I compared myself with my backyard and when on social media there are new backyards right now right?  Each social media is a new backyard and we have a lot of people to compare with.  And we compare a lot.
Let's think about it why we are comparing ourselves.  It's because what was said about the self-esteem, probably.  So when you're in the adolescent age, your self-esteem is a bit lower and you're like looking for yourself.  You are shaping yourself again.  So that's why you need to compare.  But look about that.  We compare ourselves like a whole bucket with all advantages and disadvantages and teenagers know better advantages not disadvantages.  This is a whole bucket of me and then I compare it with a tiny sharing reality from the person looking at the picture.  So it's always a losing game because here we have whole buckets of me and here I can see only just classes of the person I'm comparing with.  So always a moving game, right?
And the second thing I'm thinking about is paradox of choice.  It's like a book was written of the same title.  So when we have a lot of choices, our capability of making decisions is dropping sharply.  So this is a problem for us because when we have a picture and we need to upflood somewhere and we have so many profiles, it's eating our cognitive resources, I think, because we have so many options to where to put these 60s and what to write down -- pictures -- so I think we need our cognitive resources for more important decisions.  So let's be careful of that.  Thank you.
>> DAVID MILES: Thank you for your comments it's really interesting.  This is my fourth IGF.  Very first IGF I attended was in 2009 and then social media was barely discussed.  It's really interesting.  It was just a very periphery issue.  It was predominantly sex-based.  News feed was a completely new idea.  So I think one of the things I would put out there is one of the reasons why Facebook in early stages gained ground was because it really harbored a sense of authentic profile.  If you go back to that era, you have my space and other products and you could have anonymity and false names and so on.  So one of the core principles of connectedness within Facebook is authentic profile.  That's really important.  So that is where the origins come from.
The other thing to say, speaking to the title of this discussion and I'll come to the picture in a moment, social media is not a fixed phenomena.  It's not only a Facebook phenomena.  There are lots of types of social media extending into gaming and other areas.  But just look at how social media is morphed.  We are looking at 4 images of pictures.  Pictures are actually fairly 2015.  We now video, we are now streaming, we are now doing IGF in this format.  10 years ago this would have almost been what we are doing now would have been almost inconceivable.
And the power and connectedness of Facebook is not about just the authentic individual but of groups, of video, of free expression.  And our challenge in terms of our community standards, which is about what we allow and don't allow on the platform, is to get the balance right between Freedom of Expression, privacy and safety.  And then how do you apply those things across multiple cultures?  Because that's the other thing about IGF.  It's a global phenomena and one of the things that is really interesting is, the image you put up there for many young people in Africa, they have feature phones that wouldn't allow them, that don't have the data access to view that kind of content.  So the youth demographic globally is not seeing it in the same way always as we think.  Accessibility and digital literacy is still a problem typically in the global South in these areas.
I think what social media does is drive connectedness, and that's really important.  I think the other thing I would say too is that as social media evolved in terms of functionality, so have the responsibilities on us as a business and technology companies.  And sometimes the decisions we make about community standards or about racial injustice or about the other movements, or issues, are decisions we need to make with other people or ask governments for guidance on.  So we had to form an independent oversight board with 40 members, which came into force.  First case is in October, to look at those borderline issues, those issues which we can't make a decision on as a business.
So I suppose what I'm trying to describe in terms of features and in terms of the evolution of social media is that in that decade I spoke about, how quickly that has evolved.  And if you look at our global user base, which is more than 3 billion people, that is disaggregated across three platforms.  That's Facebook, that's Instagram and WhatsApp.  Those are different communities.  Some are public spaces like Facebook and Instagram.  Some are private spaces like WhatsApp.  And in some countries in the world, if you want Freedom of Expression, the private spaces are probably the only spaces you can have those activities.
And then the final thing I will say in terms of global is that only 13% of our users are from North America.  So we are truly a global technology.  And as a consequence of that, our user community is very large and diverse and it's very complex following these issues.  And I think the final element too, is that young people particularly teens that are on our platform because we have a minimum age of 13, are huge drivers of innovation on the platform in terms of thinking and to look what they do on Instagram, their well-being is very important.  We experimented with the idea of hiding likes and working those kind of things.  We have amazing resources, safety centers, and young people tell us a lot about how we need to evolve our product and they tell us what they want and how they need it and that's why this kind of discussion is important today because often young people are the biggest drivers in terms of innovation and technology.  That the is hugely exciting.  You're seeing that in all sorts of forms in terms of short-form video, music, all those different creative areas and they just happen to come together on social media platforms like Facebook, which is very exciting.
And I just would say finally, those four images are really interesting but they also speak to something that has been happening for many years, young people want to disaggregate their profiles.  They have their profiles for their clubs and for their groups and they want -- if they are 14 or 15, they probably would consider Facebook more of an adult platform than Instagram.  They are making those choices.  The real important thing is we have to provide the tools to make sure that they can make the right choices both in terms of their privacy, their rights and their safety.  And we always have to work really hard on that because just like our business model, it's evolving constantly.  So those will be my observations about the picture and this discussion today.
>> If I may step in with one comment before we go over to that -- JUTTA CROLL: Because I do think it's very important to bear in mind how much children's development can benefit from this somehow playing with different identities and different profiles.  And I do think we have never had before a situation where children could in such an environment try out their identity and even try out an identity with a different gender, for example.  And that is so important in times of their development.  So I do think that is really a sure ride for children in article 6 of the U.N. Convention on the rights of the child that their right to develop should be given.
So I do think there are really good opportunities within social media for the tryout of identities.  Thank you for listening.
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: A really hard comment which was in the chat which was interesting.  We need to think about the question if we have different personas in the off line world and I think our behavior in different social groups, on line and off line, is something which is going well with our next picture as well.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Exactly.  And more than being a space to experiment, there is also the question of how safe or how private or who are we sharing, but the time we spend there.  And this is a very provocative view.  So don't take it too literal.  The idea here is that we are living experiences through this digital platforms and we have influencers, bloggers, very different profiles sharing experiences.  The majority of young people and perhaps the adults right now in this pandemic situation, literally living experiences of others right at their sofas.  And this is a tricky question given this current state that we should stay at home and we should perform social distancing.  But how does this affect us?  Is social life -- young people stop doing things from for themselves and are now just consuming amazing experiences just watching the bright and positive side of things.
I always give this example of taking, for instance, seeing fast forward Lego construction that took me 30 seconds on the video but this is a process of try -- trial and error that is often not showed on what we share.
The other point is of course how we are absorbing the things we are doing on social media and that comes to the norm media situation.  The concept of being behind these different posts, we see the differences between advertising posts and the ones that are organically shared and how can we again bringing up the point from filter bubbles presented before.  How could we envision this moving forward?
This question was a little bit pointed towards the views of David in Utah.  I know there were already very involved in the last picture.  So they can perhaps pick up from where they left because I know definitely there is certain things that can be brought up also to these questions.
>> JUTTA CROLL: I can be very brief on this, I would say.  So of course I don't agree with that.  I wouldn't say -- I would say that especially during the pandemic we have learned how social media are.  We are not living in a time of social distancing but in a time of physical distancing.  And social media have enabled all the social to keep the social context and of course that counts so for young people, even so they can't meet their friends in the playground or wherever or at school; but keeping their contact with people.
And I would also not agree with saying it's not media, because again, I would not say it's replacing classical, traditional media, but it's complementary to traditional media and in some ways it's more prominent.  I would not say also more relevant but more prominent for people on social media.  Some people only use that but other people only use traditional media and I personally prefer to have a mix of both and then I can best fill my own opinion.  Handing over to you David.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: I'm picking up on a comment.  It was totally provocative to hear that social distancing must be the biggest terminology mistake of the pandemic.  And I have to totally agree and perhaps link it to what everything just been said.  Just to poke a little bit more and obviously David will pick up a little from here.  The idea of the social perspective of having 1000 followers.  The idea of having friendship with a new concept, broader concept.  I don't know if that makes it even more provocative of a picture.
>> DAVID MILES: I suppose a few things.  First and foremost, inevitably as adults who are not what we are speaking about in large numbers, often talk about things like excessive screen time and screen addiction and so on.  And if you look at the research and there is amazing research done by David Boyd in the U.S. or a Professor Sonia living ton in the U.K.
All these very interesting experts.  What they say really is it's not the quantity of time, it's the quality of time on what they are doing.  And I think that is really key.  If you are to ask a 7-year-old what they were doing, they would be doing educational things, fun thing and so on.  And there are some prominent literally experts that believe that screens are almost a new form of literacy in their own right and they are pointing to the fact that prior to substantial screen times, it was significant evidence, for example of gender-based level that young males in particular, they grew older and used and wrote less and read less, and actually all of those trends in terms of declining literacy as you get older, have reversed because young men and women are on line conversing, typing, messaging.  They are communicating in a way they never thought was possible before.  So I think we need to look at screen use in a much more holistic way, I think.
I also think when I speak to young people and I speak to a lot of young people all over the world, is that we should give them more credit for what they are doing and trust them that they really do know what they are doing and also that they are realistic about what friendships are.  Their real friendships and so on.  Haiti as very complementary to their peer structure and the way they work.  And I seen a number of examples of how young people use that connectedness, particularly under COVID, to remain close to the people that they love and the people that they are friends with and their schoolmates and their groups and their clubs, and in a COVID world as we are in now, that played a really vital role, particularly for young people's mental health in this kind of situation w that kind of relationship is really important for their development.  So I think the sort of judgment-based approach to things like, likes and fear of missing out can be overplayed at times.
I often talk to young people who are far more relaxed about this.  And I think we just have to take a more balanced perspective and a more evidence-based perspective about what young people want from technology.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Glad we have a picture for that.  I'll try to move it forward and then hand it to Kathrin while I share.
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: Yes, so we have a lot of different themes at today's session because we couldn't decide on what is the most important topic.  So maybe it isn't that of a hard card going to the theme of elections and political candidates.  So, of course this question maybe doesn't concern smaller children but of course young people who are allowed to vote and of course a lot of young people also very young people are political and they see stuff on their different websites what political candidates are sharing with them.
So the question for us kind of goes into two different directions.  The first one would be to Ricardo.  Do we have an obligation to prevent the political candidates are posting misinformation on line?  And also, maybe we should ask a question if media content may be know us better than we know ourselves and maybe they already know who we want to vote and how can we tackle that problem?  And the other side of that question would be to Dave, which is, what is Facebook doing to prevent misinformation by politicians, especially during election campaigns?  I mean, we of course we see Donald Trump as the biggest example, but there are a lot of local politicians in our countries sharing misinformation with the people, and of course they use social media to be close to the voters.  I think it's a great idea but also maybe this is having kind of like a bad side.  And what obligation do we have or maybe you have, to change that?  Or to --
>> RICARDO CAMPOS: Thank you.  That is a really interesting question because also in the political system, they are facing the same problem of this transition from the mass media communication to platform communication.  For example, just to give an example n Brazil, the election law, before the Internet used to regulate -- still today but for 20 years ago -- used to regulate if -- for example, if a certain candidate should appear two minutes or 5 minutes on the television, and for that, for gaining more time, the candidate needs to make collisions with another party and another and so on.  So if you have a great collision, you have more time on television.  If you don't have great coalitions you don't have time on television.
That was interesting because all this law was taught for the Society of Mass communication.  And now we have social media.  So you can not anymore control how a candidate appears on the public sphere.  So now the election law is facing a new challenge, how to regulate who appears and who will not appear and we have and now this is a question for David.  So we have the scandal for the Cambridge Analytica.  And it was on this problem.
Now we are having the election in another field, in another technological feud, and at that time, 2016, was the problem of ad targeting.  Now as I see, I think the problem is now faced by Facebook.  But that time was really the problems or the transformation of the communication in the society from a mass communication society to a platform communication society.
And this for elections it is really dicisive for candidates and also for society.
>> DAVID MILES: Ricardo you make some good points.  I think the first thing to say is that there are elections all around the world.  In fact, there will be 20 in Africa in the next year and the U.S. election as important as it is, it is one of many and since 2016, no question Facebook has learned a lot about that.  But really interesting, if you look at this particular election, this year Facebook helped 4.4 million voters to register ahead of the election.  So actually n some sentences, we have turned the benefits of our technology to help people register to vote.  And in fact, we now have libraries, we label advertising, and we hold people to account based on our community standards.
So, that's an important process we had to go through and we learned a lot from that and conducted our activities well, I think, this time around.  But we see that connectedness is very important.  And people's desire to express their views around all the issues that are around elections, because elections surface a whole range of social issues.  The United States racial injustice and all that emerged from that has been challenging for everybody in the United States.
The groups have formed around that, the discussions that have happened, particularly under COVID where people can't meet, where people can't travel, is part of that process of having a free and fair election.  So, I think that is important and we, as Facebook, we are constantly einvolving.  I'm much more on the safety side than I am on the intellectual integrity side.  But nevertheless, you make very interesting points and I just would make the point that I think it's an interesting election result and one that in our own way, threw voter Registration, we played an important role in.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: That's good.  And jumping to our last image to share with you, we have come up here to discuss with you a little bit what were your perspectives on this very broad topic and the idea was to try to link a little bit with the title for some in the chat debating on the pertinence of the title.
For me it makes sense as I'm seeing the world through the lendses of social media, perhaps through the lenses of tell vision.  Obviously with augmented impacts of dimension that social media have gone.  And there were some reflecting done by or among other youth and this is part of a bigger publication that was done from youth for digital sustainability, a group of youth experts involved in Internet Governance.  And I wanted to get a really brief comment and open this to all the participants a little bit.
Since youth is one out of the three active users of media content platforms, and perhaps David can pick up a little bit as well.
What is your view about the need to ensure there is youth representation in this internal Advisory Board is also -- do you have any other ideas that can contribute to improve the decisions that effect this age group?
>> DAVID MILES: I think you make some great points here.  So the project that we kicked off in 2019 was what we called an age-appropriate design jam.  So we are co-designing a youth guide, which we will publish at the safe Internet Forum with young people.  And we have done a range of workshops with young people around the world to get their input into ideas of things like Terms of Service, the way products work, features and functions.  We found that whole exercise really amazing because young people are on this technology a lot.  And they got very strong views on different things.  So we absorbed that and brought that back inside to something called TTC labs, which is a expert.  And we have written a youth design guide with their input, which we'll publish in two week's time.  That is one indication of just where this is going to go.
I'm absolutely convinced young people can play a central role in the way products and services develop.  They are major consumers of media.  And so we see things like the age-appropriate design jam as one of those ways getting young people's input.  I think the other thing I would say too is that their tastes and interests evolve dramatically.  And one of the things that came across certainly with our co-design work with young people is not to treat young people as just one block.  There are lots of different demographics of young people but also there are lots of different age groups with different developmental needs.  So you have to design products and services for those age groups.  They think will be a trend going forward.  We have launched messenger kids, for pre-teens based on research that we did with young people and pre-teens, about products they want.  And that's been hugely successful outside of Europe.  And I think you'll see that emerging more and more on features that we develop on Instagram, and other products, because young people want those kinds of things depending on the age they are and what is developmentally appropriate.
So I do think that young people are part of that process and I think they will be increasingly so.  Those young people are tomorrow's adults and they will also, as adults, make a significant contribution to the way the Internet develops and I don't think that there will be the same generational gap there has been in the past around that.  So they'll skip forward, I think, much more to what the empowering capabilities are on the Internet that may be previous generations who struggle to get their head around the complexity and fast-moving nature of those kinds of things.
And I think the final thing I would say, lots of other things need to change.  Education needs to change T needs to be much more responsive to the digital world young people are from.  In many schools in Europe, we keep children away from technology neschools.  In fact, that probably needs to be rethought.  So I think these barriers that we have placed based on old ways of working both in terms of education and other things, will probably need to change too.  And I think young people can be part of that.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: So I guess we will be asking for more questions.  Kathrin do you want to jump until a little bit?
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: I see that Anastasia wants to add something.  Please to the whole Panel, give us your thought about that.  Maybe if you also think that something like this is possible and maybe also if it's like a right for young people to participate in that process because like content platforms are working as kind of private legislators on the platforms.  So I think it's so important people who are using it are included in making the terms of it.
>> ANASTASIYA DZYAKAVA: I think it's really important for us to take apart and the develop such tools use and during development national strategy of children alliance safety, we worked closer with U.S. because Ukraine we have National Council of children who take apart in national solution and government position development.  And also I'm Founder of the First in Ukraine, educational project about 6 and women and extortion and sexting.  We work closely with this council.
When we developed a chat board for teens or some lessons, we really usually show them and receive their feedback or when we develop social advertisement and our main audience is teens, we usually consult with them because we understand that we don't know even these children will love.  So they have to consult with them and show them and ask them.
I really like example of U.K. organization child net when they teach children how to teach other children because -- about on line safety of course.  I really think that children, it's more interesting for them to be taught by children, not by adults who they sometimes think that they just don't know how to use WhatsApp or Skype even; especially before a COVID lockdown.  So I think it as well is a good trend to teach children how to teach other children because by this way, other children are more involved and teach children who teach other children and receive more knowledge.  And I think that as well involving children into taking this decisions, we show them that they have this voice and we really listen to them.  And I think businesses can be really useful because if invite children to take a part, first we can make it more safety but if maybe not good for children but it is easier to make how children will use it more.  So it's a question of screen time, of course, but ask children what you like to use.
 
So yes, I think it's really important and during my interview with children, I really often asked what would you change in social networks if you can do so?  And in Ukraine we have a little bit problem with Instagram.  When girls really, pre-teens, girls, 9, 10, 11 girls -- sorry they usually come from Instagram.  But they told me if it would be possible, I would like to do my best for adult men from other countries not to be able to write to me.  So it's really big question in Ukraine with this and communicate a lot with maybe girls, with audience and I think sometimes social networks can do nothing with this.  But it is really important to raise awareness about these issues and talk to the children about communicating with strangers.
And one more point maybe last point about taking children to participate it's when parents overuse technology.  And sometimes children come to me after lessons and say if you can do anything in this on line world, can you please do something with my parents?  And I'm like what would you like me to do?  Could you please stop them from using smartphone as much because they don't spend time with me.  They spend all their time at home with smartphones.  So why the heck they don't spend time with me?  So sometimes it's a question not about children overusing consumption on line time but more parents as well, especially in this lockdown period.  Thank you.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: And quick to Magdelena.
>> MAGDELENA DUSZYÑSKA: Just speaking about the time of initiation of using technology when you're a child, because of the touch screens, we have like really six months of children who are actually seated in front of screen and like forced to watch something.  So the time of initiation is very early.  And because of the touch screen, the tablets and iPads.  And then thinking that we don't teach kids in the kindergartens.  We don't teach kids -- at least in Poland, like really preschoolers what is Internet?  How to do Internet, right?  But kids already know what Internet is because they look at their parents.  They see that their daddys and mummies are doing something, texting or whatever.  So I think that is the time to teach technology should be earlier.  And the second thing, I think that we should teach not only about technology, but about empathy and emotionally intelligence and this is the thing.  And also critical thinking.  Because the fake news they are going to read on the Internet when they older, so these are things we shouldn't forget about.  Thank you.
>> ANASTASIYA DZYAKAVA: Just one sentence about early childhood.  Last month with the fairytale for children about extortion where torture of animals, communicate on zoo book.  And one animal ask another one to send a photo of like animal clothes.  So I think for smaller children, we should be really creative and find some lessons and really creative solutions.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Thank you.  I don't know if anyone else wants to briefly comment on the challenge we raised and offer any other solutions?  If not, I don't know, I haven't seen the signal.  If not, I just want to thank you for first of all taking the challenge to speak with us, to come up with an open mind and see the images for the first time and try to really en gauge on the big picture.  It was really a broad discussion.  So we did not try to focus much on one specific issue because as many of you said, this is a broader discussion.  This is a very pertinent and large debate.  So, of course I have to challenge David to take our challenge of having a seat on the Advisory Board, of course, but also reflect on the other ideas of bringing and where to focus in terms of education, in terms of the skills we want and the age we want them to be learned from youth and children.  From that end, I think that leaves my moderation role that was a little bit too interactive as well.  Kathrin, I don't know if you want to say thanks as well and I will leave it to you.
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: I want a short thank you to our Panelists and also to all of the people who are watching.  I can't see you but I saw a lot of comments in the chat and I think they were really interesting so far.  And if you still want to discuss with us, I don't know, I think we can have a discussion on the topics with the IGF 2020 or something.  We will see that and I'm happy to hear what your questions in the Q.  And A are.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you very much Kathrin and JOAO for preparing this interactive part, which we believe also supported inclusiveness and also gave our participants today the chance to join already the discussion from the beginning of the workshop and as you said, indeed a lot of conversation took place in the chat already.  We do have some time for questions now.  So reminder to everyone who would like to ask a question to our Panelists that you can do this in the Q&A section or you can also simply raise your hand and we will surely be able to unmute you.  I will just start.
One question addressed to David and this is linked to the picture we have seen concerning the elections.  So the question is, Facebook is encouraging people to vote.  Are they encouraging people from all sides of the political spectrum?  Because when you only doing this aimed at one particular side this may negatively effect the elections in order to make sure that this does not happen, isn't it better for Facebook to strictly act against election interference and besides that try to keep out of this debate as much as possible?
>> DAVID MILES: Great question.  Thank you very much.  And again, I must reiterate, I'm not from the electoral side of Facebook.  I do the child safety and other areas.  So all I will say is that the ability for people to register to vote, which is really important.  This year was the highest level of Registration ever in U.S. history.  So I think we played a role in that and that is done through the news feeds without any political alignments.  So I would say that from my perspective, that seemed to be a fairly objective way of ensuring people have the opportunity to have a free and fair vote in what is or was a very challenging election.  And that is probably the main thing I would say.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you very much, David.  There was another question in the Q&A section which is not addressed specifically to one Panelist directly so I'm just voicing into the group.  Which was about raising awareness because we have heard a lot of things that the different experts have been doing but people are asking as an individual adult, for example, what can I do to support this message?  What can I do to raise more awareness and help children to not only be safe on line but also to be aware to develop critical thinking skills and also empathy as we heard before?  Any tips or recommendations from the Panel?
>> DAVID MILES: I would make a comment.  Facebook a technology player, ultimately.  But we rely on the expertise and purpose of lots of amazing NGOss and some of the individuals here have been involved with amazing resources and guidance on line.  To give an indication, we have almost 400 partnerships globally just in this area.  People who specialize in peer-to-peer mentoring in the U.K., programs in Germany which we have seen through click safe and other programs.  So there is a wealth of resources out there for young people.  I think sometimes as a point was made earlier, I think some adults could benefit from the that guidance as well but I think on the whole, there is plenty out there and it's very exciting.  And I think within the IGF context, you see a lot of those NGOshere talking about the amazing resources they developed and the young people they work with.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Anyone else from the Panel?
>> JUTTA CROLL: I have already posted a link to the National Academy of Media and screens in the Netherlands.  And I do think they do a lot of work in this regard.  They have a huge programs also for teaching digital literacy in schools.  So I'm not sure what background tol the question that she says there is barely any attention in education about it to literacy in the Netherlands.  So maybe she can explain a little bit more what against what backdrop she posed that question.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Maybe there is some opportunity we can unmute Daphne to join this conversation?
>> NIELS VAN PAEMEL: And maybe add to that there is always a possibility to contact your local safe centre.  In the Netherlands there is also one.  And they will always ask people who will lobby towards both issues to change things like for example, I live in Belgium.  So it's always good to know where you always have a local safe centre.
>> DAPHNE: Thank you.  Can you hear me?  First of all, thank you for very interesting discussion that has been going on.  It was very interesting.  I have a lot of things to think about.  Where may plan of where I came from is where I'm talking about children living on my street and with my nieces and nephews who go to primary school and started high school.  I just noticed they have such little awareness and when I ask them if they get taught on school about it, they always say, no.  And we just learn it ourselves and we just talk about it with friends and stuff.
But it might be that it is just very limited and it's only through the schools that those children go to that I talk with.  So, that's basically what my question was based on.  But still thank you for sharing the resource.  I'll definitely look into it.
>> JUTTA CROLL: I'm not from the Netherlands so I don't really know about the situation in your country but what I learned from a lot of research is that media literacy training, media literacy teaching takes a lot of different forms.  It's of course not only learning about how to use the technology.  It's also about critical thinking, about ethical thinking, and it comes in very different ways and I do think that all of the people who do digital literacy education do need to be really careful what messages they convey to the children, because many of the messages that we as adults have developed and decided for media literacy training, turned out in the end they are just not comprehensible for the children.  That they have a different way of thinking and sometimes when we think okay, that's very clear and obvious what they should do or shouldn't do, and we try to educate in that way, a lot of these things are missing their target, therefore I do really appreciate approaches where -- I have understood from Anastasia that she is planning for peer education.  I do also think that another way of doing it is let young people participate in the development of such training, of such educational resources, so that they are more addressed to the target group we want to reach.  Thank you.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you very much.  I'm checking with Neils if he has any additional questions as we are coming to the end of our workshop.
>> NIELS VAN PAEMEL: I was getting the chat and I think we have tackled everything.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Okay.  Very good.  As we are coming to the end of our workshop and we have about 5 minutes left, I would like to give the opportunity to our Panelists for our final closing question.  And also looking towards what is next, looking into the future, possibly future IGF discussions.
As we orangey have five minutes left, we have picked a yes and no question to answer.  I think we have understood, based on the discussion, and we also agree that by now the revolution that is started already, that is ongoing, is clearly social media ties but the question to our -- the final question to our Panelists would be if it's also already democ tides.  And starting with Anastasia.  The evolution of social media ties but demockra tides in your opinion?
>> ANASTASIYA DZYAKAVA: I would like to believe so and especially the example of Ukranian relation in dignity and revolutions that happen now in Belarus that all of them started through social network in the Ukraine from Facebook and Belarus and telegram and also actions that we have organized at the support Belarus in August through Facebook thanks to Facebook, we were able to contact people all around the world more than 30 cities all around the world to support this initiative.  So I think that social networks really allow us to involve power of people to send for their rise.  Because no T.V. channels in Belarus show reality what happens here.  And telegram and social networks only opportunity to receive this information.  And according to telegram, in Belarus, you can receive for fire or throw them in jail, if on your phone you have telegram.  So it's forbidden channel.  I think social networks and social like communication messengers the only opportunity for revolution in some countries to stand for their rights and to at least have a chance to bid Democratic.  Of course Belarus is not Democratic country for last 5-6 years.  So I think it's opportunity to become Democratic country thanks to social interests.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you.  Magdelena?
>> MAGDELENA DUSZYÑSKA: I was listening to Anastasia and I agree.  And I'm thinking about Poland right now.  We have some cases when students are actually -- they are forbidden to join the sacrament of confirmation because they use hashtags, or teachers it's like they are investigated because of they are having like layouts on the picture of profiles on Facebook with the lightning sign, which is a symbol of women's strikes now.  So I'm totally agree with Anastasia.  I see that in Poland and I really believe it will be democratized also.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you.  Ricardo?  Is the revolution democratized?
>> RICARDO CAMPOS: So I think the question is much more complex than one way answer.  And of course, we have had Democratickization of the communication of social media but we have another problem with that.  Also discussing that is the problem of misinformation.  And that will be the negative effect of this complete demockraization of this information because you can not trust anymore an organization.  Because Facebook do not produce a content now.  And in Brazil I'm still working on content moderation, the transferences obligations for the platforms and so on.  And I -- it's really important to focus in this two pair.  So you have Democratization of information and other side we have also another problem that we need to face, otherwise we don't have a public sphere, we don't have discussion, we don't have people informed because democracy pre suppose good information.  Without good information cannot vote.
And now we have new intermediaries and now we are talking about what is the obligations of the new intermediaries.
And I would put focus on this new ways so we don't only one way democracy is democratizing but we also have another path on that that we need to discuss much more than only say democracy for information.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you, Ricardo.  Jutta.
>> JUTTA CROLL: I would say yes but there is still room for improvement and that's all.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you.  And it was great and last but not least, David?
>> DAVID MILES: I think Facebook is about building communities and bringing the world closer together.  I think social media has been revolutionary nethat process globally and there are huge responsibilities that we absolutely understand but as I said earlier on, our technology will evolve to meet those challenges.  It's in our interests to make sure that people see information that is accurate and reflects the decisions they make and give us Freedom of Expression and gives them right to activism and has them and connects them to the ones they love and run businesses and do all the things they need to do.  In other words to be a mirror of the real world we are in.  And I don't doubt the channels of that but given that is only happened in the last decade, we have come a huge distance and I think things like the oversight board and many of the other things we do are indication of the fact that we take those responsibilities very seriously.  And I believe the benefits far outweigh the challenges we sometimes face but we are up to those challenges and we believe that more long term with social media as it sort of evolves and people really embrace it as they do around the world.  It can only be a force for good.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you very much, David.  And to all the other Panelists, I believe this gives us some food for thought and surely it was not just a simple yes or no question.  And I believe has opened a Pandora box of future discussions that we definitely hope to continue at this IGF but also at future IGFs because we do believe that today's workshop also touched up on very important key pillars of the IGF.  We talked about trust.  We talked about inclusion, privacy, identity and last but not least, surely also youth participation.  So big thanks also again for joining us today and to all the key Panelists for taking the time out of your busy aagendas and to the audience and we do hope that today's workshop was interesting and fruitful and you also felt like you were able to participate in a similar way as we would all be together face-to-face in the same room.  Please everyone, stay safe and healthy and we do wish you good continuation of this workshop IGF and very good evening from Brussels and I do hope to see many of you in person very soon.  Thank you very much.  And good evening.  Thank you, everyone.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-8-ws234-security-of-digital-products-industry-and-enhancing-trust^^

 
     >> MODERATOR: Good evening, good morning, good afternoon, traditional greeting on these online meetings.  Welcome to the panel security of digital products the role of digital security in enhancing trust at the IGF sponsored by the Geneva Dialogue.  My name is Vladimir Radunovic and I will be your host today.  The topic is quite high on the agenda.  The relevance of security of digital products and services has been discussed for quite some time.  Most of cyber attacks exploit vulnerabilities in cyber space.  We need more secure digital products and more security environment.  We have heard about reducing vulnerabilities on all levels from diplomats in the UN Group of Governmental Experts and working group and the OECD to the private sector to the regulators and we will have the pleasure to discuss with some of them today.
     One of the main questions today is what can vendors and producers do to enhance the security of digital products and how does that play with the roles the regulators and government and so on.
     Briefly on the Geneva Dialogue that is and anishtives that gathers lead companies around the world to discuss good practices and security by design or secure design of the products.  The partners that contributed to this year's discussion of Bizone and Cisco and Kaspersky and Seimens, UBS and we hope that we will have more companies around the world joining us to extend this circumstance until the future.
     In addition to partners we have a number of observers that contributed to discussions including the cyber security tech accord, the world economic forum, cyber security studies at ETH Zurich and the credit episode student in Geneva.  Aligned with other multi-stakeholder episodishtives and processes such as Paris accord and we are following closely and trying to make links with what is happening in the Group of Governmental Experts, the open end working group, the OECD and many other.  We have published a document for public comments with the key terminology and best practices.  Visit the website to find out more and we will reflect quickly on that later on.  And one last note, after this session there will be a separate Zoom room as a follow-up for coffee for all those that want to learn more about Geneva Dialogue and discuss in more informal setting.  Stay tuned.  We will send you the link at the end of the session.  The outline of the session, this workshop will discuss best practices and examples for creating digital products.  It aims to bring perspectives of private sector, regulators, public authorities, technical community and Civil Society around the world and we expect your Vin puts throughout the session.  We will start with setting the stage about the impact of vulnerable products on international security and then move to turn to discussions on good corporate practices, maybe also bad practices.  That will be interesting to see.  And some of the challenges when it comes to private sector embracing security by design.
     And we will close the discussion with brainstorming on what are the next steps and discussing whether we can develop some sort of a common baseline requirements that would sync all of the different developments around the world.
     The format is roundtable but we have a couple of discussants we invited to set the stage and share a little bit of their own practices that came out through the discussion within the Geneva Dialogue.  I will briefly introduce them.  Great pleasure to have Mr. David Koh with us.  The commissioner of cyber security and chief executive cyber security agency of Singapore.  And we have with us the special Jon Albert Fanzun.  Unfortunately, the only lady today among the discuss 80s but I'm sure there will be more around to contribute, Anastasiya Kazakova, public affairs manager of Kaspersky.  Barrack Otieno is a trustee.  Kenya ICT action network and I hope at some point, I don't know in Nestor has joined.  The global CSO of the group from Argentina.  We also have co-moderator and will follow closely on chat, Marilia Maciel is a digital policy researchers at DiploFoundation.  She will look at discussions in chat and try to interrun me and us and raise your hand and jump in and we have a Rapporteur, Andrijana Gavriolovic.  Be provocative in chat and raise your happened, it is a roundtable so don't be shy.  We were asked by the Internet Governance Forum ask do a group photo.  A family photo.  I also all that want to switch on the camera at least for a brief minute and we will do a family photo.  I guess they also need it for IGF presentations in a way.  Thank you so much.  We will do it like three, two, one and then go ahead with the session.  You can smile.  Plea three, two, one, smile.  Thank you.  Perfect.
     Okay.  I encourage you to keep the cameras on certainly.  But so that we feel maybe more closer.
     Let's run straight to the discussion.  We will start with setting the scene.  And well, trying to understand why the vulnerabilities of the products and the environment impact the international security.  I will start with Mr. David Koh.  David, I guess I mean the Singapore was one of those very active in the field when it comes to looking at how to make products less vulnerable.  You have done a lot on a regional and international policy and some sort of labeling schemes and instructions about security by design, but you are also very active in international discussions and negotiations.  David, I would leave you to maybe set the scene briefly.
     >> DAVID KOH: Thank you very much, Vladimir and the DiploFoundation for inviting me to speak on this very important topic on enhancing what I would call trust or trust in and the security of digital products as well as the importance of industry participation in this endeavor.
     We are all deploying critical technologies more and more.  The fact that because of the pandemic right now we are meeting the IGF not physically but virtually on Zoom.  This just underscores the dependence that we have on digital technologies and the internet and therefore we must cultivate trust so that our citizens, the whole of humanity can reap the benefits from using these technologies.  Trust in my view is even more important in the current context of accelerating digital transformation and intensifying technological come about petition.  With the geopolitical divides leading to potentially bifurcation and standards and maybe between surveillance mys chains trust is the element that will facilitate the intra-operability of networks and technologies.  In my view, cyber security is the root of trust of the digital revolution that is upon us.  I don't mean the technical term root of trust that has a different meaning.  But metaphorically.  Cyber security, such technologies can trust and leverage for social, economic and financial opportunities.  How do we secure the root of trust?  Or more directly, how do we implement cyber security best practices for the digital technologies?
     I think we did do this at three levels.  Like what Vladimir was talking about.  Internationally, regionally and domestically within our own country.
     Firstly at the international level, developingle and maintaining a rules-based multilateral order is the first step to strengthening trust about states to ensure a secure, stable, resilient digital commerce and one that I would add is interoperable.  I believe that the members of the panel will speak more about this.
     Move on to the regional level.  Regional organizations can also help states to build their cyber capacities towards implementing norms of responsible state behavior for example those agreed in the UN at GGE meetings.  We are developing a practical long-term regional cyber security action plan for implementation and this will take into a*&* the national priorities and cyber capabilities of member states.  We have ten states which are different diverse levels of economic technological development.  We figure if we can get an action plan going on with all of the different groups of people it will be probably applicable to many countries around the world.  The cyber security center of excellence as well as the Japan cyber security center capacity building member in Bangkok help states build trust and maybe progress in cyber security building.
     Within our own countries, states must work within industry to strengthen cyber security as its root of trust.  This was relate to how can governments would, with industry to implement robust cyber principles.  For example, like security by tee sign.  In Singapore we launched a safer cyber space master plan to strength among businesses communities and small and medium businesses and organizations.
     When Singapore first started in cyber security the first focus was on CII, essential services.  We have the cyber security act and now moved beyond that and the next step is a broader cyber security master plan.  This master plan comprises three strategic trusts.  Firstly, to secure the core digital infrastructure.  Second, to safeguard the cyber space activities.  And third, to empower a cyber satisfactory population because ultimately people are the weakest link.  We want a mind set that cyber security is ultimately a collective responsibility.  All stakeholders, the government, businesses, small and medium enterprises, the community, individuals, everyone has a part to play and everyone needs to play their part well.
     IOT is one area we are particularly concerned about.  Ten deVises per human.  Five times more than what we saw in 2015.  This significantly increases the attack surface.  And we need to better secure these devices to protect users.
     In Singapore, we published a security by design guideline to support the industry, adopt best practices and incorporate security into the product development life cycles.  We also launched as what Vladimir noted a cyber security labeling scheme to raise the security levels of Iot devices. this is a simple labeling scheme like the energy efficiency scheme that you have in the EU and in many countries.  Like one tick, two tick, three ticks.  So the consumer can easily see which is the more secure product.
     Through the labeling scheme we hope to encourage device manufacturers to episode corps rate cyber security into their devices.  The things that they make.  The secure by design principle should be incorporated.  We look forward to working with international partners to establish mutual recognition of these labels so that that we can collectively advance security advances of IoT devices around the world.  Thanks very much, Vladimir.
     >> MODERATOR: You are a small state but doing amazing things in the field.  Much that we can learn from the Singapore experience.  You opened a number of good questions and one were discussed already in the chat whether the trust is a root for security or security enables trust.  And what is the relation.  We had quite some discussions in the Geneva Dialogue but what action means trustworthiness.  We will come back to that.
     Then there is a lot that we can discuss about the roles of private sector in the levels that you mentioned.  On the global level with rules based international and capacity building level and national and so son.  I will save that for a couple of minutes after now.
     First I want to hear from Jon Albert Fanzun.  Switzerland is active, no doubt.  What is interesting to me is that you recently got the Swiss foreign digital policy which I hope all countries should have in a way.  How do vulnerabilities and reducing vulnerabilities plays in this foreign policy?  And generally why Switzerland and Geneva Dialogue with pry private sector, it is an interesting mix.
     >> JON ALBERT FANZUN: Thank you, Vladimir.  Good so tee you all here and thank you for episode viting me for this panel.  Good questions and also some answer.
     I mean as David also just made a very important points especially about trust.  I would like to continue the conversation with outlining why we think the greater international engagement and a bit in answer to your question including multi-stakeholder engagement to build peaceful and secure cyber space.  What have what is the situation?  David said some words about it.  We are witnessing some worrying trends.  Geopolitical tensions on the rise and supply changes decoupling from each other.  The technological competition is intensifying.  Be it in the area of 5G or in the field of artificial intelligence.
     And the application of global norms and existing international law to cyber space is still uncertain and partly being contested.  There is a dramatic decline in trust Preen States and other actors and increasing risks in terms of regulation standards.  In our view, these challenges in view of these challenges it is clear that, on the one hand, we have to continue working and clarifying the international rules in cyber space especially in the framework of the UN.  But I think we also have to develop a normative approach.  And the new strategy you mentioned comes in.
     We waited for this panel and we just published it last week.  This is the first strategy in that sense.  It is also part of the there is a foreign policy strategy and then we have an internal part, the international strategy on cyber security and the third element that we would say is the international part of it.  And there are four fields of action that are defined in the strategies.  Digital governance, prosperity and sustainable development, cyber security, and also digital self-determination.
     The strategy also highlights especially the importance of the private actors in enhancing trust and security and encourage us to work with the private sector in addressing current issues in digital governance.  This is also exactly what we are aiming at with the Geneva Dialogue on responsible behavior in cyber space we started in 2018 and we launched now in the second phase in 2020.
     Today, vulnerabilities in digital products are often being exploited by threat acts in cyber space.  Given the geopolitical context that I outlined before, there is no global agreement to date on how vulnerabilities should be reduced.  At the same time, norms of responsible safety behavior developed in the behavior of the framework of the 2015 UN Group of Governmental Experts call upon states to ensure the integrity of the supply chain and to encourage responsible reporting of vulnerabilities, among others.
     This cannot be achieved without involvement of the private sector.  I would say cyber security is not like tennis or golf when you play for yourself.  But this is team sport like soccer or futbol.  In that sense or with this aim, we together with DiploFoundation developed the Geneva Dialogue into process among 15 leading industry players from across the world.  We are happy we are able to present the first outcomes today and I'm looking forward also to our discussion on this project.  Thank you very much, Vladimir.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Jon, for clarifying.  That was the first question what does the government have to do about the discussion of private vector on the best practices on reducing vulnerabilities but actually I think and I saw in the chat also mentioned this importance of collaboration.  But he sort of signaled that the good scams of the incident response cooperation across the world where this might be one interesting parallel.
     Really I see there is a lot happening in the chat so maybe you can summarize and even I don't know, hand the mic to any of those guys and girls that have been very active.
     >> MARILIA MACIEL: Thank you.  It is true we had a lively discussion on the chat.  Search proposed to switch around the terms of the discussion as you mentioned and perhaps trust is the root or anger as proposed by Barrack on cyber security and what are the building blocks of trust if trust is the starting point.  And we were discussing importance of norms that promote collaboration as the starting point of building trust.  And also the importance of perception in this discussion because sometimes we do have good security and data protection policies in place.  However, it is important to convince users that there is -- that products are trustworthy.
     And that that was what we discussed so far.  But the discussion here in the chat has been lively.  I don't know if any of you would like to voice your comments.  Perhaps using the mic.  Ying-shu just added a comment with record to the response of respecting mic.  I leave the microphone if you want.
     >> MODERATOR: Does anyone want to jump in?  Just raise your hand.  You should have that option.  Yes, correct me.  Mees go ahead.
     >> HUMAYRA RABAB: An excellent discussion so far.  I wanted to add in terms of building trust I apologize for the background noise.  In Earls it of building trust I think often what we are facing is innovation is taking place without a lot of collaboration with government from the private sector because then we -- the government loses sight of what type of innovation is taking place.  And frankly, some of these new products can appear quite scary.  We saw with the election in 2016 how Facebook was collecting data.
     And now we want innovation to occur.  You know, we want technology to succeed and provide all of these capabilities to our society but I think there needs to be a bit of balance in terms of working closely together with the government to ensure that we are not producing  a new technology that could potentially be quite scary.  For example, retaining data with new products or ATM information and that sort of approach.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  You raise an interesting zoom out perspective that not and we should discuss with the private sector that the security of digital products should be in place.  But there is more so that the global social responsibility in terms of the products and how they will impact the society in a way.
     So that it shouldn't probably be only let's say the assessment of security levels but also the assessment of how the technology can impact the society.  Quite interesting.  I don't know if any one of the colleagues from the private sector want to jump in.  Just switch on the mic.  David, did you wish to comment?  David?  David, if you wish.
     >> DAVID KOH: Thank you very much, Vladimir.  I thought this was a great conversation and I especially like the comments of the yum lady, sorry irk couldn't catch your name, when she made the comments I thought they were excellent.  I absolutely agree there needs to be a balance of views between government as well as industry.
     And I think that there are competing demands sometimes and we need to be aware of it.  Some of the side comments talk about trust and what are the basis for trust?  First of all, I would say that I'm happy to have start off this conversation.  I was speaking figuratively that cyber security in relation to the digital revolution is the root of trust.  I wasn't speaking about cyber security and trust but this is a great conversation.  I would add one element to some of the things that people talked about in the chat and that that is transparency and openness.  That is a key element of trust in my opinion.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  We can get back again to what are the confidence of trust in a way and that is a very important part.  Search.
     >> SERGE DROZ: Already 15 minutes in and it is super interesting.  I like that.  The role of the different stakeholders it is that we clarify the roles.  I hear the call for information of governments.  I find this is trick DYson because what we are talking about is a very difficult and technologically challenging system to be looking at and no single entity today controls the full technology stack.  So not even the big players control the full stack.
     To coming up is meaningful technical regulations probably is going to be a challenge and probably going to create more damage than it is creating good.
     I think what governments need to do is or should do is that they should create an environment in which collaboration can foster.  For example, security teams  can reach out to each other and address vulnerabilities.  In the past, just yesterday, Microsoft published a patch with 112 security holes that were fixed.  Most of these were not discovered by Microsoft.  They were discovered by other people.  We need to be able to talk to these people.
     Right now we have sanctions that makes it illegal to talk to many so of the mayber technology companies and that is detrimental to trust because we cannot use the products and be sure that all of the security issues are addressed.  That is one through the definition of norms can create an environment where the people that operate the whole infrastructure and that is the tech community can start work together meaningfully.  And I think there is a difference between looking if we want to have a business case or not or a business case at a company like Facebook or Google or who else has versus the underlying security and the underlying infrastructure that actually makes the internet running.  It is often referred to as the public core of the internet.  Think we need to distinguish between these two things and at the end of the day we really need to start talking to each other.
     I mean I think what David mentioned quite directly, trust is not a technical issue, it is a human issue.  We all are humans and we must never forget this especially in the technological environment like the internet.  We need to build up the relationships across the trust gaps.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks.  Yes, go ahead.
     >> JON ALBERT FANZUN: I want to say something about trust.  I fully agree this is not a technical issue.  Just an example from the Swiss perspective.  We have a private application and app for contact tracing.
     Most important part of this application is security and data protection.  There is no possibility to technically identify the users but we had a very -- a lot of discussions about privacy and about trusting this application.  Even and when you compare it with other applications like the data flows and if you have a Facebook account or something else, you see that there is not trust or let's say the other way.
     Even if you think in other context that the governments -- that the government has more trust if they do something.  In that case it was not the case.  We have more or less 2 million people using the app and I think we overcame the trust problem.  Nothing to do with technology, I think the baseline is, of course, it is needed.  But trust is a process, and it is something that you have to build up among experience and explain how you -- how a device is if you canning.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks.  I think we collected already in I will read some of those I wouldn't say definitions but confidence of trust which were mentioned over there that I notice is predictability.  Transparency.  Knowledge, consistency.  Reliability.  Dependability.  And so on.  Marilia Maciel, before I pass the floor to the colleagues from the corporate sector to hear more from them, any summaries from the chat?
     >> MARILIA MACIEL: An interesting side discussion on the need to foster partnerships between governments and the private sector in order to avoid governments from taking advantage of vulnerabilities.  This is a very interesting point and I believe that others will touch upon it later.  But it is just important to remember that there are some groups working on norms that would create a transparent system for governments to vulnerabler inities.  It is important that they have a clear process and that it is disclose our and not stockpiling.  A norm advanced by the cyber commission on the stability of cyber space that launched a report recently and they do have a specific norm on governmental stockpiling of vulnerabilities and a system of transparency and an interesting comment on encryption.  We are talking about security and governments want to have security in cyber space but at the same time have policies that webben encryption.  How do we reconcile the two different policies being developed by governments?
     >> MODERATOR: Nice thoughts.  Let's move now to there was more of a broad discussion on the interplay between the policies and international, national and then the corporate sector roles.  But I would like to focus a little bit more on what the companies themselves can go.  And within the Geneva Dialogue we ended up with as I mentioned a document for comment withcy sort of a result of the brainstorming of the companies involved on what are the main components.  What does it mean, security by design?  Security by default?  Security of the life cycle.  A couple of terminologies or concepts explained there.  We tried to find a common understanding.  Including concepts like vulnerability management, vulnerability handling.  Coordinated vulnerability disclosure versus responsible vulnerability disclosure.  It is quite a mess when it comes to terminology.
     But there were interesting examples shared by the companies on main elements of how they themselves implement security by design and that includes threat modeling and various ways mechanisms to do a threat modeling for an upcoming product and then there is a lot about supply chain security and how do you make sure because we are so interdependent also in the marketplace, how do you make sure that you follow closely on what confidence you integrated and if a vulnerability appears in someone else's product whether that impacts you.
     And then development and deployment and a number of good practices to ensure that developers are trained and responsible coding in a way and other means.  And lastly, vulnerability processes.  Whether from reporting to management to disclosure and so on.  I want to hear from the firstly from the two members of the partners of the Geneva Dialogue any experiences or even on previous discussions.  I will start with Anastasiya Kazakova.
     >> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: Good morning to everyone.  It is a great pleasure to be here.  I would like to highlight one of the three aspects of the Geneva Dialogue that we experienced me and my colleagues while participating in several months of discussions were helpful.  That is true about the definition.
     I think what really the Geneva Dialogue did is build in the community where different companies could talk to each other and found that we may all speak about the same but use different notions and names and vice versa.  Sometimes ma I use the same names but imply different meanings.  It was a really good exercise to try to agree on and reach a consensus of a meeting industry best practices and vulnerability handling was someone of the best aspects and what security by design and security by default means.
     The second aspect that I find important that Geneva Dialogue focuses not only on the vitally discussed security by design and security by default but also on the concept of trustworthiness a relatively new concept which adds to the assessment of the products and Geneva practices and allows us to ask many additional questions about some non-technical aspects.  Institutional and legal aspects.  Whether digital products are trustworthy and allows us to dig a little deeper and found more about the environment where the technology is being produced.
     And it is very great that we could cover these aspects within the discussion.
     And finally, the third aspect I think the greatest achievement of the Geneva Dialogue and organizers is that we try to episode corps rate and the organizers tried to incorporate many other industry best practices and we tried to not to duplicate what has been said.  But on the country to try to deliver and that is complement in more detailed manner of what are the principles for resilience and security of digital products?
     And I think it was really, really good exercise, first of all, again for the community, for companies to understand that they are there are actually some differences between us, too.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  One of my take aways on one hand there is quite some different perspectives on approaches.  But on the other hand some of the lead companies do honor quite much when it comes to try secure devices.  I notice your hand, I will get back to you, soon.  Netor is again, is another partner.  I know that you are working a lot on digital identity and the supply chain is one of the important aspects.  I wonder when whether you want to comment on the supply chain aspects and how you can ensure that supply chain is trustworthy in a way so your technology is also trustworthy.  Nestor?
     >> NESTOR SERRAALLE: We must align you will a of the activities with the development of best practice in Earls it of cyber security.  First this is turning in best practices but also a change and challenge in terms of internal processes such as partner and supplier cooperation and contract policies and a wide range of things we need to keep up to date.
     As you say, the very changing in the industries is very important.  You know that the security life cycle is for us a main question.  Because we need to create a secure solutions in terms to through the digital identity of the people in our region.
     The complexity of the process we are -- where our solutions bring the cyber security includes many core systems for example there is a challenge in the region where the partners, integrators and customers are working very hard to close the gap in terms of safe practices.  Because of this from view we are committed to maintaining the same cyber security standard through the solution and sharing our best practices with the rest of the players forward especially with customers.
     So one of the best findings we made in the process of developing the security culture inside of our company is importance of maintaining and increasing our participation in activities.  Today we are involved in Geneva Dialogue because it is important to layer and discuss best practices in our industry in order to maintain the digital security of the people who use our products.  Not just a reputational problem, it the a social responsibility.
     Despite the restrictions in the region we want to provide the same security experience that leaders provide globally.  Because of this interaction with colleagues around the world and close relations with Microsoft and Cisco and other important players in the industry our key to increase our capabilities on our security development life cycle.  And I want to say thanks to the Geneva Dialogue for the opportunity to be here as part of this very relevant forum to create a more safe digital world.  Not only for us, for our extended value chain and for the society especially in -- thanks.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Nestor.  One of the interesting elements that you mentioned was the investment in security culture in the company, the change of the project.  That is is in the outcome Document about the process and how do you make sure you change the project.  What is interesting with Vue that is a relatively small company compared to others onboard but to you do have a special department in a way following up on the cyber security tech accord and many other international developments and that is quite interesting.
     I want to open up now the discussion of first pass the floor to Barrack Otieno and then get back to Muhammad.  It might be easy for the big companies who invest in the change of the culture and generally embracing security by design.  I'm sure there are a lot of limitations when it comes to smaller companies and Vue is one example.  Barrack any comments on the previous discussions.  I saw you were very active also in the chat.  Any reflections on what are the limitations for challenges across companieslet say across Africa to embrace the approach to security by design.  I will start with Barrack and then nestor, if you wish to comment as well.
     >> BARRACK OTIENO: Thank you very much.  And good morning, good afternoon, everyone from wherever you are joining.  Just to respond to that, in the global south business majority of the startups and generally even the small and medium enterprises are always struggling with the question of survive harsh economic environments and staying afloat.
     Just to note that just like in many other parts of the world, getting credit for business is a major challenge which means that founders or proprietors of companies have to get customer resources.  Which means they have to choose between food and keeping the business going just to ensure that their companies are working well.
     As such the whole issue of security by design then becomes secondary to operation of the business.
     I would like to say that is a major imPediment when it comes to implementation of security.  Unlike the global in Europe where security is part of the culture or fabric, it is a bit different in the global south.  Of course, we have scenarios where security is driven where you find most of the global companies dealing with security products are pushing their products or are pushing to make a profit as opposed to transforming the culture or ways in which communities look at things to make sure they are security conscious for lack of a better word.
     Which leads me to my next point is which is basically when you look at the global south which is almost similar to Asia, the Asia-Pacific region, we have cultural nuances.
     >> , in Africa we have what we call the spirit of Ubuntu.  It means togetherness.  It means whatever I have, I share with my brother.  For instance, if it is a laptop, it is not just pipe.  It is for the family and for the community.  When you start looking at security within the concept of ubuntuu it brings challenges when you compare or look at is the way security is in the global node or in other parts of the world.
     And finally,  this is also the lack of adherence to security standards like the ISO 7000 series and other government standards like COVID --  I don't know why the word COVID just came out.  I think there is a major issue or major challenge because if you look at majority of the organizations in Europe, over and above the vendor products that provide security, you find that there is a security framework that guides how these companies operate or how the companies treat data and this is one of the areas that we are struggling with in the global south.  You find that, for instance, I happen to have been involved in local standard development at the Kenya bureau of standards which is my country.
     And while these stand Dads are available to the community at $30, you find that they still are not purchased from the library of the local bureau.
     And one of the things I have noted is that standards touching on health and safety are mandatory.  They are enforced.  But standards touching on IT security are not mandatory meaning the companies are given an opportunity to divide whether to implement or not to implement.
     This is considering the fact that right now most of the business is online and security is as critical as health.  I will stop at that.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, barrack.  Quite some important thoughts.  We had a lot of discussions about the standards and applicability of standards not only whether they are mandatory but also whether they are affordable and clear and whether they are useful and even some definitions in the standards are not the same as what the companies are using.
     I wonder, Muhammad, you lowered your hand but if you want to jump in back raise your hand or switch on.  Yeah.  Go ahead.  Sorry for waiting.  Just unmute yourself.  You have to unmute.
     >> MOHAMMAD GHARANI: I'm from Afghanistan and working a as the deputy director at the president office.  Lyme leading some technology staffs for example, technology, and also system and process reengineering.
     But the big problem here is digital culture.
     People are not -- they are not trusting on for example their data to share with the government or for example when they are taking the IG accord, they don't want to share their private information or family information or their educational background because they don't have the trust that someone will hack our information or access our information for example from Pakistan or iran but we have some political issues also.
     My question is or just I want to know that trust is a process.  How to promote the trust among new generation at schools or universities or at society.  What will be the best model or practice to apply it in low income countries or landlocked countries for example in Afghanistan?  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Mohammad.
     Very useful again.  One thing that might be the question for all of you is if we look at the young generations going more and more into startups nouvelling new applications and devices.  Now do we make sure that those new startups and new services actually start from security by design as well.  I will give you one example.
     This very Zoom which was very scarcely used before the COVID.  Overnight it became one of the key communication platforms and certainly when they started the platform they didn't have security as one of the preconditions as Barrack mentioned.  It is not the focus.  We will probably have more and more of these services which suddenly pop up and become very important and many will be coming from some startups hopefully from developing country as well.  That is another one question how do we make sure that we spread the culture and enable people with innovations to start on best security.  I know that Snastaysia wanted to reflect on challenges.
     >> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: I wanted to reflect on them but I wanted to reflect on this question.  I think it is important that Barrack mentioned for small companies when emplaymenting the security layer especially for SMEs this is my big question on return on investments and return on investments might be to ensure the product security.
     So why SMEs should invest more in security for them.  If they don't have budget simply knowing what should be done and capacity building is one of the directions for collective work including both larger companies and the government side as well.
     Another probably direction for addressing the challenge is building the trust ecosystems and multi-stakeholder ankle co-systems and the example the Geneva.  We learned on the Casper ski side what is done on the Siemens and Microsoft side and it was helpful to exchange and hear each other.  I think if the small startups together with the government I think it will provide more opportunity to foster and fill the gaps that exist in the industry and enhance the information sharing and help each other.
     Another challenge that we personally see still, though they are a good compilation with the best practices with the Geneva Dialogue report there is still an open question about the lack of institutional framework I would say.
     So the many important questions are those what from the government point of view would be an optimal level of security?  What are the particular certifications and standards to pass?  And Barrack touched on this.  And what are the necessary technical requirements to meet.  Even in the European continent there are already good practices but the lack of institutional framework sometimes, the lack of actually guidance what should be done to be considered as an optimal level of security, this is I think the one industry would definitely find helpful as well.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Anastasiya Kazakova.  We have a few more minutes.  I will ask, you asked interest to jump it on Mohammad's comment.
     >> IDI KULA: We promote trust.  We need to promote scepsis many in terms of Civil Society and among our Civil Society because when anyone is not -- he sensitive data or personal datas are processing collecting by private companies and all governments they don't need to trust the dig dig of government (break in audio) corporate entities.  And secondly, I would also emphasize that private sector or companies need to be more open to Civil Society and they need to say hey, come here and please test our products, our processes.  If we have any backdoors in our products.  Like some companies has backdoors and very dangerous factors in their device.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  I will think we had quite some discussion on Geneva Dialogue on transparency and a couple of good examples I invite all of you to look into the document and provide comments on transparency by Microsoft and Huawei.  In order to open up and be transparent so the communities and the customers and the community need to be able to review the code and look what is in and so on.  So capacity building as Anastasiya Kazakova mentioned is the key.  Point taken, thanks a lot.
     >> DAVID KOH: May I jump in?
     >> MODERATOR: Sure, David.
     >> DAVID KOH: I just wanted to pick up on Barrack's point about culturallal nuances not just in the global south but also in Asia and circle back to a point which Jon talked about earlier about COVID applications.
     So all of us are familiar with contact tracing applications because of COVID and there a huge question about transparency and about security and privacy et cetera.  I want to just tease out Barrack's point that there are cultural nuances.
     For example in east Asia countries like Japan and South Korea and Singapore have different political cultural history and community historical cultural perspectives so there is a strong trust.  It is not so much individual privacy but individual privacy, individual standards are subordinate to family and then community.  And there is a certain element of trust and sub order nation of the individual tool, the wider community good.  Consequently in countries like Taiwan and Hong Kong and Japan and South Korea and Singapore, we are prepared to give up some of our individual privacy in order that appropriate government agency, the ministry of health has the information so that they can do contact tracing.
     This would not be acceptable, in let's say, EU, Europe, GDPR, et cetera or in some other jurisdictions.  But understanding the balance point and difference in cultural nuances and historical context or even the political culture of the different jurisdictions is also relevant.  So as we discuss about international norms and standards, even for cyber security or privacy or trust I think these are things which perhaps need to be considered.
     Because as many of the speakers have said, trust is not just a technical issue.  It is ultimately a human dimension.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, David.  And this basically leads to the discussion which we will probably follow up in the Geneva Dialogue and it is how to come up to some sort of baseline security requirements that maybe all companies can start with and how do we think let's say the international principles whether it is the UN and the Paris accord and the others with standards and policy and regulation like what CSA is doing and then with best practices.  There will be a big challenge because of both you and Barrack mentioned the different nuances in the not necessarily just cultural but generally difference.
     A quick back to Marilia Maciel before we wrap up.  I see scrolling through the comments.  Maybe you can try to summarize.
     >> MARILIA MACIEL: Thank you.  The chat has been very, very lively and interesting.  Thank you very much for being so active.  Our comments resolved around three main cop, epicorruption, pros, cons around short comings.  Alternatives to encryption.  And then we discussed the disparities between north and south when it comes to capacities of putting in place security standards and somehow lite of the importance and there were interesting discussions on standards and the need to deploy security standards in order to promote security online.
     And I leave you with an invitation that actually comes from Mout and mark Cavrell to join the coalition on security standards they are looking at point such as the procurement of large companies to foster the adoption of security standards and other top.  I will join this Dynamic Coalition thank you very much and I invite others to do so.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  And thank you Wouk and mark for mentioning that.  We are coming to the end.  I would like to at the end use the opportunity before we hear the messages to ask anyone of you the discussants whether you have any final thoughts in the brief form.  I will start with Jon first.  If you want to wrap up briefly from your side what are the takeaways?
     >> JON ALBERT FANZUN: Thank you very much.  The take it is aways is that trust is at the center of the discussion and I don't think that that is a technical question as I mentioned before.
     Some years ago, we trusted that an election and the result of an election will be accepted.  Now we live in a day that -- days that even that that we saw that it is -- it is impossible to not to trust is in question.
     And I think trust begins with dialogue and I think what we started with the Geneva Dialogue is to talk to each other.  Anastasiya Kazakova mentioned it.  And I will think that is the precondition to have trust in each other.  One of the key takeaways is also that the dialogue we started gives or offers room for also the industry to talk to each other and that is also one of the takeaway I take or the takeaways I heard in the discussion.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Jon.  I guess I can do it on your behalf since the IGF asked us to come up with a personal organization commitment when it comes to the discussion.  Do you want to tell your commitment then?
     >> JON ALBERT FANZUN: So we want to continue our Geneva Dialogue was in 2021.  I hope, of course, in a digital way but also I hope that we can see each other and that is our commitment to go a step further with our dialogue.
     >> MODERATOR: David, any final reflections and your commitment on the topic of securing devices?
     >> DAVID KOH: Thank you.  Two points on the take did theaways.  One is really the whole discussion of trust.  Trust we agreed is at the center of it.  There is a lot of discussion in the chat on what trust comprises.  I would add transpair sentcy and it is a human endeavor and what Barrack said that you have to bear in mind the cultural elements.  The first takeaway is trust.
     The second is what Jon said and I heard previously as well that second baser is a team sport and we have -- that cyber is a team sport.  We have to play together.  We need to work together and second is multi-stakeholder.  I think that governments come to this -- I saw in some of the chat this is the government perspective, I confess I work in the government and I spend my whole life in the government so perhaps that perspective is -- that comment is not untrue, guilty as charged.  But I think that totally agree the digital world, the digital revolution is too important.  Governments can't deal with this alone.
     We need the full participation of industry, full participation of academia and Civil Society.  So multi-stakeholder approach.
     I commit to engage other countries and other stakeholders.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Quite a commitment which will be undertaken in a way.  Anastasiya Kazakova, how about reflections and commitment.
     >> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: Both comments from Jon David looks very, very inspiring for many of us that are currently in the session right now.
     From my side we talk about a lot of challenges and even in the digital tomorrow and the digital day after tomorrow there will be even more challenges.  Digital transformation is here to stay and the threat land scape will become more sophisticated.  This is the difficult option in which we will live.
     Reflecting on the trust and multi-stakeholder cooperation the key is to build the trust ecosystems and to help actually everyone that wants to about he in the -- at the able and to have a say in the negotiations and the dialect.  Trans pair presentcy on both sides.  On the government side and the private sector side.  I mentioned in the chat verification and accountability and integrity.
     Serge I mink mentioned that you shouldn't violate norms and integrity is what you actually say and what you deliver.  You shouldn't violate what you promise before.  So those are principles of those trusted ekey co-systems.
     The committens, capacity building for us for Kaperski we will try to invest in the ICT community and support, first of all, our partners and customers with the knowledge on how to address supply chain risk and digital security risk.  Thankoff.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Anastasiya Kazakova.  Nestor, your commitment? UNMUTE YOURSELF.
     >> NESTOR SERRAVA LLE: Sorry.  I'm impressed for the discussion.  For us today to participate.
     So can you hear me?
     >> MODERATOR: Yeah, yeah.
     >> WE MUST THINK we must think globally.  We are operation in Europe and we need to work with all of the trust and confidence policies that you have in Europe.  But at the same time, this is a good opportunity to create the same environment in Latin America and other countries, Korean region or North America inclusive.  To create the same environment you have in Europe.
     I think Europe is a very good example for example in terms of GDPR regulation could advance if you compare that regulation for the rest of the world.  For us a big opportunity and good opportunity to create a new perspective regarding the security by design and security by default and security life cycle.  All of these topics are relevant to increase the security and mainly when we are taking care of our digital identity in many countries.
     So for us is a must to understand what is the best practice in all of these topics.  So I appreciate so much the collaboration between public sector and private sector.  But in fact in our region we have a gap to cover in this topic especially.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, nestor.  Barrack, you have the last round to close with some of your commitments and reflections.
     >> BARRACK OTIENO: Thank you very much, Vladi.  I join my colleagues in commending your moderation.  It has been an interesting panel.  My commitment is to create more awareness because I believe that is what is needed in the global south in most of the African countries.
     We have come up with very good documents.  Partly like the convention which just tries to build a security conscious cyber space or cyber society in Africa but adoption is low because of awareness.  For me, creating more awareness is key.  The other point is capacity building which is a also is commitment I'm engaging myself to.  Because once aware science created, building capacity is key.
     And finally, also building the security conversation into the culture or fabric is the last point that I would look at.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you Barrack.  They will kick us out of the room even if it is virtual we still have to hear the messages or key points taken.
     I invite Marilia Maciel to share the messages from the discussion.
     >> MARILIA MACIEL: Thank you.  I will be super quick.  I --
     >> ANDRIJANA GAVRILOVIC: The first is that trust is at the center of discussion and it is important to remember it as human issue and not a technological one and the starting point are building trust are norms that promote multi-stakeholder collaboration.  Governments should create an environment in which collaboration with foster but there needs to be a balance of views between government and industry.  Promoting best practices of companies can help other company improve the own processes as well.  That would be the second message.  The third it is important to clarify baseline requirements for digital products taking into (indiscernible) and norms.  And the last message would be the companies need to capacity building both in terms of the implementing the baseline requirements and fulfilling and participating in multistandings processes.  Did I breathe while reading this?  It is not sure.  A colleague of writing right now and it will be available on digital watch.  Over to you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, and I encourage everyone to share your takeaways and thoughts.  What he have to close now.  We do have another Zoom room open now and I will switch after this session to that one.  If you are interested you can join, my colleague will share the link to the Zoom room and thank you all for joining.  We have gone a little over an hour but it was a good discussion.  We can play the bye bye video.  Thank you for joining.
     >> Thank you very much.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-9-bpf-data-and-new-technologies-in-an-internet-context^^

 
     >> MODERATOR: Hi, I will host this session for IGF.  I have a question.  And we will wait for two more, is that correct?  Or can you tell me, please?
     >> WIM DEGEZELLE: We are waiting on at least one panel lead.  So I would say let's wait.
     >> Okay, of course.
     >> WIM DEGEZELLE: Let's wait maybe a minute.
     >> I wanted to tell you this session is recorded and hosted under the IGF Code of Conduct and UN Rules and Regulations.  And the chat feature is for social chat only and only, the Q&A feature is used to ask questions.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Thank you very much for all you are doing for us to make this work smoothly.  It has been quite impressive.
     >> WIM DEGEZELLE: There might be issue with some people have a problem with registering for the session so that might explain why.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: You are talking for the first five minutes?
     >> WIM DEGEZELLE: Titti and I.  If needed, we can start.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: We might as well start.
     >> WIM DEGEZELLE: I will start and then see if in the meantime our panelists and I see --
     >> WIM DEGEZELLE: I would say, Titti, if you want to.
     >> MODERATOR: I can start?
     >> WIM DEGEZELLE: Yes, I would.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay, good morning, everyone, and welcome to this session on BPF on Data and New Technologies.  
     My name is Concettina Cassa.  I work AGID I'talia governance.  And I'm the moderator and co-facilitator of the BPF Data and New Technologies in the Internet Context together with Emanuela Girardi from Pop Artificial Intelligence and Wim Degezelle, Consultant of IGF Secretariat.
     So before we start the discussion, I want to share just with you a few words about the Best Practice Forum, on what is the BPF.
     The Best Practice Forum actually are part of the intersectional activity that I would like by the MAG is -- it is up to the MAG members to propose a BPF and then a process is started.  
     So the MAG discussion analyzed the topics presented by the MAG and then approve.  And then after the approval by the MAG, the BPF can start.
     So what is the BPF?  It is actually a platform to exchange experience and also to address internet policy issues.  So the BPF follows an open and bottom up in the collaborative process.  It relies on community inputs.  And also as the objective to identify best practice on internet policy issues.  
     So the BPF actually was during the year discussed on this issue.  And then it coordinates with this session that you are participating here to collect input.  And then a report is issued at the end under the discussion of results collected by the BPF.
     So but coming back on the BPF on Data and New Technology and Internet Content, this BPF is focusing on how user data is collected, analyzed and used and on the best practice for which data is used to bring benefit to our users.
     And let me share also that we actually have three session.  The first one where Wim Degezelle will share the main point of the discussion this year on the BPF.  And also on the case study we collect and how it discussed the main collection of data through these new technologies.
     And then we have Michael Nelson, Director of Technology and International Affairs at Carnegie.  And he will share with you how we need new mental mind set, how our views are changing, COVID-19 impact on the user collecting and use of data.
     And then at the least of the session we will have the discussion on the next step on how to address these issues in the future.  So at this point, let me give the floor to Emanuela for the next section.  Emanuela, the floor is yours.
     >> WIM DEGEZELLE: I see that Emanuela is not yet joining so she should be there, she is having some problems logging in.  Let me already jump to the next point and say a few words on some of the activities. 
     This is Wim Degezelle.  Let me say a few words on some of the activities we have been doing within the BPF.
     Let me share my slide.  I have a short presentation, not too long.  Because I wanted to highlight one point.  So the Best Practice Forum, like Titti explained, we started discussing already early on in this year, I think it was in the end of February.  And had regular meetings to, first of all, discuss what we want to talk about or how do we want to define, further define and refine this issue or this task we got from the MAG to discuss best practice and start to look for the best practices.
     One of the points that came up early on was about definitions and concept.  The element or question was what exactly are we talking about or do we want to talk about?  Do we use the same concepts and words?  Do we use the same words for different meanings?  There was a point that was flagged early on in the discussions, but I'm sure that in the next session that is one of the elements Mike will come back on during the roundtable.  
     I wanted to use this short time to flag or to show one of the outputs of those early discussions.  And that is the BPF data and new technologies issues cards.
     It is a short document, two pages, that maps different issues and challenges, concerns that came up when -- during the BPF sessions we asked for, but what exactly now are the issues you think about when we link or discuss data new technologies and what happens with the users' data.  I think we spent two or three calls on discussing these issues.  Also put it online on the mailing list to get additional input.
     So what is the issues card?  You have the different concerns, different questions, formulated as questions also.  Why?  Because we want to have them as a tool to help people to discuss issues and to have a dialogue and start up a dialogue on specific issues.
     Because we hear a lot about there are problems with data and concerns about data, but very -- at very few moments people can -- will be specific and they will all mention data as a problem or an issue or as a concern.  Or even data sharing, data collection, storing data.  But even during the discussion people will not really know or not really specify what they are talking about.  
     And that can lead to a little problem where also other different people around the table think that they are discussing the same thing, but, in fact, talk about something different.
     So the issues card is, like I said, a tool to foster dialogue and helps to raise awareness and should specify and focus the discussions.  So the question is for who?  I think the issues card could be used for -- by almost everyone, whether policy people or even politicians sitting around the table discussing the issues.
     But I also notice that it can be interesting for individual users like you and me if you think about your mobile phone and said oh, yeah, I tagged something or published something online.  And I know there are specific data-related questions or issues linked to that but working on the project together this issues card also helped me to just raise questions for myself.  
     What happens with my data?  Do I know where it is stored and things like that.  And probably as an individual you can look to the issues card and go okay, are there questions in there I should be concerned about?  Or are there other things that I said well, basically there are -- they are interesting, but probably not something I should be concerned about.
     So where to find the issues card.  We hope that it can be used as a standalone tool or standalone document for like to foster or to help building discussions.  So it is available in the report, but also there is a standalone version available on the website.
     Thank you.  I hope it is a useful tool.  And then I see that Emanuela has joined us and I would like to give the floor to her to take over and lead the first section of our workshop.
     >> EMANUELA GIRARDI: Hi, everybody, sorry, I got some problem in the connection.  I get confused with the timing with UCT, but I'm here now and we can start.  Sorry I missed part of the initial presentation from Wim, but I know that he probably gave a very good presentation about the issue card and the novel view of how we develop the process of the BPF and we reach to this point to the final discussion today.
     Okay.  So I'm here today with some very distinguished guests that I'm about to introduce.  I already see Veronica Arroyo, she is a Latin America Policy Associate with AccessNow.  And she will present as part of the case study that have been submitted today in -- during the process in the last month.
     And then we should be having in a few seconds Ricardo Chavarriaga.  He will be joining us.  He also got confused with the timing.  And I haven't seen Cathal McDermott.  Has he already joined us?  I don't see --
     >> WIM DEGEZELLE: Yes, he is, but maybe he still has to be upgraded to panelist.
     >> EMANUELA GIRARDI: Okay, good.  Okay.  So the idea today is to -- I mean like a good presentation about the issue card and the best practice using data to benefit and not to have misuse.  
     So today I would like our guests present us briefly the business cases they presented on this theme and talk about their experience.  So Veronica is already about us, I will start with Veronica.  
     Veonica With AccessNow.  She submitted a case study for some dos and don'ts with COVID-19 tracing.  What I would like to ask Veronica is if you can first introduce briefly your business case.  
     And then in particular, if you can tell us which one are the main risk related to users' data.  And in particular if you can tell us which one are the best app globally that are kind of better balancing the dos and don'ts that you listed in the case studies that you submitted.
     Please, Veronica.
     >> VERONICA ARROYO: Thank you very much for this opportunity.  
     I will introduce first AccessNow.  AccessNow is a digital global organization that has been working for the past 10 years extending and defending digital rights in the world.
     And this time I'm very proud to present the dos and don'ts guide for lawmakers or for States regarding contact tracing and digital contact tracing.
     This document is a very comprehensive one, and I feel very proud of it.  Why?  Because it was built by all of the people at AccessNow.  We are global team and have technologies and advocates, lawyers, designers.  
     All of the recommendations are very broad recommendation and based on the data protection principles.  And also they face the reality that we live because we live in a very diverse world and it is necessary to reflect that on the recommendations.  So we have eight dos and seven don'ts.
     I'm sharing this on the chat so you can check it out.  I really encourage you to go there and check all of the recommendations that we made.  
     For us, it was very quite important to have this document even if we don't believe that our digital contact tracing can solve the problem that we are having right now that we dealing with.  And also it raises a lot of red flags on privacy issues.  We felt that it was important to give this kind of information to the governments and also shape the discussion which is quite interesting, and that is why we are here.
     We use it also -- and that is what you can find on our submission and in our particular case here in Peru.  Because as you might know, Peru wanted to have -- announce publicly to have a contact tracing, digital contact tracing app.  And we use it to talk with the government, to start talking with the government because the government is not quite open to talk with Civil Society but this time this helped build this bridge between the government and Civil Society and also to participate on all the debates that we have here.
     The good news is that at the end of the day, we don't have this contact tracing app here in Peru.  For us, it is kind of a good news thing.  And when you are talking about -- when you asked about what are some of the risks of using data, at least in this moment of pandemic for us, it is a misuse when you change the purpose of using this data.  
     That is kind of the big -- one of the big flags that we have because now they are using -- the governments are very positive on using this data for the pandemic to combat this moment, but one of the things for us is quite important is to see what they are going to do in the future.  If they are going to still use the data, they are gathering right now and processing right now for other purposes because there is a lot of sensitive data.  And I think we have to pay attention on that specific point.
     So I stop here and continue on the -- I can explain more on the questions part.  Thank you.
     >> EMANUELA GIRARDI: Thank you, Veronica.  Very interesting.  Also in Europe we have several of these app, we have one in Italy where I'm located in Muni, but we have several different apps in Europe that were really taking into consideration the privacy issues that you just raised.  Thank you.  
     I think that Ricardo Chavarriaga just joined us.  Welcome, Ricardo.  Ricardo is a Senior Scientist at Zurich University of Applied Sciences and is the co-lead of CLAIRE Task Force on AI and COVID-19.  
     So Ricardo, I would like you to briefly introduce as the CLAIRE COVID-19 task force.  And then also to tell us which one of the main challenges related to the data collection storage and labeling that you faced -- we faced actually during the task force experience.
     And then if you can also give us some of the recommendation based on this experience for the policy makers.  Please, Ricardo.
     >> RICARDO CHAVARRIAGA:  Thank you, Emanuela, for the introduction and for the invitation to share here the experiences and the lessons learned at the CLAIRE COVID-19 Task Force.
     So let's start by introducing CLAIRE.  CLAIRE is a network of European researchers in AI and covers about 400 research groups in academia and in industry.
     In March, given the effects of the pandemics, we launched a voluntary effort to gather scientists to help in tackling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.  And we were able to enroll about 150 volunteers from different areas of AI and from different countries trying to ask what can we do to contribute that?  
     And similarly to the contact tracing apps, there was -- this was a period where there was a large number of expectations how science and technology can contribute and help in this process.
     And so we aimed at contributing to that.  And one of the first things that we saw is that there was many activities, a lot of information coming out, but it was not properly structured.  So we first aim at collecting information and in a structured way about databases, about tools, about initiatives, and about challenges that are -- were directed towards the COVID-19 situation and helped people to find the right information.  
     And we also had groups that look at more specific ways and development of how AI can contribute that and analysis of social media activity.  
     Throughout this period, some of the observations that we have is that there was a significant difficulty of collecting data and reliable data, label data.  And this difficulty was mainly due to heterogeneity in the privacy regulation and a lack of integrated and common pipelines for data collection and storage across health institutions across public bodies.
     So we were at the situation where there was a lot of data, but very fragmented.  And very, very difficult to put it together so that we can have a proper use of it.  
     There were some public and private initiatives on collecting data and trying to use it in certain ways.  But there were certain lack of transparency on how this data was going to -- is managed, what were the legal frameworks that applied, and also how they derived products of the use of the data will be later taken into account.  
     So it will be public use or private use and how can we deal with the usage and value generated by that data?
     Similarly to the data collection, there was a lack of available infrastructure for cloud storage and interoperable use of this sensitive data that we were collecting or that we were trying to use for the use of the artificial intelligence.  
     And also, most of the data were not labeled in a consistent way or in a reliable way.  So it is something that we have to take into account for future in technical developments on systems that can work with unlabeled data, on reliable data for basically an unlabeled world as we have right now.
     And to close in regards of recommendations, we think that it is important to take a proactive stance to build a more resilient infrastructure.  And by infrastructure, I mean a flexible and agile fast response mechanisms that allow experts from different domains to mobilize and work together and have access to resources.  
     Resources in the form of interoperable data that can be used, and this implies flexible governance mechanisms that may allow secondary use given extraordinary situations.
     And, of course, when we think about that, we also have to think about oversight mechanisms that can respond in the flexible ways when the challenges arise in this situation.  With that, I will stop, and I would be happy to discuss in the Q&A.
     >> EMANUELA GIRARDI: Thank you.  Very interesting for the fast response using AI and data.  Very interesting.  I think we can further discuss it in the second part in the mechanism and about your mind set.  
     Okay.  I see that Cathal McDermott just joined us.  Welcome, Cathal.  Cathal is Senior Counsel in Privacy and Regulatory Affairs at Microsoft, and is working particularly in Microsoft Corporate, External and Legal Affair Department.  
     So he will be -- we mentioned before with Veronica the privacy issues.  And Cathal will talk about the case studies that have been submitted by Microsoft.  Microsoft submitted three case studies.  Very interesting.
     And in particular, he will talk about the one about the privacy principles that Microsoft designed to develop and implement the COVID-19 technology.  
     So Cathal, can you please tell us which one of these principles?  And then why Microsoft, if it already had a privacy principles, decided to introduce a new privacy principles for COVID-19?
     And also if you have then some time at the end, I would like to ask you how Microsoft is in kind of a promoting this awareness creation because one of the point that I read in your case studies for individuals on how they -- I mean how their data is collected and how their data is used.
     So please, Cathal, I give you the floor.
     >> CATHAL MCDERMOTT: Thank you, Emanuela.  
     I think these are great questions.  And we have quite a, you know, substantial body of work in Microsoft around COVID.  
     I think when we initially looked back at the beginning of the year, you know, what Microsoft could do for COVID, decided that given the global scale of the pandemic, technology we understood was going to play a very critical role in almost every facet of the response to COVID-19.  
     And, you know, Microsoft was in a position to be able to leverage a lot of our technology from AI right through to other partnerships which we had with non-governmental organizations, governments, and Civil Society.
     So I think given the context around some of the work we initially moved on was that we partnered and joined with many, many States and national and local healthcare organizations and providers in addition to researchers and nonprofits and governments.  
     And we were really trying to use our technology to help develop solutions to the COVID-19 pandemic.  And this was including solutions such as coronavirus self-checker tools, which we partnered with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.  Helping launch coronavirus trackers on Bing, the Microsoft search engine, using AI to help decode the immune system response to COVID-19, et cetera.  
     And to get to the question here, we understood that as we use companies' technology and sensitive data to help respond to COVID-19, this was going to involve a certain level of tracking, testing, tracing to help fight the pandemic.
     And one of the most critical aspects in all of this response was always going to be how to protect and ensure people's privacy was going to continue to be protected.  
     Of course, Microsoft and other companies out there have a very deep and extensive privacy principles built into what they do already.  But we definitely thought given the novel approach that was being taken to fight coronavirus, this pandemic was new, it required a lot of new and interesting uses of technology.
     So Microsoft felt it was necessary to really reinforce and sort of double down on our privacy principles, especially as they relate to COVID and our COVID work to respond to the pandemic.
     So at the ground level, really and our belief here, we wanted to understand that people are in control of their data.  People were empowered with the information to explain how their data will be collected and used.
     We believe this was absolutely critical to the success of the technology and the COVID response.  And, of course, furthermore, on top of that, companies needed to be accountable and responsible for this data. 
     We offered seven principles as really grounding ideas to consider how we could ensure that privacy was respected as we fight the pandemic.  It is interesting to look at a high level at some of these principles and how they were adopted within Microsoft and across our response.
     So, firstly, we were -- we deemed it extremely important to obtain meaningful consent and to be transparent about the reason for collecting data and what data is collected and how long it is kept.  We wanted to ensure that people understood that the data was only ever going to be used in a manner which was explained to them.  It was clear and user-friendly information services, and people were able to interact with the technology to make informed choices.
     That was at the ground level.  This was going to be the most key sort of aspect how we were responding to COVID and ensuring privacy was protected.  
     Secondly, we wanted to ensure that data was only collected for public health services and under the controlled individual and should remain under the person's control.  It was not to be used for unrelated data.  It was important that people understood where the data was going and how it was going to be used exclusively for the pandemic response.
     Thirdly, and in line with many ground line laws and privacy regulations, it was important to collect the minimal amount of data required for the response and for the solutions in question.  Really limiting it only to the specific data required for the specific time period, ensuring that it was only to be used as necessary by the public health experts.  
     We wanted also to provide clear and meaningful choices to individuals about where their data was to be stored.  You know, there has been a discussion which we wanted to ensure was moved forward here around whether the data was stored on the cloud or on the person's device and we have seen that come up in some jurisdictions also and be quite an important factor in this discussion.
     We also wanted to ensure that the appropriate safeguards, the de-identification, encryption, random identifiers, all of those in our tool box of encryption solutions were in place to help protect people's data from any harmful exposure and hacking attempts.  We were very, you know, very sort of focused on the fact that this is extremely sensitive data and everything should be done to ensure it is only used for the specific purposes in question.
     We wanted to ensure that the data was not or the health status, of course, of the person was not shared without content -- or consent, or that an excess of data was shared with any third parties.  So we didn't want thing to be shared beyond what was required for the particular solution.
     And, of course, lastly, and in line with good practice and good data hygiene, that the data was deleted as soon as the purpose was achieved.  So there was not to be any storage or unnecessary storage on the devices nor cloud.  Copies of the person's data were to be removed from any third party or public health authorities that it had been shared with.  
     And really these principles from Microsoft were designed to apply certainly across the work Microsoft was doing, but also we believe there was a very good sort of grounding for any privacy work around COVID which was happening with other companies and, indeed, the public health sphere in Civil Society.  
     That is kind of how we approached work and was the basis for our case study here to ensure privacy was front and center to our COVID work.
     >> EMANUELA GIRARDI: Okay.  Cathal, very, very interesting.  Thank you for sharing this with us.  I think the most interesting part was the one where you said you tried to empower the people, the persons, I mean to understand how their data are collected and used and stored.  This was very, very interesting.  Thank you.
     I see that we don't have at the moment any questions in the chat.  So I would like to thank Ricardo, Veronica, and Cathal.  And since we are saving a couple of minutes, I will give the word now to Michael Nelson.  
     We collected lots of very interesting input from these case studies and from the presentation of Ricardo, Cathal, and Veronica.  And I think I will ask them to stay with us.  First, I will thank them.  And then ask them to stay with us for the roundtable about the new model and new mind set about collecting and sharing data that will be moderated by Michael Nelson.  
     So please, Michael, I give you the word for the second part of the session.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Thank you very much.  And thanks for some very useful context.  
     I'm a technologist, I worked in business and it always starts with the product and the service, and that's why I'm so glad we have these examples to work from.
     As Wim mentioned at the start, I'm the Director of Technology and International Affairs at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, D.C.  It is currently 4:35 a.m. and I haven't had any coffee yet.
     But I'm very glad to be part of this.  I'm here because I have been part of the Best Practices Forum group and probably more importantly, was part of the preceding group that worked for two years on Internet of Things and big data and artificial intelligence.  And it has been a pleasure working with Wim and Titti and other members of the group.  
     But I'm also here because I provide some diversity.  As a technologist and someone who spent most of my career in the private sector and as an advocate for regulation as a last resort rather than the first reflex.  So I provide some diversity.  
     And I'm also one of only about three people I think from the Western Hemisphere on this call, since it is 2:00 in the morning in Silicon Valley.  I did see Jim Prendergast, another person that has been at lots of IGF meetings.
     But most importantly, I'm here because in the past, working at IBM, I had a midlife sabbatical and I taught at Georgetown University.  I was a Professor in the Communications Culture and Technology program.  And I learned a great deal about how to talk about technology from journalists, communication specialists, sociologists.  And that's what we're going to do today.
     I have been on the MAG in the past, and I've also been very involved in the IGF USA.  And I know that one of the biggest challenges, the problem with these sessions is that we don't have a good way to involve everybody who is part of this event, all of the audience members who might have something to say.
     And so I'm going to try something new.  The other thing I'm known for is being disruptive and trying new formats at the IGF USA. 
     We have done debates, we've policy hack-a-thons.  We even did a policy slam, which is little bit like a poetry slam where people get up and they announce what they would do if they were king of the internet or queen of the internet or queen of the cloud.  And then the audience votes on which one they like best.
     So we're going to do something like that.  We can't have everybody talking at once so we're going to use the Q&A function of Zoom.  And I apologize for those who are just calling in and don't have access to that.  
     Most of you will be able to post on the Q&A section and also to rank the different things that are being posted there.  So what I'm going to do is I'm right now going to post -- let's see.
     Wait a minute.  Okay.  Can I not post questions?  This is not good.  Okay.  Let me post to the chat room.  A list of provocative statements.  And I'm also posting in the chat room in the Q&A.
     But what I have done here is posted some policy statements and buzz words that get in the way of thinking about data, artificial intelligence, machine learning, the digital society, human rights and all the rest.
     And so what I want you to do is think about new ways to think about technology.  And let me give you some examples.
     You will notice that our report, although it talks a lot about machine learning and artificial intelligence is not titled artificial intelligence.  One of the reasons for that is because there is so much confusion about what artificial intelligence is.  And there are literally 10 different definitions, and they are quite conflicting.
     It is a term that has been used for more than 60 years.  So what I'm proposing is that instead we just talk about algorithms.  AI is just a marketing label, and many of the problems are really about spreadsheets and very simple models that don't involve artificial intelligence.  
     The second term that we need to think new about is data governance.  As the report says very clearly -- and this is I think one of the most important findings -- if we don't know what we are talking about, we are not going to get good policy.  
     Data governance to a CIO means something very specific.  It means how do I manage my corporate data.  Unfortunately, in a lot of rooms here at IGF, people have said data governance and they are really referring to data policy, what governments are doing to control the flow of data and how it is used.  And to say it is all one thing is misleading.  I urge us to separate those two problems.  What do individuals do, what do governments do, and use different terms.
     The third term that is really confusing a lot of people is ethical artificial intelligence.  Technology is not ethical; people are ethical.  So let's talk about trusted uses of big data and AI.  Similarly, let's not talk about AI ethics.  We can't even agree on whose ethical system to use.  Let's talk about digital human rights.  We do know what human rights are.  We do have UN documents that define human rights.
     Another very, very confusing phrase is my data.  And we hear people talking about how I need to control my data.  Well, as we say in the report, you got to talk about what types of data you are referring to.  So thank you for putting that forward.  So on -- hang on a second.
     So when you say my data, we should be talking about the stuff that I post on the internet, personally identifiable information that I have provided in forms and then everything else.  And there is a lot of everything else that really isn't my data.  It might be a picture of my car as I drive down the road.  Or it might be a picture of me at a restaurant with a friend that somebody else took.  That's not my data, somebody else took the picture.  Okay.  Now let me get to the three most important and most misunderstood ideas.
     This is one that The Economist put on its front cover.  Data is the new oil.  This is the most destructive term and phrase that we have in this whole debate because it makes countries and governments think that data is something they need to hoard, that it is a strategic asset that somehow they need to track where it flows.
     Data is not oil.  It's shareable.  It's not consumable.  You don't burn it.  If I have my data, I can copy it and give it to you.  You can't do that with oil.  But the idea that data is the new oil is leading to the next problem which is digital sovereignty and data sovereignty; that countries need to keep their data inside their borders, they have to have total control over it just as they want to control their oil supply.
     Milton Mueller made the case very, very effectively a few days ago that we should talk about personal sovereignty.  Let's give each of us the ability to know where our data is and to know what is protected.  
     That requires a number of things.  One thing that is really important is that we need to think about better encryption, better quality mechanisms, better ways to know where my data is and who has had access to it.  For my money, that's the most important part of the global data protection regulation.  The part about transparency, knowing where my data is.  
     Last one on the list that you are seeing is about cyberspace.  This phrase was initially used by William Gibson to describe what he said was a mass hallucination of people linked together.  Then UNESCO talked about this space where ideas flowed freely.
     But then the U.S. Defense Department started talking about cyberspace as it if was simply a bunch of computers and networks linked together.  And they started talking about cyberspace as the new battlefield.  
     Cyberspace is not spatial.  The internet is not in one place, and it is not static.  It is constantly moving as people move and ideas flow.  The idea that we can somehow have cyberspace and draw boundaries around it is really causing problems.  And again, the phrase itself, cyberspace, is leading to a lot of confusion.
     So this is a hard one, but we have to find a better term.  I'm -- I think cyber civilization.  Cloud of things.  The Japanese talk about Society 5.0.
     The last issue I would put out here is also on the chat, and that is that we should stop talking about data brokers, people who just gather all of the data together and combine hundreds of different datasets to get an incredibly accurate portfolio.  They do that because they need all the data in one place so they can run algorithms against it.
     There is a new idea, and one of the champions is Sandy Petland at MIT, and that is data unions.  These are third parties who take your data and store it just like a bank stores your money.  And what that enables is people to run algorithms against data in hundreds of different places.  And in each case, as the data is accessed with a particular algorithm, the algorithm will have to get permission, it will be very clear what data it needs to use and what data and answers it is retrieving.
     I mean it might be a very simple thing like is Mike -- who in this group of people in Washington, D.C. is over the age of 18?  They don't need to know 1700 things about me to find that out.  So this is the kind of new thinking we need, new terminology.
     So what I would like you to do is if you can, get on to the Q&A.  Start putting out ideas.  Put out ideas on better terms.  How would we replace the idea of a digital ecosystem?  That is a great idea.
     Either in the chat or in the Q&A, put your suggestions out there.  And let's have a discussion by the chat and by the Q&A.  And at the same time, I would also ask my fellow panelists if they have any better ways of thinking about it?  
     When I was at Microsoft, we spent a lot of time thinking about ways to convey the idea of the cloud and the Internet of Things that weren't so techy and connected to people in a powerful way.  Sorry I talked so much.  Clearly, we have a lot of mind sets to fix.
     So let's get some ideas out here.  I just read a few that are here already.  Digital self-determination instead of sovereignty.  There was a great session on that earlier in the week.  Jorge mentions digital ecosystem instead of cyberspace.  
     The one challenge I would pose to people is Nelson's law of buzzwords.  You only get five syllables.  So digital ecosystem is seven.
     Still great.  Maybe it is just e-cosystem, I don't know.  So let's think creatively and concisely.  You get five syllables for the buzzwords and you get eight words to explain it.  That's really the way Washington works, and unfortunately more and more countries seem to think in Tweets and sound bites and not in policy analysis. 
     We have to find a way to make the issues new.  Any panelists want to weigh in?  Do you have any good words, any other good ways of saying cyberspace, data sovereignty, ethical AI?  My data?  Any other terms that you propose?
     >> RICARDO CHAVARRIAGA: Now before launching into a new term, I just want to say it seems that we try to make ways to make a parallel with existing things.  
     When we think of cyberspace, we then focus onto a physical space.  When we think data as being new oil, we then imagine this as tokens, things that can be sold or exchanged.  But data is something different.  
     So one of the things that I think that we need to imagine is how to redefine.  The public is fearing the digital age.  The example is the picture that is taken of me, there is certain aspects of the information that are personal, but they are not mine.  
     Also, if I think about my data, we have to imagine how does this data end up being of someone else when it is being transformed, when it's processed by an algorithm.
     So I think before thinking about new spaces, we have to redefine what is this new public space for the digital age.  Because that is what will set the boundaries of what is my data in which I need to have agency, determination, and sovereignty.  And then on the other side of the boundary, other rules would apply.
     So how do you coin a term on that, that's a tricky one.  But I guess if we continue talking about cyberspace which gets often conflated with cybersecurity, we are going in the wrong space.  
     And I will focus on how do we define the public sphere and from then on we can identify how systems can be respectful of my human rights and my privacy and the things I should be autonomous and agent on.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: The other dangerous and crazy phrase is data is the new plutonium, which is mostly used by privacy advocates.  It makes one very powerful statement, which is that data used the wrong way can cause a big mess.  And if you get too much in one place, it can get a really big mess.  
     But, again, it implies that we can keep track of every grain of data and that we need a Nuclear Arms Control Treaty to control where it goes.  I mean it is interesting to read these things.  
     I worked with Senator Gore back in the late 1980's and early 1990's.  And he was very interested in metaphors and was famous for talking about the information superhighway back when nobody knew what the internet was.  And that was very effective because he made it clear that we have this fundamental infrastructure that is going to connect our people.  
     But some people took it one step further and said well, have the federal government pay for all the superhighway, let's have the government pay for all these networks that are going to reach everybody.
     And we had to come back and say no, no, the government paid for just backbone, just the core of the highway, and everybody else had to pay for the roads and driveways and the parking lots.
     But it was -- every time you come up with a short way of saying something, you have unintended consequences.  But right now we're in a world of mass confusion because people are taking all the old analogies and just applying it.  
     Other thoughts from our panelists on how to talk differently?  How to get that killer phrase, digital divide?  Net neutrality?  What is the phrase that we need that is going to get people to rethink the data landscape?
     >> EMANUELA GIRARDI: An interesting concept I think is the one that has been promoted and developed Luciano Floridi. And he and created this concept of infosphere.  
     So basically started from the biosphere and created the infosphere that is kind of digital, but at the same time real world that it includes the cyberspace and internet and digital communication and also the classical mass media basically.
     So I think that thinking about a new -- kind of a new virtual but at the same time real world like this infosphere is -- I mean it will help us creating also new mind set.  So this is an interesting concept to me.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: And what was the name again?  Maybe you can post it in the chat.
     >> EMANUELA GIRARDI:  Luciano Floridi.  He' a philosopher, he's the Director of the AI and Data Analytics Laboratory at Oxford University.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Okay, you might post his name in the chat.
     >> EMANUELA GIRARDI: Sure, definitely.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Other thoughts or things that people are -- I really like some of the things that Jorge is saying here about the digital ecosystem or data ecosystem.
     >> VERONICA ARROYO: On my point about -- what I believe, it is quite interesting this whether you propose to analyze how we frame how we -- the concept that we use and the phrases that we use for every -- in every aspect, right?  
     Some of them I completely agree with them.  I, for example, instead of using ethics or AI ethics, move to digital human rights, it is more concrete words that we can use and enforceable words as well.  
     There are others that maybe, you know, because -- at least me, myself, I'm also an advocate and activist and sometimes we obviously use those words, those big words or trying to, as you mentioned, like the plutonium or some of -- or data is the new oil just to catch attention.
     It's important, but it's not the only thing we should focus on.  If you catch attention from people using catchy phrases or ideas or analogies, sometimes you miss the opportunity to explain what you are talking about.  And we are living at least in a world where we need to ask advocates or ask people who are very involved in this to be as clear as possible about the things that we are doing and not let the spaces for misconceptions.
     That is why at least from our perspective it is good to have all of the concepts clear and all of the informations clear.  And I think that the exercise is interesting to make us think and reopen our minds of what words we are using today.
     But I will also put more attention on how we explain this.  So for us, what means, for example, data sovereignty, which is a big word and which is something quite interesting to put attention on right now on what governments are doing with the data sovereignty and why they are using this word and what this means exactly for them and for us as citizens.
     I think we can listen and see what others think about this.  I'm quite open to continue the discussion.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: I have worked with governments around the world and so often the policy maker is dealing with 50 different issues.  People are coming in to talk about corn crop, weather, who they need to hire for a new position, and digital sovereignty.
     And they are desperate to have some analogy.  And that is why we have got to pick the right one.  I'm particularly concerned that people are so focused on the Internet of Things that they are not focusing on the data and where it goes.  
     I always talk about the cloud of things, which is also only three syllables because it gets people to think of the whole system and how we can design the cloud in a way that would provide better security.  If someone says Internet of Things security, or Internet of Things privacy, the first impulse is to secure the things and to regulate hundreds of billions of things.
     Well, let's regulate the data.  Let's understand where the data from the thing is going and not try to fix the problem by making sure every single five cent device has 17 different privacy functions.
     Cathal, I will put you on the spot.  Microsoft has been such a leader in this space, and you have such a large branding and marketing team.
     What is the phrase that we are missing here?  And I know you are lawyer and not a communications person, but you know how important words are because you're a lawyer.
     >> CATHAL MCDERMOTT: Yes.  And thanks, Michael.  I mean it's a great discussion really to I guess figure out how to land messaging.  
     And I think that is the real piece which is at the heart of privacy right now.  It is ensuring that the messaging which is delivered to the customer and to the folks whose data is being used, that it is clear and intelligible.  
     I'm not sure whether that is best served through the buzzwords or short phrases.  As you well represented, I mean these lose nuance but there is a tendency always to focus on something which is fantastic for a pickup in media or to get to the front of the news cycle.
     But I think that always comes with a loss of certain meaning.  And I think that meaning is the space for the messages really communicated to the user.  And I think really I mean privacy especially needs to be communicated in a manner which is clear and is meaningful to the audience, right?  There is not a one size fits all.
     If we look at, for example, constituency with children's privacy, I mean that is quite a different understanding and communication than would to, let's say, a seasoned technical expert.  And I think companies are really understanding, you know, these differences now and the shift.  That the same sort of carbon copy of messaging doesn't work nor land in the same way.
     And I think just understanding that is the piece which is really going to make the most sense here.  And whether that is done best with a short terse statement which can also grab some news cycle, I'm not quite sure.
     We are better looking as it's understandable, sort of lack of legalese.  So I think I have a slightly different take here.  But simplicity is key here, and intelligibility.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: So what do you do when they post we must have data sovereignty?  Probably will be in French or German.  
     But what would you do?  What would you tell your CEO to respond if for some reason he wanted to respond to that tweet?  Or if Brad Smith were to respond, what would be the phrasing and term?
     Because I mean sovereignty has always been part of running countries, right?  How can you be against sovereignty?  But how would Microsoft respond to a tweet like that?
     >> CATHAL MCDERMOTT: I think when we look at the sovereignty issue, that is something which is clearly becoming more important across the globe and occupying more news space.  And we have and do see those types of messages coming out from countries more and more at the moment.
     I think that, once again, I'm not quite sure how we would respond with a tweet or even if a tweet would be the best way to respond to in this kind of debate.
     I think as there are a number of ways to try and influence and move and educate around these debates.  And that comes from, you know, a number of factions within any company's sort of toolbox here to engage.  We would, of course, be engaging on a policy level, but also via just our educational streams to help educate our users and Microsoft's audience.
     And it is multifaceted.  These are difficult discussions, and you know --
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Sorry to put you on the spot.  That was unplanned.  This has not been rehearsed.  
     But Ricardo and Emanuela and Veronica, Wim, how would you respond if the head of a country says we must have data sovereignty and we must have it now?
     >> RICARDO CHAVARRIAGA: If I backtrack a little bit on what we are trying to do here is coming to this sound bite to open the door to the discussion where it really nails.  
     Because we started from a set of different misnomers like cyber security and AI ethics and data governance that all address specific issues.  And this is where the clarity that Veronica was mentioning is needed.
     And but and then we also need this sound bite that says this is what all of these issues entailed.
     So if we really want to get to the sound bite, we need to agree on what is this thing that we want to get or the scenario we want to avoid.  If we want to push, say, one example you want to push for sovereignty as individual or organizational or state level, we can imagine digital autonomy.  If we think about, say, flourishing, we can imagine talking about digital empowerment or digital enlightenment.
     If we want to talk about protection, then we may talk about digital governance or digital regulation.  But then what is this thing that we want to avoid and what are these misconceptions that we want to clarify in terms of data as a commodity?  The digital public sphere?  What is this first point that we need to redefine and we need to get societies and organizations to agree upon?
     And based on that, we can say all of these aspects they point out to this -- someone say the humane approach to digital technologies.  Because data is not the only thing, we may have other things that generate data but have issues on their own.  And then we may say this is not about data but about digital and digital communities or digital ecosystems or digital spaces.  
     Or we may say we really want to avoid unforeseen events and then we really put all the money into regulation and oversight.  But then what is this thing that we want to avoid?  That would be my provocative question.  The challenge is that when we ask these questions we end up with thousands.
     So what is this line that put all of these issues together?  And if we identify that, we can start with an explanation that takes a couple of pages but that will be the best way to later narrow it down to this five syllables that allows us to talk with the Twitter oriented leaders.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: What you just said is incredibly important.  You have to have the hub, the focus, seed that is going to be the one idea that everything else kind of grows from.
     It may be what you just said.  Digital autonomy or, you know, data agency or personal sovereignty.  You know, the idea that I have the ability to control my data.  A little bit like hate speech application contents.  Governments that want to filter the internet and censor the internet, they don't want to give their people the flexibility to make their own choices and to pick their own filters.  And that is the personal censorship function is what a lot of platforms try to so that we don't have this pressure on governments to censor the internet.  
     But again, it's how do we control data?  Well, give users as much control as possible about data about them.  Not my data, but data that might be about me.  I call it two-way transparency.  I will give away data, but you're going to tell me what you are doing with it.  Or mutually assured disclosure is another buzz word, but that sounds a little bit too much like nuclear war and plutonium.  
     Titti or anybody else want to weigh in on this?  I know we are running out of time for coming up with the idea.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA:  Evelyne's comment, what was written in the chat that she does not read about comparing AI ethics and digital human rights.  Maybe you can say a few comments on this.  I don't know.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Can we promote Evelyne?  
     I mean I do agree with her quite strongly that AI ethics is this term that means everything.  
     I have been in three-day conferences where we've talked about everything and at the end people were more confused.  
     The moment I remember was 25 years ago at the NW UNESCO meeting, I stood up and I said we've talked for three days, has anybody defined info ethics?  And the chairman said well, you just weren't listening.  And then a theologian stood up and said no, Dr. Nelson is right, we have not determined whether it is contian ethics or Hegelian ethics, or Confucian ethics. And then we had a 25-minute conversation about that.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA: Let's see maybe Evelyne, maybe you can just intervene the discussion, if you like.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: And Jorge has said a number of very important things.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA: And he can intervene and share his comments, please.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON:  Unfortunately, in the webinar format we have to promote people to panelists.  
     SO we have 20 minutes left.  Perhaps it's time to go to the last section and talk about how this report can do more to impact this debate.  You know, what is missing from the report?  Oh, Emanuela?
     >> EMANUELA GIRARDI: Sorry, I just wanted to add something before your conclusion.  
     I think building up from what Ricardo said, to me one of the most important thing is to agree on anthology.  
     So really to agree on what we mean when we say like data that have to benefit and not to harm people.  So these basic things, I mean they have to be globally agreed.  And then from that probably we can start building like the vision or what -- global vision probably that includes the governance of data.
     But the basic thing is really that everybody agrees on the kind of data anthology.  I think this is one of the key requirements.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Well, one of the nice things about this project, it has brought people like Microsoft into the discussion.  
     We had some great comments earlier in the week by Fujitsu, has their own five principles for responsible use of data and artificial intelligence.  A lot of overlap, a lot of best practices to choose from.  And I think highlighting some of those in our final report would be very helpful.
     So if anybody has other pointers, other sets of principles that we should look at.  You know, we all know about the OECD principles and the European Union has come forward with some very interesting ideas on what needs to be done in the area of artificial intelligence in particular.  Let's keep sharing.
     We do have an opportunity now to spend the last 20 minutes talking about what is next and how to get more ideas and more buzz words and more tweets to shape the debate in the right way.
     Thank you very much, and thanks for trying this experiment.  It didn't quite work the way I had hoped because not as many people up voted.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA:  Evelyne has been promoted, and then we will try to reply to your question in the chat.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Can we promote Jorge as well?
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA:  Evelyne, I think she can intervene now.
     >> EVELYNE TAUCHNITZ: Can you hear me now?  Hello, everybody.  
     I was just, my comment about ethics and human rights, I cannot agree really on that.  Because while I'm working in both in human right and social ethics.  And just to maybe specify that and also highlight the importance of ethics and also values, I think.  
     Like ethics really is about the study or science of different moral norms.  That presumes that there are lots of moral norms out there.  Some of them legally binding, for example, human rights.  But lots of them also not.  
     I think the concern of ethics is not just only to kind of say or judge what is right or wrong behaviors, but it's comparing these different norms.  There might be situations where it is ethically correct to violate human rights, or you could argue that way.  And I think it is very important when we talk about data and when we talk about new technologies and the internet in general, to also try to find agreement on what values we want to base these technologies.
     Like in the sense of what purposes should they serve?  And once we can find an agreement on that, we should set the boundaries of the technologies accordingly.  
     Like for what purposes are data support -- data supposed to be collected, for instance?  For what purpose it is not?  Did users agree to them?  Did they not agree to them?  
     And to the last governance question, which we didn't talk about so much, in which forum can you discuss these questions?  And where can you find such agreement?  And what political legitimacy also is there in a sense?
     And what actors should be responsible really talking about the issues.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: I'm glad you could bring this in.  Because I didn't want people to think I don't care about ethics.  But I'm just being practical in saying we have a base to build on when it comes to human rights.  
     You go to different countries and say I think it is -- you know, we have done comparisons.  You go around the world and you ask people ethical questions and ask them to make values-based choices.  And it is amazing how different the answers are.
     When I worked at IBM, they did a survey every year of the new employees.  And they had data for more than 300,000 -- actually half a million, 500,000 different previous and current employees of IBM.  
     And the differences between countries where people put the society and the community first and countries like the U.S. where we are crazy about individualism.  I mean the U.S. is very unusual that way.
     So it is much harder to get this agreement on ethics.  I think values is a better term because when you talk to technologists and tell them we're going to talk about ethics, they look blankly and think well, I didn't take a philosophy class in college, you know.  
     But you talk about values, that makes them more at ease and more comfortable.  But if you say human rights, they at least know how to look that up and find what that means.
     >> EVELYNE TAUCHNITZ: I think like maybe a common concept is also norms.  Because there we can talk about moral norms, legal norms, social norms.  And that's really like something people can relate to as well.
     And I would specify we should talk about human rights norms.  In the sense we have the advantage, I completely agree that they are already internationally agreed upon.  I mean that is something you can build on if you want to find some kind of agreement.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Let's turn over to Jorge.  And then Titti, who can take us to the end.  Jorge, you've had some great comments in the chat, and I really wanted to bring you into the conversation.
     >> JORGE CANCIO: Thank you so much, Michael. 
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Introduce yourself because not everybody watched your earlier session.
     >> JORGE CANCIO: This is Jorge Cancio.  So thank you for putting me on spot.  You see I am wearing my business attire so I'm completely ready for this invention.  
     I will pick up what I said on digital ecosystem.  I think that we have been focused on geographic, geometric analogies, metaphors for the last 20 years or more.  And this has many limitations and many implications which remain.  
     And also it directs our imagination to something that can be governed to something that can be taken, to something that is passive, and that can be dominated by us humans, I think.
     And if you take this idea of digital ecosystem, it is an interactive space and interdependent space to take the terminology of the panel on digital cooperation and combines natural and social relations between individuals and communities.
     And this also gives space to the idea which we are exploring of digital self-determination for the individual but also for the communities.  Ecosystem also brings with it the idea of systemic relationships, of dynamic relationships.  Ecosystems plural, and there are no one size fits all.  
     There are differences in the ecosystems.  And I think especially in this present and future where we are entering a time where digital is pervasive and where we are really becoming hybrid beings between our digital life and our -- and normal or physical life, it is something that you cannot really distinguish any more.  And this will evolve and be increased in the next years.  
     In this notion of ecosystem is much richer and also links up to something we have been seeing during this IGF, the mega trend of digitization is absolutely and intimately connected to the environment and to climate change.  And so I think it's a great idea.
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: Thanks for being part of the discussion.  
     One final thought.  I'm going to continue to monitor the Q&A, and I hope there will be other ideas and people will up vote the greatest ideas.
     So many of the terms we use are so negative.  And sometimes that is by design.  But artificial intelligence.  We don't want artificial food.  Big tech.  That brings ideas of big government and big brother.  
     Again, there's so many terms that have been designed in some cases to cause a negative reaction.  We have got to -- and sometimes because of the movies and science fiction terms that were positive got turned into something like killer robots and Skynet.  
     So we have to think new ideas partly to get rid of the old confusion and the old connotations.  Anyway, thanks for a great discussion.  
     We are going to incorporate a lot of these terms.  And if we can find a way to say digital ecosystem in five syllables, I think we have a winner.  Titti, do you want to wrap it up.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA: This question that referred to the discussion of the data technology in an internet governance concept.  What should be the next steps?
     We will try to share how we can address these issues and where and by who should be discussed, and what is the role of the BPF inside the context of the IGF itself.  
     Because, as you know, the UN Secretary General issued the rules on digital cooperation which identifies priority or asks the digital corporation.  
     Also, at the same time we have the paper or recommendation that also assign to identify concrete ideas on how to move forward.  And then we have also the MAG, the working group of strength and strategy by the MAG that does also gives useful suggestion the way to go forward on this context.
     Then the question is where and how the BPF should be in this new context.  As you know, there are several idea on this because some are sharing the idea that BPF could be used as politic incubator to incubate policy and law for public discussion.  
     And some say you have the role of cooperation accelerator to try to focus on some issue or try to bring a range group of institutions and process on these issues.  
     I want just to share with you and ask you some idea what do you think?  What should be the role of BPF in the new scenario that is the IGF plus.  So please share your idea in the chat and also taking the floor and try to see what we think about this.  
     I don't know if Anriette can say something on this.  Wim, there are several idea.  Do you think?  
     Should the BPF be used as -- I think both functions I mean it is important to share it and understand what BPF should lead the discussion in the future in the next scenario of the IGF plus?
     >> EVELYNE TAUCHNITZ: Can I say something about that? 
     What I like with BPF, I mean it's best practices in a sense.  Like best ideas and best ways of doing things.  
     And I think there is a huge innovative and creative potential which should be used for policy making.  
     And actually, personal feeling I have within the IGF, I mean it is Internet Governance Forum.  The governance aspect I think is not so intensively discussed as it could be in a sense.
     I think it would be good to really kind of focus on creative or innovative ways of governance in a sense of policy incubator as you just mentioned.  This is my like spontaneous reaction to it that in a sense that I think it would be really great if it could develop this way.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA: Thanks a lot, Evelyne.
     >> RICARDO CHAVARRIAGA: I'm not very familiar with these activities, my first intervention.  
     But one thing that I'm somehow afraid is there are so many discussions and so many initiatives that appear at the same time that we may have the issue of too many cooks or that we don't know exactly where to pay attention to.
     And I think it would be important to see how the interaction with other initiatives developing governance mechanisms and standards and recommendations can be cross fertilized with interaction with this forum.
     And I liked a lot the previous comment about having a policy incubator for new forms of governance because this is something that is becoming a recurrent theme when discussing emerging technologies in general that we see the current approaches seem unfit.  But we don't really know yet what we need to replace them with.  
     So I think having a policy incubator that has a good interaction and active dialogue with the organizations developing standards interacting with governance bodies, I think would be a great, great way to put forward the discussions that you are holding here.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA: Thanks a lot, Ricardo.  Any other suggestions or comments on this?  Please share your ideas.
     >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN: Thanks so much for having this session.  I think what is valuable about a session like this is that it actually really brings together diverse ideas and perspectives on the problem.  
     And in a way it feels to me -- and I know some of you that are working in the BPF also feel that as well -- that this shouldn't be the end of the BPF cycle.  In a way, it feels to me as if we are just beginning in some ways to come up with really creative solutions.
     So I think we should look at how we do BPFs in the IGF and how much time we give them.  How many opportunities we give people to come together in this kind of format.  And I was just talking to Wim, maybe we need an intersessional event where the BPF or all of the intersessional work of the BPF comes together to have this kind of session.  
     I think we need to continue and give the topic time, and I think we shouldn't be over ambitious about finding so-called best practices.  I think that in a way becomes quite intimidating.  It's useful, but maybe that can also limit the collaboration that emerges from the BPF process.  
     But I just invite all of you to come to the session later today.  We'll be looking at the future of BPFs.  Because it is the moment now, we need to look at how we can strengthen and involve this modality.  Thanks, Titti.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA: Thanks a lot, Andriette.  Any other comments or suggestions or ideas?
     >> MICHAEL NELSON: This is Michael.  If I can just add to what Andriette said.  
     Best practices are great, but when I was in government and business, I found that worse practices and worst practices, particularly if you didn't understand why they didn't work, were often more useful.  But Nobody wants to talk about failure, so I hope we'll do more about that.
     >> EVELYNE TAUCHNITZ: I think best practices don't have to be real necessarily.  I think we can also analyze the worst cases and then think how we should have done it better.  
     I don't think that we always need these practical case studies in order to talk about best practices.  But in a sense, we can also discuss what could be done better without the real cases.  That is how policies are usually designed and drafted like just thinking how should we do things.  How can we do them better for the future.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA: Thanks a lot.  Anything else?  Veronica, did you want to add something?
     >> VERONICA ARROYO: I think what is important, and I agree with some of the people who are writing on the chat is that we can also -- I agree that this is not -- this should not be the end of the work that the BPF does.  
     I think as people who we want to continue working on this, it is important for us.  It's important also to include cases from other parts.  I agree with Evelyne saying that we can start working on cases and analyze those cases from a mutual point and from that create our best practices.  I think we really are here coming and hearing from different perspectives, that is really important.
     So I will keep more diversity and more work we can do, I think.  There is a lot of people really interested on that, and I think that is really great.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA: Okay.  Thanks a lot, Veronica.  We have a few minutes left.  I will take the floor to Wim and you can add a few words.  
     Wim?  Because we are out of time so I don't think we can accept other comments.  If that is correct, Wim?
     >> WIM DEGEZELLE: We are already one minute over time.  I would like to say two things.  
     Coming back to the discussion I was having with Andriette offline, I had the same feeling as I had last year at the IGF that this is a great starting point for a BPF discussion.  
     And sometimes it feels that final -- I feel a bit sorry this could have been a wonderful discussion to start developing the dialogue throughout the year.  So we should be looking into a way on how to enter this and build on the discussion we had today.
     And the session Andriette also pointed at to discuss the future of IGFs and also follow up on this topic is later today at 1:30 UTC.  You can see that in the schedule.  The title is Preparing IGFs for the Next Cycle and Following Cycle.
     So that is 1:30 UTC.  So I would like suggest that this discussion be continued there.
     And then for this year's BPF, I will just point to links in the chat.  The idea is that the BPF document itself is finalized shortly after the IGF.  
     So we would welcome additional comments and feedback on this discussion and the report either by e-mail or please don't hesitate to subscribe to the mailing list and continue the discussion we had today over there.  
     So then I would like to thank all for participating to the session and I hope to see many of you later on at the discussion at 1:30. And thank you to the panelists and the facilitators.
     >> CONCETTINA CASSA: Okay.  Thanks a lot.  Bye-bye.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-9-high-level-leaders-track-economy^^

    >> MODERATOR: Okay.  If we are ready, it is time to go.  Bon jour, and good morning from northwestern Italy in a pandemic.  But constructive and happy mood.  
     Good morning to our speakers and to those who are going to follow this high-level panel organized in the framework of the 15th Annual Internet Governance Forum organized by the United Nations.
     We have a very interesting set of participants today that I will be happy to introduce to you right now before introducing the meeting itself.  
     And in no particular order, I would like to welcome Mr. Victor Harison, which is Commissioner for Economic Affairs of the African Union.  
     I would like to welcome to Daniela Bronstrup, Deputy Director General and head of Regulatory Framework.  And she was also the former part of the former country and culture of the MAG.  And she's, of course, from the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy in Germany.  
     And good morning to Armida Salsiah Alisjahbana, Undersecretary General of the United Nations and Executive Secretary of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific.  
     And good morning to Mr. Yi, who is the Deputy Director-General of the World Trade Organization, based in Geneva.
     And good morning to Daniel Trujillo, Executive Vice President and Global Chief for Ethics & Compliance Officer of the American Walmart.  
     And then good morning, bonjour to Gillian Marcelle, and she's the founder and managing member of Resilience Capital Ventures LLC.  Welcome, Dr. Marcell.
     And then good morning to Mr. Mukhisa Kituyi, Secretary General of UNCTD, the United Nation Conference on Trade and Development.  
     And last, but not least, but not finally, Mr. Edward Anderson, the Chief Information Officer and Director of the Information Technology Department of the IMF.
     As you unfortunately know, very well, we are in the middle of a very dire pandemic.  And all of the economies of the planet so far have been severely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic itself.  And the effect is that we cannot meet today in person, but we get to do it through the digital.  
     And that is why we are discussing this because the use of digital technologies can help reduce the harm and, for instance, we are placing more importance on digital trade and remote working as we are doing right now.
     But, of course, we know that this process in many economic areas can also bring some concerns, and these are related to accessibility, inequality, and security just to mention a couple of them.
     And as you know very well, the secretary of the United Nations, Gutierrez, has promised, has committed himself to present before the end of the year his road map for digital cooperation is a document which will be very important to tackle diversity and to help the world to have a better digitalized relation.
     So that is why we have this panel of high-level discussants, and we are going to try to explore the role of the internet in the public digital policy and see what is the role it can play for the economic recovery in the post-emergency situations, and what improvements are needed to go forward.
     Now I will ask each of the panelists to switch on their mics and switch on their videos so we can go into our little show.  
     And I remind you, you have no more than three minutes to answer my questions.  And the first one is for Mr. Harison for the African Union.  
     Very plainly, I'm wondering, how did COVID-19 affect the economy in the African Union overall?  And what do you think are the policies on utilizing digital technologies that can reduce the pandemic negative impacts?  
     And which are the solution that you think should be prioritized -- that is a very difficult -- prioritized.  In Italiano (Speaking non-English language).  I cannot say it in Italian as well.  So you've got three minutes.
     >> VICTOR HARISON: Thank you, Chair.  Good morning and good afternoon, everyone.  
     The COVID-19 pandemic has caused socio-economic impacts in Africa.  Among the economic impacts we can mention of recession of between minus 4.9% to minus 2.1% according to the estimate of the African Union.  A loss of at least in dollar 65 billion in terms of foreign trade.
     A considerable drop in all commodity prices, a sudden increase in the inflation rate.  Losses in public revenue and external financing including aid to African countries.  
     In the meantime, public spending is on the rise because of an unforeseen expenditure on AF and social medias, we need to deal with the pandemic and contain it. 
     The premise of a food crisis due to a contraction in agriculture or prediction of between 2.6% and 7%.  It is industry and weaken the private sector, yet it is engine of growth.  
     The most affected sectors include agricultural sector, accommodation and food services, manufacturing, et cetera.  
     On the social level, the pandemic have significant impact in area of health and as gravity, social development issues linked to poverty, to risk of farming to loss of jobs.
     The economic department has launched last October a report on the socio-economic impact of COVID-19 on Africa and the opportunity to bring more revenues and resilient emerging economies.  
     I will only develop a paragraph on the leveraging the digitalization which can (?). 
     Policies promoting the digital technologies in Africa to reap the benefits and this revelation are guided by the African Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa 2020-2023.  
     According to the bank, reaching for Africa goal of universal and affordable internet coverage will increase GDP growth in Africa by 2% per year.  Indeed, for images of digital area has offered opportunities but can be asked for Africa's socioeconomic trust formation.
     Let me give you some initiatives.  One, digitalization is making a headways in agriculture sector in Ghana and in Nigeria.  Digitalization is improving healthcare system in Kenya and in Cameroon.  
     In response to COVID-19 pandemic, a number of countries have used technology to detect and limit the spread of virus.  Madagascar has developed a digital platform to identify and track affected cases.  
     Education.  Education is also reaping the benefits of digitalization.  Universities in Egypt and Ghana and South Africa, et cetera.  
     Bank digital services have grown in Africa with a positive effect on financial inclusion.  And for African continental free trade area, a flagship project of our Agenda 2063 will be from January 2021.  
     According to Veronica, African free trade, continental free trade area would raise inter-Africa trade from 15% to 25% compared to Africa free trade area.
     It also adds the potential to provide an appropriate platform for digital trade as reported share of digital trade to drive economic development and transformation in Africa remains largely in exploring.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Commissioner.  And you have given us a clue about how digital solutions can help Africa to tackle a problem which is now a food crisis mainly and leads to a very poor situation in the country.  
     I guess it is pretty different in Germany, but differences and difficulties would be different there.  And I ask Dr. Daniela Bronstrup, how did the COVID-19 pandemic affect Germany?  And which are the digital technologies and digital solutions you are foreseeing in order to try to tackle the pandemic?
     >> DANIELA BRONSTRUP: Thank you, and good morning, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.  
     I think it is fair to say that for us in Germany the pandemic has developed some unwanted and unexpected stress test of the digitalization in all areas of life.
     The operator of the world's largest internet mart is situated in Frankfort, and it reports that internet traffic has increased dramatically during the pandemic.  For example, video calls have increased by 120%.  And the data traffic amounts to 9.1 terabyte per second right now.  
     Therefore, I'm really happy to say that we haven't experienced any failure of our digital infrastructure throughout the pandemic.  
     But certainly the coronavirus has also exposed some digital deficits we have in Germany.  I think, however, that it is more important that the crisis has put those deficits and digitalization as a whole very high top on the agenda at all decision makers.
     The crisis also forced companies and particular SMEs to improve their efficiency and financial stability.  Our government decided to give an additional boost to an extended set of tech startups for their digital efforts with funding programs for SMEs as an example.  
     More and more people expect every service to be digitalized and accessible.  And companies of course, as well.  This is what people foster now about our Online Access Act.
     One essential to helping to reduce the pandemic's negative impact is, of course, contact tracing.  This wouldn't be possible without digital technologies.  In Germany, the coronavirus warning app is very good example of how digital technologies can help us to fight against the pandemic.
     But this is only true if people trust them.  And that is why transparency, data protection, and decentralized data storage are just as important for us as the principle that its use should, of course, be voluntary to everybody.  
     This has more than 18 million people are now using the coronavirus warning app.  And every two seconds it is being downloaded from one of the stores.  
     And last, but not least, we are just beginning to explore the potential of digital education.  The experience of the coronavirus crisis has made clear that digital education is not only feasible but also extremely reasonable.
     So even though we, of course, faced a lot of economic trouble due to the crisis, we are now looking much more positively into the year 2021.  But now we expect an economic growth of 4.4% in Germany for next year.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Daniela.  And you said that more and more people expect services to be digitalized and now it is probably the future.  
     So that gives me the chance to ask a question to Armida Salsiah Alisjahbana, Under Secretary General of the United Nations.  
     And talk about Asia-Pacific because this is the region which is in forefront of digital innovation.  But, of course, as we can see, it is the region where the digital divide is growing and where differences are growing, too.  
     And there are new forms of development gaps which the COVID-19 pandemic has made bigger.  Can you tell us more about the regional specificities of your digital divide and what do you plan to do to try to solve this not irrelevant problem?  The floor is to you.
     >> ARMIDA SALSIAH ALISJAHBANA:  Thank you very much, Marco, for the question.  Very good morning, good afternoon, good evening to all of you.
     So let me respond to the question basically first on the regional specificities.  Again, our region, Asia-Pacific, certainly is a very diverse and also dynamic region.  So, therefore, in terms of this digital divide or digital connectivity, the specific or the specificities in our region is the three speed, if I may call it, the three speed region in digital connectivity as well as innovation in which there are countries advanced the more developed economies and some of the upper middle income countries in our region which basically these countries are the frontier, yeah, in terms of digital technology.
     And these countries have, let's say, not only the 4G but they already started the 5G and even they are developing the 6G connectivity coverage.  And usage is widespread.  And also including affordable and reliable in terms of internet connection.
     And then there are these middle-income countries that actually majority of countries in Asia-Pacific region are middle income countries, of course.  Lower middle-income countries and a few them are the so-called upper middle-income countries.  And remarkable dynamics in terms of closing the digital and innovation gap in countries.  Although, of course, inequality, the digital divide in the respective countries is still prevalent.
     And the third category of countries are the countries that still have very limited access, internet access.  And, in fact, according to the latest data, still around 2.3 billion people are offline while many millions remain under-connected.  
     Again, Asia-Pacific as a whole is about 4.6 billion.  So half is still offline.  And many, many millions remain under-connected.  
     And again, there are these countries that belongs to LDCs and the landlocked developed countries and sits where the broadband internet is unaffordable for the majority of the population.
     So on proposed solutions, of course, we see this is addressing digital divide especially now even more so becomes a matter of very, very high policy priority.  So therefore, how to close this digital divide.  And also in terms of COVID-19 recovery in terms of the stimulus package priorities, I think it has to go into also this, how to close this digital divide in the sense of building the digital infrastructure, both hardware and softwares, of course.
     And therefore countries in the region needs yet to push for the big investment including the planning for that to leapfrog into the next generation of networks.  Because otherwise then you are lagging behind, you start to compound the problem.
     And then how to incentivize innovative business models and practices including social enterprise, in fact investing in universal digital literacy.  As well as, of course, the most important thing, how to improve or upskilling this digital skill formation as part of the life-long learning among the communities.  So over.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Armida.  You gave us a very frightening figure; 2.3 billion people are offline.  And so that means that we are many people in the same world with very, very different situations.
     So this is the right point to call in Mr. Yi.  I mean he is the Deputy Director General for the World Trade Organization.  
     And because some argue that trade focuses on convenience rather than solutions that improve the lives of the world's majority, and trade is sometimes an enemy.  
     Mr. Yi, is there a way to trade for a better widespread progress to mitigate the economic implication of COVID-19?  I mean how can you make trade more friendly for all of the world using the technological instruments?
     >> YI XIAOZHUN: Thank you, Chair.  Hello, everyone.  
     At the WTO, we were already well aware that digital technologies and the internet had become essential to working, doing business; and, of course, conducting international trade.
     The health crisis not only confirmed this but further intensified the trend.  The WTO found that the impacts of the pandemic on trade has been pervasive.
     Although world trade had already been slowing before the pandemic, merchandise trade in nominal dollar terms was down 21% in second quarter of 2020 compared to the previous year, while commercial services trade was down 30%.  
     For merchandise, it severely disrupted global value chains and delivery channels.  Moreover, it altered trade conversation towards basic necessities and health-related products.  It also stimulated online purchasing over the internet.
     For services trade, it caused travel and tourism to plummet, for obvious reasons.  At the same time, however, it boosted demand for a great many online services.  Video conferencing, e-learning tools, and telemedicine became essential to people's lives.  For those reasons, the pandemic affects many aspects of our work at the WTO.
     Our members have integrated into our agenda work on customs and investment facilitation to help build the necessary infrastructure for physical and the digital trade flow.
     We are also exploring for small and medium enterprises and principles for e-commerce.  We pursue our work in these areas in the hope that trade will mitigate the effects of COVID-19, foster economic growth, and improve the standard of living in developing countries.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Well, thank you to you.  And it is the moment to drive ourself into a totally different world.  
     From WTO, which is the referee of trade to those who do trade in the largest way.  So Mr. Daniel Trujillo is the Executive Vice-President for Walmart.  And Walmart is probably the biggest chain of hypermarket stores in the world.  It is interesting to know how has COVID-19 affected your way of working?  
     In my newspaper, I saw in the headline last week saying that you are cutting the number of robots in your hypermarkets and going back to have more people in the supermarkets.  
     Basically maybe this is one of the reaction.  But what is your response actually to the current pandemic crisis?
     >> DANIEL TRUJILLO: Thank you very much.  Good morning, everyone, and thank you for the opportunity to be part of the forum with this group of selected leaders.  
     I would like to touch three key aspects.  One is the e-government deficit.  The other one is the potential that we see.  And lastly, I would like to talk about license permitting.  
     You know, COVID-19 has unmasked the huge deficit in digitalization of government service, many of which have been largely paralyzed during periods of remote work because of overreliance in paper and in person steps.
     Yet, COVID-19 has also shown that rapid acceleration of e-government is every bit as possible as it is urgent and important for us.
     You know, we are all experiencing in the private sector, we, our customers, suppliers, and other stakeholders have found ways of hugely accelerating digitalization of our own ways of work and customer proposition.  We know it can be done.  
     We are now resources in helping governments get up that curve quickly as well.  In terms of licensing and permitting, within e-government digitalization of licensing and permitting must be the highest priority right now.  
     There are three key aspects why we think that way.  First, across all governments, stimulus in the form of deficit spending in each region will be reaching its limit.  So what is most needed at this point is private sector funded shovel ready investment projects.  This is exactly what is being held up by huge COVID era delays in the licensing and permitting system, for example.
     E-government will influence corporate investment over the medium term, digitalize permits around unlocking projects that have been already approved and which are just waiting on permits before the shovels break the ground.
     Second, direct and indirect users of license permit systems include the entire public and private house market as well as corporate real estate, architecture and engineering firms and almost any business.  So, that is, any business that is seeking to grow.  
     So digitalization of license and permits helps get a critical mass of public and private sector users to adopt digital tools.  Making it an on-ramp into a massive digital economy.
     Third, and lastly, license and permit systems have historically been plagued by corruption.  Digital licensing and permitting ensures more efficient and reliable provision of public services and limits opportunities for corruption by strengthening transparency and accountability.  
     In short, digitalization of licensing and permitting must be a top priority right now for COVID-19 recovery and resiliency.  This is something that is key for both public and private governments.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: You're welcome.  
     Talking about what governments and public institutions and global institutions can do, I would like to give the floor to Mukhisa Kituyi, which is the Secretary General of UNCTD. 
     And, of course, my question again, how can an ethical and efficient use of technology provide us with a solution to mitigate the emergency in the digital divide?  
     But we have had from the floor a question from Wolfgang who is asking a comment on global digital taxation, whether it would be good or bad.  
     And possibly, Mr.  Kituyi, this is something that you can comment, please.
     >> MUKHISA KITUYI: Thank you very much.  I want to thank the brilliant panelists for the refreshing ideas shared with us.
     In dealing with the ethic, the practical, the challenges for the government today, we have been trying to look at what are the intrinsic challenges that are deriving from the pandemic.  And how has the pandemic magnified challenges that already pre-existed.  
     And it has come clear and come through from the others the digital platform companies have been the main beneficiaries of the economics of the pandemic.  As you can see well, the Dow Jones Index was down 5% over the first -- over the six months between March and September this year.  JD value went up 100%.  Companies like Amazon, Apple, eBay, Microsoft and Alibaba, their businesses gained between 40 and 50% in that period.  
     So there is no doubt that the stress for some has really been a gift for many digital businesses.  
     This brings us to the next challenge, those who are not already prepared for the digital economy have been farther set back in the challenges.
     I want to share with you a recent study we did.  We sent out a survey in 23 developing countries asking businesses and government what have been the main challenges of the rising significance of digital inclusion and digital business during the pandemic.  
     50% of the respondents from the business community were saying that the high costs of broadband services which preexisted the pandemic became particularly important at the time when they have to transform more of the businesses online.  
     Secondly, that in countries where government have not had a priority for e-commerce you still have the dinosaur issues of infrastructure, policy, priorities and the absence of a clear internet framework, and clear policy and consistency on tax.  
     Now, on tax at this level is another side that has not been mentioned, which is because of the pressure for stimulus and public revenue, authorities have been major squeezes in raising taxes normally.  We are seeing growing attention to further taxing of digital businesses not just in the volume of services being offered, but the digital startups facing entry point challenges because of the desire for more public revenue.  And this is going to be a condition that is around for some time.
     But there is also another pre-existing condition which has been exacerbated.  The absence of happening between growing e-commerce potential and fiscal logistics for the movement of goods.  
     I come from East Africa where there has been significant great capacity for online purchase of goods.  Unfortunately, you will find physically because of the absence of clear protocols on cross-border movement of trucks with goods that have been electronically procured.  For example, if you go to the border between Kenya and Uganda, you'll find trucks are back 50 kilometers in the queue because of the customs.  But more importantly, a credible procedure on health protocols at the border.  
     These are non-digital challenge of logistics of a digital economy has been exacerbated by the crisis we are going through.
     Let me just come back to the question you asked specifically about taxation.  You know digital economy reports 2019, we had mentioned there are unequal relations between countries which are the drivers of digital business and countries which are only included primarily as digital consumers.  
     So the developmental challenge is how can consumers have something, whether it's service or any other form of gain beyond being consumers of a service that is now predominating the digital space.  This is very much related to the challenges of what is fair succession.  
     Unfortunately, the world has not structured these debates adequately.  It is hostage to a pressure that have affected rulemaking at the WTO and at the levels of hosted technology competition between countries which even strengthen the spirit into fracturing digital governance or internet governance issues as well.
     But we have a number of specifics with ongoing discussions how to apply the de minimus rule on the packages of digital procurement of goods, how much is that fair to countries which look at these opportunities missed to raise taxation on imports, challenges on taxation -- the value of debtor that is monetized by digital platform companies.  Should benefits go partly to the sources of that data is what is being commercialized.  And, of course, the question of price of duty on cross-border because of digital economy.
     I think this conversation has come to the point where the traditional internet are insufficient from a development perspective.  Increasingly must look to hear the voices of the most valuable trying to catch up and the most excluded in the benefits even when they are on land with broadband.  I think that is how I would respond.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks a lot.  I mean the point you raised about digital customs.  I think it is a crucial one but depends very much on digital education.
     Again, it is the beginning and the end of the story at the same time.  So it is definitely needed, public effort to do this, but also investments.  
     And Dr. Marcelle, you are the founder and managing recommend of the Resilience Capital Venture.  Your job is to see that money gets invested in the emerging markets and to foster growth and foster a better life for everybody.
     So I was wondering again, if you can tell us how can digital technologies from the point of view help the world especially the emerging markets and the -- and the less lucky parts of the world to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic?
     >> GILLIAN MARCELLE: Thank you so much.  And I hope that you can hear me well.
     >> MODERATOR: We do.
     >> GILLIAN MARCELLE: I want to thank the other panelists who have laid out many of the structural areas very well.
     And to speak specifically to your points about investment, I want to make a couple of points.  
     First of all, I think that the COVID-19 pandemic has very clearly identified the structural differences and variations across the world --
     And so the economic crisis that has come in the wake of COVID-19 has not been equal.  And so for emerging markets and emerging countries where there was little participation in the digital economy, the prices would have exacerbated that -- those difficulties.  
     However, that decoupling of the digital economy from what is happening in the real economy is also being seen also in countries like the United States and also in Europe.  But particularly in the United States and the Secretary General of UNCTD made reference to this.  Where you had a decoupling of the very large players in the digital economy having had -- actually having had their market value increase significantly while there is considerable crisis in many other parts of the society and the economy.  And I think that that is mirrored on a global scale.
     So what we find around the world is we find that the crisis has shown up the structural imbalances across the world.  Where I think that there is room for some optimism is that we have also seen tremendous flows of investment funds, capital being allocated into ESG and responsible investment funds.
     What we have not seen, and this comes to my hope for policy recommendation coming out of this, is that we have not seen a step up in an acceleration in blended finance models.  So blended finance being not only the combination of private sector capital flows and public finance but also increasing the emphasis on other forms of capital other than financial capital.
     And so if we had that sort of approach led perhaps by the UN system and other members of the international development community, we would be able to tackle the fact that even before the COVID-19 pandemic all technologies are socially constructed and so we should not be surprised.  
     We only have to go back to the history of looking at digitalization, whether it is missing links from the ITU whether it's knowledge societies from Robin Mansell where the OTAG had a very important role to play, to understanding what have we missed in the last 20 years in not anticipating we would have these kinds of digital divides?  
     And also no one has yet mentioned that there is a gender divide.  And so the ways in which the digital divide shows up is not gender neutral.
     And so I would expect that UN women and having played such an important role 20 years ago would be involved in developing any of the proactive solutions that this group and others may come up with in terms of how do we go forward.
     Just one further point.  I'm encouraged also by seeing different forms of multi-stakeholder partnership and I'm particularly encouraged by something called the Green Economy Coalition that is looking at ways of ensuring that even the stimulus funds that have been, you know, put forward in developed countries are used well but with a view to having that done with an ethical basis and also having regard to inclusivity.  
     So I think that there is -- on one side there is crisis and there is pain.  But if we harness the intensity of this moment there is also an opportunity to learn from it and to produce some of the policy changes that have been, you know, called for, for some decades.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, Dr.  Marcelle.  It appears from what you all say that the COVID-19 pandemic have been drawing in some dividing lines, increasing differences and increasing imbalances.
     So it's a good moment to ask Mr. Anderson from the IMF about these differences and about the role that technology did play and is playing during this crisis.  Especially related to the fact that now we have changed the way we are working.  We are mostly working from home.  And so there is a new relation and a new way of working.  
     So how can we be helped by technology, Dr. Anderson?
     >> ED ANDERSON: Well, first of all, thank you, Marco.  And also greetings to the other panelists.  
     As the IMF's Managing Director has said many times, quote, digitalization is the big winner of the crisis, end quote.  It is important to realize the crisis has three phases.
     One, countries had to reduce the amount of the lockdown measures.  And many are now back in this stage.  Two, they have to recover from the crisis.  And three, as they are doing so, they have to build a more resilient economy.  Technologies and, of course, the internet are playing a different role for each phase.
     For phase one, as many of my co-panelists have explained, those who have access to the internet have been less impacted thanks to e-commerce, remote working, remote education, or digital payments.
     It is clear that while digitalization was an aspiration before the crisis in many of the least developed countries, it is now a necessity to get out of this crisis and become more resilient to future shocks.  
     But instead of repeating what others have said on the benefits of technology, let me share some observations on the new digital risks and limitations that we noted.
     Technology has not helped everyone equally.  In every country from the U.S.A. to Ghana, the crisis has shown the significant negative impact of the digital divide.  Meaning those who have access to the internet compared with those who don't.  Those who can afford it, those who know how to use it, et cetera.  
     Countries now -- must now concentrate their efforts to provide connectivity to the hardest populations to reach physically, economically, or to access those who -- those with digital and financial literacy constraints.
     Second, as you know, women have been particularly impacted during the crisis, and Dr. Marcelle noted this as well, because they often have jobs that are not tele-workable.  And more often than men, they tend to take care of the children who stay at home, and especially now stay at home.  
     Countries like Togo or Pakistan, for example, have recognized this issue and have used mobile phones to prioritize the cash transfer programs to women.  This is an example of smart digital policy that makes sense economically.
     Finally, more digitalization and more internet services introduces more digital risks.  Managing digital risks cannot be an afterthought.  We the international community, public and private sector, have a responsibility to build forward a better world that is safe, robust, and sustainable.
     Cyber security comes to mind, of course, but that is not all.  We also have to prevent further digital divide, or the concentration of digital power and data will remain in the hands of a limited number of big tech companies.  Privacy also becomes more critical than ever as we produce more data in this new digital world.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Well, thanks.  We are running a little bit late on schedule, but I think this is acceptable.
     And you just said, Mr. Anderson, that the big winner of the crisis is digital.  But is it?  Because soon after you underlined the problems that we are facing right now.  
     And this is why I invite you to explore now to see what the role of the internet and the public digital policies can be in order to try to solve the problems you all have been underlining so far.
     Because things are getting better, but they are not working as well as we would expect.  We have seen how many people are not connected, how many people are at a bad line.  And even here I have a colleague who must come to the office every day because in his area the connection is bad.  And I'm talking about the northwestern part of Italy, which is supposed to be rich and happy.
     So the second session would be about this.  I invite you again to try to respect when possible the three-minute ceiling for the conversation.  
     And I will start again with Mr. Harison from the African Union.  After you heard of this, what would you ask all of the stakeholders, the informational institution to help you in order to have a better economic recovery?  Or, to put it bluntly, is there a silver bullet to help Africa?
     >> VICTOR HARISON: Thank you.  Regarding IGP areas of cooperation, I will make three points which seems to me particularly important.
     One, infrastructure.  The development of digitalization cannot fortify unless Africa address its sizeable deficit in digital infrastructure.  But you know this is a big investment.  
     Two, education.  Education systems need to be remoderate but even addition (?) programs for both basic and address the digital skills to make sure African youth are employable.  And especially for post-COVID era in which digital skills will be at the core of many occupations.
     Three, macroeconomic and physical tools.  Digital technology should be explained to macro economy and fiscal policy tools to provide a host of digital solutions for economic transformation on the continent.  
     As I mentioned earlier, a digital transformation strategy for Africa has been developed and adopted and some initiatives have been taken to harvest digital technologies and innovation to transfer Africa societies and economies and promote Africa's integration during inclusive economy growth, stimulate job creation, areas with digital divide and eradicate poverty to secure with the benefits of digital revolution for socio-economic development in this regard.
     The development of cooperation between stakeholders should be of these framework and pursue the existing initiatives.  And the framework for cooperation between stakeholders should be adding it with this continental strategy and continue the initiatives carried out.  I thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Well, thanks to you.  And we see that the African problem is relevant.  
     But also in Germany there were troubles, as in most of the European countries, in all of the European countries where travels because of the coronavirus and generally experienced a big drop in the GNP.  
     And even if Dr. Bronstrup says that in Germany there was no failure, which is something that we would expect for Germany.  On the other hand, not all went in the right direction.  
     So I was wondering, is there something high tech that you missed and what is the lesson you could draw from this very difficult month and year?
     >> DANIELA BRONSTRUP: Thank you.  Yes, and you are completely right, of course, we run into economic trouble, as I mentioned before, due to the crisis.
     And it is very difficult to estimate right now how that will go on.  But right now we are quite optimistic and this is also due to the fact that the German government acted very quickly in helping especially companies that have been affected by the crisis with the aim also to safeguard jobs, of course.  
     The German Parliament decided on an assistance package of historic proportions.  And after that because it was only the first step, we decided to invest much more in future technologies.
     Dr. Marcelle asked for that right now, and I think that is an important point to look into the future in overcoming the crisis, and that is why we will invest in future technologies.  That is true for green technologies, but also for digital technologies like, for example, investments in artificial intelligence in a competitive European AI network in the construction of two computers in Germany, investments in the 5G network investment in future communication technologies, but also in the automation and public administration.  
     You mentioned that before that is very important for the citizens about public services digitalized.  That is a view that we really share.
     So we are now confident that the program will help Germany to emerge from the crisis with renewed strength, but we will have to do more, of course.  Thanks.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, And Danka.  Of course, heavy investments can be a right solution, but still sometimes you got to know, and you got to have the right know-how in order to know where you've got to put the money.  Because if you just put money in the wrong project, the effect will be non-existing, if not negative.
     So again, Armida Alisjahbana in Asia-Pacific and we have been discussing investments in projects. 
     Could you share with us some of the initiatives that you planned and organized in order to have a contribution to the digital transformation of the economic sectors?  I mean what was your -- we have seen what Germany did, and what was your action?
     >> ARMIDA SALSIAH ALISJAHBANA:  Yes, thank you very much for the question.  
     On the specific maybe initiative that ESCAP has been supporting our member states and stakeholders in our region I can share a few of these.
     For example, one, at the request of the Pacific island countries, and as we know that the Pacific is one of the part of the region in Asia-Pacific that are in terms of accessibility and internet and so on is still under investment.
     Therefore, ESCAP undertook an in-depth study that recommended the establishment of the so-called shared internet exchange point between three countries.  In this case, Fiji, Samoa, and New Zealand.  And this will, of course, dramatically improve internet accessibility, not only accessibility but quality across the countries.  And hopefully this initiative can be scaled up to other countries in that part of the region.
     Second example is the cross-border paperless trade facilitation.  This is an agreement in member States in Asia-Pacific which will enter into force in early 2021.  The idea is how to have a trade but through digital trade.  So all of the documentation and so on is being fully digitalized.
     Therefore, there will be quite significant reduction in terms of trade costs around let's say 10 to 30% of the existing transaction costs.  Therefore this will further facilitate the trade.
     And another example, the third example is scaling up digitalization as well as some concrete efforts along the Asian highway network.  So the Asia-Pacific -- the Asian highway network, this is in terms of transport connectivity.  But then of course, because of this COVID-19 pandemic then how, yeah, we can ensure facilitate the uninterrupted cross-border free transport movement at a part is how to digitalize.  
     These are examples that we at ESCAP are working with Member State and support them especially in times of the COVID-19 how to beat the socio-economic impact as well as how to facilitate several of like the cross-border trade and so on to be uninterrupted.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Well, thank you, Secretary.  And this is the kind of solutions that we have been looking for countries that seem to be far away like Fiji, but they still deserve as all of the countries and the effort must be done.
     The fourth industrial revolution, which we are living now, it has been in a way contaminated by COVID-19.  And that drives us to the necessity of finding solutions for a very important problem, which is the managing of data.  The modern economy is built on data and more and more and more datas are flowing around the world.
     So, Mr. Yi, you are the Deputy Director General of the WTO, the trade organization.  I wonder whether you can help us in understanding how can we manage all of this data and how can we protect them?  
     Because I think the possibility to have a free flow of data is very helpful for the world economy.  But on the other hand, the protection of privacy and the rights of the citizens and of the companies is capital.  So is there any advice or any plan you are working with that you can share with us?  Thank you.
     >> YI XIAOZHUN: Thank you very much, Marco, for this question.  
     The discussions at the WTO since the start of the health crisis have helped governments better understand what is at stake in the global digital economy and movement of data.  
     In this respect, our e-commerce talks have probably had the most visibility.  The great increase in online transactions has contributed to resilience of supply chains and could offer future growth opportunities, particularly for micro, small and medium enterprises.
     Our members are deeply involved in talks on enabling e-trade principles including data management and the cyber security, these kind of principles.  
     We have also worked towards solutions through our own aid for trade mechanism which involves many stakeholders and in partnership with, for example, the e-trade for all initiative.  
     Indeed, our e-commerce talks gained new urgency due to the pandemic.  We have conducted a dialogue with the private sector and NGOs such as consumer associations and have sponsored seminars and the workshops on topics ranging from trade related data governance to e-health and think tank.  
     The trend with the pandemic not only demonstrated the importance of economic sustainability and recovery measures, but also cast a harsher shine, light on the challenges.  It became clear that underserved populations and the developing countries needed more and better connectivity.
     So we have a framework covering global supply of communication services, but it will also require moving ahead hand in hand with many other institutions and stakeholders.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Well, thanks a lot.  We have been discussing the role of the public administration, and it appears that most of the panelists are a little bit aware of the fact that things are not going as they should.  
     So, Mr. Trujillo, you are private, you are the market.  And so you made a case for digitalization of licensing and permitting for better public and private governance and that would help the resiliency towards the COVID pandemic.
     And but how can this be done?  How do you see it from your own experience, from the experience of your very large company?
     >> DANIEL TRUJILLO: Thank you for your question.  The first point would be to keep it simple.
     One of the greatest impairments for governmental adoption I would say has been that it is complex and costly.
     And that means having some faith that if you do core digitalization work it realigns incentives and capabilities in a way that makes additional improvements easier.  So that would be number one.
     Secondly, heads of state of the western hemisphere committed at the last Summit of the Americas to work on best practices and asked for coordination.  So we in the Americas business dialogue have been part of a multilateral process coordinated by the Organization of American States which has set down five best practices.  
     Number one is all roles and fees are online.  Number two is pay and renew online as well.  Number three, digital single window for application processing and extended monitoring of progress.  Number four, impact mediation requests must be disclosed online to be binding.  And, finally, number five, training and certification of keepers in regarding how to do the best practices.
     The last point that I would like to make what is called trust in business initiative of the OECD.  We have a set of best practices certifying both the agencies that successfully implement and professionals who are trained in the best practices creates a virtual circle, both in hiring and retention of well-trained people and giving an incentive to push agencies to be certified.  Thank you for the opportunity.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Mr. Trujillo.  The market is important.  And the market in some regions, especially the small businesses are at risk right now. 
     Mr. Kituyi, watching the problem from the point of view of UNCTD, I would be happy to ask you which are the real policy areas that require cooperation, that require cooperation of all the stakeholders?  
     But before that, something you said before, and you said that you need the internet and the digital development to help foster trade and commerce.  But I was wondering whether this could harm the small businesses and the small shops in the African countries.
     It is definitely an opportunity, but maybe it is also a risk.  What do you think about it?
     >> MUKHISA KITUYI: Thank you very much.  Of course, the nature of trade is always determined by what is the quality of products being traded.  And of course, with the products, particularly those that are also competing with local produce, then efficiency and arrival of digitally procured goods can put pressure on locally produced goods.  
     But many times what we see is there is part of that is a challenge.  In fact, our study shows that many startup internet trending companies, logistics companies, find it much easier to facilitate imports than exports for developing countries.
     I suppose part of that is the fact that there is the fear of rejected return goods, which is mitigating how much you introduce new products for developing countries in more sophisticated markets.  But be that as it may, I think the main challenges are the following: Many small and medium enterprises in the developing world have been finding themselves niches and opportunities in global supply networks and global value chains into which they provide a service or a product.
     And so where we are, what should we directly concerned is that in the days of the pandemic it is basically an inflection point in what is already happening in the world.  Combination of technology, economic merchandising have seen immediate disruption of global supply networks with most being network domestically or in shorter regional context.
     And that means that as the trends in investment become shorter distance geographically, and as the content of investment, opportunities for small businesses and policy makers in developing countries have to realign to that new reality.  
     Looking more for niches in more regional supply networks and more domestic markets than in the sense of single profit-seeking long distance.  That is one important area that has to be appreciated.
     The other area.  It is not possible to grow a regime of consumer protection and logistics facilitation without international cooperation. 
     There is need for strengthening protection of consumers, particularly where people have been taking advantage of the strain of the urgency of the pandemic period to charge profits on the PPE requirements or urgent products that is needed to mitigate the impact of the pandemic.
     And I think this is an area of cooperation.  Similarly, we need enhanced international cooperation to mitigate the very, very extreme disruptions of global hospitality and related services.  And whichever components can be digitalized, assurance of quality of standard of hospitality taking care of the pandemic are going to be important in the recovery of the hospitality industry and related services.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Secretary General. 
     I just call your attention to a written question we have had from the floor on the role of women in Sierra Leone which we cannot take now, but I would ask if you can answer it on the floor later after this session ends.  That would be more than welcome.
     Thank you.  And so we have rules, we are asking for projects.  And Dr. Marcelle, again, to have a better and more fluid, more efficient flows of capital, which kind of policy recommendations would you suggest, would you ask for in order to step forward and give the world a better pattern of growth?
     >> GILLIAN MARCELLE: Thank you for that question.  
     In a sense, what must happen is that policy and policy formulation has to catch up with what is actually happening in the world.  
     We have had for at least two decades a situation where the geography of innovation has in fact changed, but policy recommendations and policy frameworks still treat the structure of innovation and the structure of finance in a very outdated fashion.  
     And so we should be updating our frameworks and mind sets vis-a-vis knowledge flows.  We should be thinking about multipool geographies rather than a single technology frontier.  We should be focusing on bidirectional flows of knowledge as opposed to old fashioned technology transfer mindsets.
     To illustrate, I want to give examples of successful companies that have emerged during the pandemic period.  So You have companies such as Dyotropic in Senegal which is coming up with a very affordable testing kit.  You have Tafari Capital and Technologies in South Africa that has developed a COVID-tracing app both for Lesotho and South Africa.
     You have Zunica that has come up with the digital currencies in the Caribbean.  You have a number of examples of small venture companies as well as large companies that have actually pivoted and used this inflection point beneficially.  
     And I also want to make a point where I think this is a real role for policy intervention vis-a-vis the investment flows.  I mentioned before that in the pandemic you have had a tremendous increase in responsible investing.  Some 275% increase.  So that you have $7.1 billion of investments which are viewed as having a responsible investing strategy.
     But that is still only less than 5% of all investment flows.  And that's --
     >> MODERATOR: Sorry.  Okay.  Thank you, Dr. Marcelle.  And again, we are nearly on schedule.  
     Dr. Anderson, IMF.  I mean we have heard a lot of interesting suggestions, and I mean you are such a big stakeholder.  And I am asking you how should stakeholders rethink their cooperation if they have to do it, as it seems, around the internet governance for a better economy recovery?  I mean what should we do now different to make it better?
     >> ED ANDERSON: It is clear that the role and the impact but also the expectations of digitalization from governments and citizens alike compared to pre-COVID have changed significantly.  In fact, the situation is so different, it's probably fair to talk about a digitalization 2.0 era.  
     The question becomes how do we get the best of digitalization 2.0?  And instead of watching digitalization develop unequally, as we saw with version 1.0, which was the pre-COVID version, can the international community shape its trajectory and not let a crisis go to waste? 
     At the IMF, we're seeing a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to, quote, build forward better, end quote, a world that is fairer, greener and smarter.  And the internet and technology play a central role to build this better world.
     For example, a fairer world is one where women who have been more impacted than men during the crisis, as I said before, have equal access to the internet.  Did you know that in the last seven years gender digital divide has become worse, not better, for the least developed countries.  
     So Governments and the international community must come together to look at how we can empower women with connectivity and digital finance in particular.  Programs in Togo, for example, have targeted mobile cash transfers to women.  Tanzania and Zambia have experimented with free phones to the poorest women with great results.  It just makes economic sense.  
     We know that expanding internet access in Sub-Saharan Africa by 10% of the population could produce real per capita GDP growth by as much as four percentage points.  
     Finally -- and I'll conclude with this -- more than ever, stakeholders must address the issue of the 46% of the globe that still doesn't have access to the internet.  And the private sector will be instrumental in this post-COVID world.
     Take, for example, the organizations that are building and deploying low orbital satellites, companies like SpaceX.  In less than two years, they will cover every inch of the earth with high bandwidth internet, assuming electricity is available.  
     And there is another -- and that is another priority for digitalization 2.0, which is the availability of electricity.  These low orbit satellites could leapfrog millions out of poverty in just a few years.  It could be a game changer, but it has to be done in coordination with the public sector and international organizations.  And it has to be done in a manner that is fair, smart, and green.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Dr. Anderson.  And I mean it is great, we are only two minutes out of schedule, which is a great performance for this governance forum.  
     So I take the chance to give back the floor to each one panelist for, let's say, a voluntary commitment on behalf of their own individual or institution.  Just to say in less than one minute, last word from the day which, of course, is going to be different from the one you are going to pronounce tomorrow, but this is the game we are playing.  
     So let's start again from the beginning in less than one minute, Mr. Harison, African Union, how do you feel?  Tell us.
     >> VICTOR HARISON: Thank you. For Africa, the cooperation between government, private sector, and partners is crucial.  So I continue to mobilize them to accelerate the implementation of digital transformation strategy for Africa.  I thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Accelerate the implementation. Yes, we shall.  
     Dr.  Bronstrup, Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs, what is your take?  Mic on?  Yes, you are.
     >> DANIELA BRONSTRUP: Can you hear me?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, of course.
     >> DANIELA BRONSTRUP: Sorry for that.  I couldn't hear you for a moment so I'm not sure if I got the right question.  
     But maybe as my final point I would like to say how honored Germany was hosting the IGF last year, and that we are still very much committed in advancing the progress that we are making in the international community, bringing forward all of the international discussions and bringing forward the IGF, we have been the facilitator and the process of recommendations 5 A and B.  We are still very much in favor of bringing into the discussion parliamentarians so the decision makers all over the world.  
     There was a session yesterday where all parliamentarians made the offer to coordinate with parliamentarians all over the world to bring them together in discussions in the IGF.  And I would like to underline that and thank you all very much for the discussion.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you to you, Dr.  Bronstrup.  And thank you to your government.  
     Under Secretary of ESCAP, Armida Salsiah Alisjahbana, what is your final word for today?
     >> ARMIDA SALSIAH ALISJAHBANA:  Accelerate and scale up the implementation of the Asia-Pacific superhighway initiative, through, one, support Member States to enable government policy for accelerated digitalization.  
     Second, to promote women's economic empowerment by increasing access to finance and digital technologies, especially those in LDCs, LLDs and SIDs.  Third, to encourage young social innovators and entrepreneurs to leverage technologies.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Mr. Yi, WTO, World Trade Organization, the floor is yours.
     >> YI XIAOZHUN Thank you.  I think from our previous experiences, we can envision new and critical digital economy solutions. 
     It is also clear that global communications networks have demonstrated their role in the delivery of essential services and outreach to less connected communities.  
     We are convinced that trade rules and principles are not an obstacle but are part of the solution.  WTO can offer a path toward greater predictability, interoperability, trust, and lower costs for both businesses and consumers.  
     I can only underscore the need for greater collaboration to facilitate cross-border movement of goods and services and level the playing field for the developing countries and the small and the medium enterprises.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: A level playing field is definitely needed.  
     Mr. Trujillo, Walmart, the floor is yours.
     >> DANIEL TRUJILLO: Thank you.  I would like to mention two things.  
     The first one, we have a commitment, we have already signed on the dotted line to commit to a public-private multi-lateral partnership that provides technical assistance and financial resources to governments that wish to implement the digital licensing permit best practices.  I invite governments to make their interest known, that would be number one.  
     As well I am proud to be a founding corporate member of the trust in business initiative of the OECD.  And we have made a strong commitment to pair private sector compliance best practices with these public governance reforms that I've described before.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Well, thanks to you.  And Mr. Kituyi, back to you.
     >> MUKHISA KITUYI: Thank you very much.  
     I very much want to associate myself with the efforts that we confined through dialogue.  Building sustainability because of shared benefit.  The crisis today is because of the import benefits from the globalization.
     I think that should be a lesson as we enter the digital era that a fair distribution of the benefits, clear development of competition policy that addresses questions of gobbling up of businesses by media platform companies.  Better distribution of the digital global economy are important.  
     But I think going forward we must also do more every day best assessment of the impact of digital economy on gender, vulnerable groups and women groups in transition of societies, what has happened and with can be done better.  
     Evidence based affirmative action is necessary to make us generally say that we are sharing a vision for world opportunities.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  And again, Dr. Marcelle, your floor.
     >> GILLIAN MARCELLE: Thank you so much.  And thanks to the IGF for the invitation.  
     I want to congratulate you on setting up a forum where we can actually continue to advocate for systems and mindsets that allow us to think about the ways in which we can mobilize capital, including financial capital, to ensure that we have sustainable human development that tackles intersectional areas of social injustice as well as mobilizes financial investments for digital infrastructures and also for digital societies.
     And so my commitment is to continue to be involved in the design of those strategies as well as advocating for those ways of conducting ourselves in the international community.  Thank you so much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks a lot.  Mr. Anderson, IMF.
     >> ED ANDERSON: So again, thank you, Marco.  And thank you, IGF.  
     We have now entered the era of internet of value where payments and moneys are exchanged almost as easily as information.  
     Some countries are accelerating the adoption of digital moneys.  For example, with CBDC, Central Bank Digital Currencies.  But as I said before, not all countries have the same access to the internet and digital skills, so we are facing the risk of vulcanization not only of the internet, but of the internet of value.  
     We are working with other, the BIS, CPMI, the FSB, the WB, and we're committed to making cross-border digital payments as equitable and safe and as green as possible.  Once again, thank you, and thank you to the IGF.
     >> MODERATOR: Well, thanks everybody.  I mean we made a sort of miracle.  We are a little bit ahead of schedule.  
     So I will take the three minutes that remain or even less to sum it up.  
     I mean it has been an interesting panel here.  And I mean on the occasion of the 16th Annual IGF, the Internet Governance Forum, organized by the UN.  
     And we are living a very painful and dangerous crisis, but what we used to say is that we should never waste a good crisis or a bad crisis in order to make ourself and our economy better places.
     So we have the impression that the digital is something that will save us.  Which is true, but it is not completely true because it is not the only solution.  
     We must think big and wide and look beyond the walls.  And we shall invest in digitalization from what you said, but at the same time, we must remind that the world is made of people, which is something that Dr. Marcelle was clearly saying before.  Therefore, digital should be aimed at education.  And digital should be aimed at fostering investments and make them arrive in the right place.  
     And there is a need, as was underlined by the speaker from Walmart and among the other speakers as well, including Mr. Kituyi, there is a need of e-government working in a better way, which means providing digital services in the most efficient and resilient way in order to be made available to everybody.
     There is a problem of taxation as well.  Taxation should be good to redistribute income and welfare itself, but should not be, let's say, strangling those who are smaller.  
     They should be able to gain -- (audio disruption).  I would keep it quick and be fast and be more pragmatical than political.  You all are a part of the world, you are all engaging your lives to make the world a better place.
     Be more pragmatical and more efficient than political, and maybe we will get out of it a better solution, in a better situation as we hope right now.
     So from northwestern Italy in my office here at La Stampa, I thank all the participants for being here today.  
     I won't name them again, now you are great friends, and you can continue in admitting yourself in the forthcoming occasions.  
     And I thank the IGF for this opportunity for me to share this very relevant and important meeting.  And I wish you all the best for this pandemic.  It is not going to be easy, but I think that with a little bit of effort, a little bit of wisdom, and a little bit of work we will get out of it safe and soundly.  
     So again, see you in the new occasion.  All the best.  Thanks, everybody.  And thanks to those who have been listening to us.  This is the end.  Go home and be happy.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-9-ws165-unlocking-the-digital-potential-of-the-dldc-part-ii-raw^^

>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: We are going to start right now.  I would like to say good morning and good evening, everyone listening around the world.  And welcome to the 15thAnnual Meeting of the Internet Governance Forum on Internet for Human Resilience and Solidarity.  And to the Africa Information and Communication Technologies Alliance Workshop Number 165 titled: Unlocking a Digital Potential of Developing of the Least Developed Countries Part II.
Let me give you brief about this session.  This workshop will explore the digital potentials of developing at least Developed Countries in the post COVID-19 era.  We are still in the COVID-19 era which I believe we will overcome.  As one people working together.
The workshop will examine digital cooperation initiatives that encompass the industry 4 technologies and related methods, such as smart manufacturing, environmental sustainability with meaningful connectivity.  The workshop also focus on the requisite of digital skills and tools necessary for sustainable development of the requisite labor and human capacities.
My name is a Jimson Olufuye, your Moderator for this workshop and coordinator West African Internet Governance Forum also a member of the U.N. Internet Forum Government and Champion of Internet Governance Forum.  From the Civil Society.
Also supporting me is the Chairman International Center for Emerging Technology in Nigeria and Chairman of Data Analytics Privacy Technology and Board Member for African Technology and Services Alliance.
Also supporting is the AfiCTA Secretariat.  Before we move forward and considering the role that Ms. Marily Cade played in the information Internet Governance Forum.  The World Summit on Information Society with engagement the Internet Governance Support Association and the role she played in the establishment of Internet Corporation for Signed Names and Numbers and in the business constituency of ICANN itself, information and also inspiration in regards to AFICTA.  I'd like to call for a minisilence in honour of Marilyn Cade.
[ Moment of silence ]
My her soul rest in peace, amen.
>> Audience: Amen.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Once again welcome to Internet workshop 165, unlocking the digital potential of developing and least Developed Countries Part II.  We have a line up of distinguished speakers and in no particular order I will mention their names and profile will be posted in the chat.
We have Hossam Elgamal, the Private Sector of AFICTA.  We have Melissa Sassi, Technical Community based in the U.S.
We have Dr. Kossi Amessinou, Director Ministry of Planning from the government African group.  We also have Jane Coffin, Senior Vice President Internet group at the Internet Society Technical Community based in U.S.
Also with us is Kulesza Joanna Professor of International law in administration University of LUTZ Poland from Academy of Civil Society of Poland.  And we also have with us from Nigeria Director and Chief Executive Officer of the (?) information system representing also government African group.  Thank you.  We also have Mark Datysgeld CEO of governance primer and newly-elected ICANN Councilor based in Brazil.  I don't know if (?) so the first part of this workshop took place last year and the report of these databanks available on the website -- I think the link will be posted so you can reference it permit me to do a recap of recommendations, a suggested way forward on the two policy questions last year.
>> Can you please inform Mary to transfer host to (?)
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Mary, if you can hear me please transfer host to Mr. Jalo and let me move ahead.  We have recommendations and the first was that government is encouraged to believe that they do not have all the fix.  They don't have it all to embrace multi-stakeholder approach in all policy making and implementation effort.  That is the first corporation among all stakeholders.
So the second point was that ICT sector should not be over taxed.  In essence, multiple taxation should be abolished as a priority.  We also recommended ease of doing business should be to attract direct investment.  It should be flexible, regulatory frameworks and also Number 5, that government should invest everything in the youth and the people in general.  In the policymakers should be well equipped to carry out their responsibilities.
It was also recommended that school curriculum should be revised as a matter of urgency.  Recommendation 7 was that focus be on the development of local solutions because the solution means that it is advised, continuing digital divide and locked digital potentials.  And 8, developing least Developed Countries should consider electricity as a critical infrastructural right for all citizens to guarantee access and relation of this Sustainable Development Goal 2030.  Recommendation 9 that collaborations should be enhanced across all sectors and the last recommendation is that regulatory institutions advised to transform by name and policy to unlock digital potentials for the benefit of their citizens.  For example, telecommunication authority can be transformed to digital society authority.  We see this in Nigeria.  That's why Minister of Communication has been transformed to Ministry of Communication and Digital Economy.
Now to Part II of our workshop series.  So COVID-19 pandemic led to the shutdown of many countries.  Important and ongoing discussion is led to global economy.  In this respect, two policy questions would be addressed.  And the policy questions are Number 1, how do we ensure that all stakeholder groups collaborate, prioritize and invest in the digital infrastructure and skills to mitigate similar challenges in the future?  The second question is, what strategies and policies needed to be in place, articulated and implemented to proactively develop in least Developed Countries in the case of a similar occurrence and the adverse effect through the supply chain in Digital Economy.  Follow-up question also in that second part is how can a developed and least developed country develop digital initiatives to encompass technologies and related tools such as smart manufacturing, Internet affairs and environmental sustainability for the benefit of our citizens.  And job creation and the economic sustainability.
So we will go in two rounds as I said three minutes per speaker so after the rounds we can have ample time for Q&A and get interaction.  It's now my pleasure to invite the Chairman of the Africa ICT alliance and CEO of ICANN to provide his opening remark.  Please.
>> HOSSAM ELGAMAL: Thank you very much it is the pleasure of all members to organize this second session for IGF.  We are needs have all the distinguished speakers and participants with us.  As all of you know, AFICTA has been established in 2012 and since then with the main founder Dr. Jimson, and now we have members from all over 30 countries from all over Africa representing different business associations and the SMEsand large companies.
It is really very important subject that we are discussing today where we really want to make sure that we are able to provide the best ecosystem and the Best Practices to the EAPsto benefit from the Internet and what we have seen during COVID time showed how much access is very important for everyone to benefit from the use of ICT in different sectors; education, health care, manufacturing, retail, e-Commerce.
It is certain that countries that were able to capitalize on the investments they have done in Internet access and applications were able to move much better than countries that are still in need for this to happen.
I think it is very important to have such a session where we can discuss the potential of bringing together all the efforts to have a better working environment, to have a better access, to have better policies enabling such access and such application, to have better investment coming in to provide such opportunity, especially as there is a big market where not just the citizen will benefit but the governments will benefit and also businesses will benefit.
I wish all speakers for success in this session and let us move forward.  Thank you Dr. Jimson.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Excellent.  Thank you very much.  That is so key and it's critical.  Let me call on Melissa sassy.
>> MELISSA SASSI: So, I think a lot of times we come to a variety of U.N. events or other industry events and we pontificate and we talk about policy.  And we failed to make it real and talk about how lack of technology skills and lack of access to the Internet is real.  Recently pivoted a lot of my work to not just focus on Melissa as the academic and researching and writing and understanding, to acting.
This year, one of the most exciting actions that I can think of that I personally have worked on with the Secretary of State from Cape Verde, and also saw really nice social media shout outs from the Prime Minister of Cape Verde and the vice Prime Minister, including the Secretary of State.  And we created a national day of code.  We came together to bring young people in a collaboration between the Private Sector, between the non-profit sector, Academia, the start of the ecosystem and the entire public sector.
As a Call to Action to say, come and figure out what this is all about.  And we brought two famous musicians to come and code with us.  And the whole concept was, come learn with us.  Come create with us.  Come change the world with us.  And what we did is we taught these two musicians the introductory building blocks of learning to code.  Okay maybe they didn't create a mobile application but what they did is they came in and inspired young people to explore the concept that anyone can learn technology.
It doesn't mean everyone will be an engineer but anyone can learn.  I'm in active conversations in Mozambique.  I'm in active conversations in other countries.  I would like to use this as a Call to Action to say, how can we create an International day of code?  A national day of code in your country.  I work at IBM and I had up entrepreneur and student experience, and IBM will be your partner and help to bring content, curriculum, speakers, a platform, to help enable this because I think that it's not just about how do we reform policy, but how do we bring the tech-sector together with all stakeholders to truly make a difference and look at it and say, all right, when are we doing this?  So Jimson and Hossam and others with me today, when are we doing this?  Because I'm ready.  If you give me a date, I'm ready to do a national day of code in every country across the planet.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Fantastic.  That is great.  Thank you very much for that.  I think we are going to take you up on that.  We will take you up on that.  Great.  Let me talk to Dr. Kossi Amessinou, Director of Minister of Planning in the Dominican republic.  Dr. Kossi.
>> KOSSI AMESSINOU: Thank you.
[ Broken Internet connection ]
We know also that every time needs government --
[ Broken Internet connection ]
When we look at Civil Society, we need something private government to support to --
[ Broken Internet connection ]
It's important to have support from government.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Very good.  So resources.  Talking about resources quite a challenge and people need to collaborate and cooperate to raise needed resources to be able to implement important development projects.  Thank you very much Dr. Kossi.  We know the Internet is quite challenging there but we tried to get the message.
Let me turn to Jane Coffin Senior Advisor to the CEO.  Jane, over to you.
>> JANE COFFIN: Thank you very much.  And thank you to our colleagues today and I'm very pleased to be joining everyone here.  What I'm going to focus on are three of the things you mentioned and then weave in something that Melissa mentioned.  Flexible regulatory frameworks, taxation inclusion and real people.
We have seen under COVID, that connectivity, those of us involved in it for a long time in trying to deploy networks for better socioeconomic development, have seen that COVID is keeping us accountable for what we didn't get done.  And it now gives us an opportunity to help connect people faster and faster.  This means that we have got to take a look at these flexible regulatory frameworks and also add innovation and a little bit of agility.
Innovation and agility will help us loosen up licensing and make authorizations go faster.  We seen the need for speed when it comes to putting in fiber in certain cities, getting the authorizations in the rights of way and the trenching for fiber.  It means getting the authorizations for spectrum authorization  and Wi-Fi -- maybe unlicensed spectrum.  Also, the old ways of regulatory working from the Teleco era and now into the Internet era, we need to have interconnection of small, medium-sized networks.  We need financing for small, medium-sized networks which means on the financing side, changing universal service funds.  This has to change because the old ways, the money is locked up and it's not getting out there to people.  And it's people that we are seeing under COVID who need to work from home, children need to be educated from home and we need to stay in touch with each other.  Seeing all of you gives me hope.  It's great to see you.  I'd love to be there in person but we need that social dynamic as well.
This is putting pressure on governments to get more done.  Taxation, putting strong taxes on equipment to build that Internet to allow people better opportunities only keeps it in jail a bit longer.  We seen equipment sit in customs warehouses for 3-4 months.  Please urging governments.  This is no longer just a Ministry of Communications and regulatory body conversation.  You have got to have a whole of ministry discussion with the Prime Minister, Ministry of Education, with the customs authorities, because you're now responsible for helping your countries move forward and get connected.
Inclusion bringing business, Civil Society and the Technical Community for consultation.  We use the networks.  We have people like Melissa setting up days of code.  If you don't bring in these different perspectives, your innovation might be impacted.  So just to pitch again for more flexible and innovative regulatory frameworks.  We watch Ghana loosen up spectrum and the U.S.
We seen taxation come down on equipment.  Do this to help speed up the deployment of your infrastructure and for the betterment of your people.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Excellent.  Thank you so much.  The need for dynamic regulatory framework.  Very flexible regulatory framework.  Thank you very much for that.  And now to Professor Kulesza Joanna Professor of International law.  Joana.
>> Cool, cool thank you.  It's a pleasure to be here.  Apart from being an academic, I'm also involved with ICANN, the platform where we have the opportunity to first meet and start working together.  I appreciate the opportunity to be here because working both as policy activist and as an academic, I see the silver lining of the pandemic we witnessed and the silver lining is fundamentally that we can no longer argue there isn't a right to Internet access or that Internet access is no longer of value.  What the pandemic has done is it emphasized that we do need cyberspace.  We do need the connectivity now and interventions from previous speakers who have emphasized how important connectivity is.
It is important when it comes to infrastructure and I welcome call toles provide reliable infrastructure and capacity building on the skills that are fundamental to keeping the network operational.  Island like to put a balancing emphasis on end-users, individuals, humans, if you will, of that equation.  I believe that Developing Countries are in a unique position to prioritize, to humor the NGO perspective of these discussions.  It is a unique opportunity for us to look at the multi-stakeholder model that is unique for the Internet, unique for cyberspace, and to quickly amend it to better meet our needs.
Now we can do it by approaching this challenge in a number of ways.  The first initial one I referred to is focusing on the individuals.  Now again, there is a body of work that focuses on the rights and obligations of individuals that is clearly something we can use.  But I think that the pandemic made us realize that we need to effectively break the silos.  We have been talking about this for so long and so many wonderful initiatives going on.  I welcome this discussion we are having because this is clearly a way for us to address that challenge.
We need to work together on common goals.  How do we do it?  I welcome the call for a universal day of code.  I think it's a very tangible real initiative we could pursue.  Let me put on the table in the same basket so to speak, an ITU initiative that focuses on balancing gender when is it comes to the on line activity.  ITU has a wonderful program called equals.  There are girls in ICT that ITU has been promoting for a while.  Developing Countries have been very active in that respect.  So I would point to that as one of the initiatives.  So make sure that the Internet gets developed where it needs to be introduced, so to speak, is based on this fair balance of genders and interests.
Another issue, and I welcome the reference and the first part of this workshop, the capacity building.  So in another research we might want to explore is capacity building when it comes not just to developing the network, but making sure that it is secure.  So just to give you a buzzword or hashtag, Cyber Security Capacity Building.  Now cybersecurity is quite broad.  It is about maintaining infrastructure secure.  This is where 5G comes in.
The Developing Countries will be able to learn from the lessons of those who need to make difficult choices about 5G infrastructure now.  Again you could see as silver lining.  There will already be a whole body of experience that comes with 5G and the equipment that will be purchased or introduced to provide for high speed networks.
Another element that falls into that is supporting platforms that coordinate regional capacity-building efforts.  If I was to point to specific solutions, I would call to form a platform that we welcomed during this IGF here as well, that would be the global forum on cyber expertise.  And interesting endeavor that is focused on training those that develop cybersecurity policies.  Again, deriving from experiences we already have in other areas of the world.  But to make sure the Developing Countries do not need to force open doors.  There is expertise to be used and I'm happy to provide more details during the focused session on the civil portal.
So I'm a strong believer in capacity building.  I'm a strong believer in looking into interests and balancing those the best that we can.  I believe in infrastructure keeping it secure but also believe in the soft skills.  Regional efforts.  Thank you.  I'll stop here.  Thank you very much.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Thank you very much.  We are going to have a second round and before we get to that second round, we will take this first round and like to call on Dr. Jalo
>> ISA IBRAHIM JALO: I'm happy to be part of this forum.  My organization I must say, is one a success story in terms of administration, technology agency that we have worked over the years to build in terms of building a special digital infrastructure for the institute.  As we all know, Abuja is Africa's new city (?) as the capital of Nigeria now.  And the government moved in 1991.  And we started the computerization as soon as (?) it's a world city and we succeeded in building the necessary infrastructure that is needed to make world classic and technical infrastructure had to become into the accord because you need the GIAsto be able to manage the city itself.
Now because of this success story all the states in the federation right now have embraced GIAs and technology.  Equally during COVID-19, we had to change our technology and upgrade from the desktop environment to web-based system.  And this we did with our Partners in South Africa and using the local stuff that we have, we were able to do this successfully using digital platform.  This is made possible because of the heavy investment of the 3G and 4G infrastructure that has been done and because of also the fiber optic connect activity we have, we were able to do this upgrades.
We did this from desktop because we need to collaborate with other departments and agencies of the FCT.  And we realized through the COVID-19 that we cannot move physical fights from one location to another.  We had to weigh content.  So because of that, we had to also focus on building the web-based system which we successfully did.
So the other departments who are able to deliver information through the web-based system, we had to also establish a connectivity fiber because of limitations and because of that, we became very efficient in terms of the sciences we develop.  And we equally also had to provide services on line to our customers because we are the front end in this administration.
This has also contributed in terms of revenue we collect and we have been able to sustain, which is also very critical for the day-to-day management of the city.  And I must say that we are quite successful to the taxation agency in terms of revenue in the cities, government revenue in millions of dollars.
Because we tried to innovate and tried as much as possible to use technology, we have been able to ensure that revenue comes into the coughers of the Federal Government.  And we are hoping by January 1, we are going to go full all services on line and we have to also integrate our back-end services with the front end.  However, those services have to come forward to be present to deliver.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Let us go to the second question.
>> MARY UDUMA: No questions yet.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: What strategies and policies need to be articulated to approximately prepare developing least Developed Countries in the case of a similar reoccurrence?  Flexibility for regulation both specifically what area of regulation are we looking at?
>> MELISSA SASSI: I think that the biggest -- and by the way, my dog says hi.  She is joining us today.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Okay.
>> MELISSA SASSI: The world changed since the last time in Berlin.  My children live in Tunisia and they have sporadically been in school.  Sporadically.  And they are impacted by school closures due to COVID.  And they have been asking me, mom, what can we do?  What can we learn?  I feel like we should learn something.  I don't think I should be on tick tock every day.  I'm thankful my kids come to me and ask me, mom, what can I learn?  What can I do?  Is how can we empower young people with real practical skills, will informal or formal and think about young people at the centre and think about 4 youth, by youth and with youth.  Especially on Africa, when you think about how many young people make up the population.  And if you look across all of our government entities across the planet, what is the number of -- the age or number of years of experience?  And what are we all doing to make sure that youth is at the centre?  One of the things that I really enjoy about Internet Society, for example, is their Ambassador program that brings young people together to learn practical skills to, take those back into their communities.
In my role I often have atlas fellows from an organization called atlas core run by Scott field.  And they identify up-and-coming lead tours provide them with experience and working at companies like IBM or Microsoft or others.  And the idea is they come and it's on line or in person and they spend a year to a year and a half learning practical skills and then taking those skills and bringing them back home so that it's not just about how does Silicon Valley bring something to you, but how are young people in individual countries challenged with looking at what is the problem I'm trying to solve?  Because ultimately when we are talking about technology, it's about problem-solving, engineering or data science or a developer.  It's all about how are you solving a big wicked problem?  And how are you doing that with technology?  If our young people don't have access to practical skills, it's very difficult for them to make real true meaningful use of the Internet.  I'm talking about also injecting entrepreneurial spirit and critical thinking and problem-solving, creativity and innovation.  So when we are talking about supply chain or health tech or insure tech, IOT, whatever it is, really putting youth at the centre and thinking about what are those problems they can solve, and giving them opportunities and a real voice, a voice that can drive impact.
I think all of us, collectively need to do a better job of incorporating that concept of design thinking.  How do we bring our audience, how do we bring all people to enable them to have a seat at the table?  And again, do national days of code.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Great.  So you already have full support for that.
>> MELISSA SASSI: That was my goal for today, among many other things but thank you.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Great.  Design thinking.  Thank you very much.  Dr. Kossi, are you there?
>> KOSSI AMESSINOU: Yes, I'm here.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: So what policy framework are you working on to enhance your ability to be able to get funding?
>> KOSSI AMESSINOU: Yes, getting funding is important but when we talk about strategy in SET area it's important to know that Internet is not programmed for one context.  In Developing Country and poor country, when we are talking about strategy in digital area, we are some dynamic -- we are going to make something for country.  It's not better every time.  It's not better every time.
When we look at Africa region, for example, we have one big strategy for all of Africa.  Africa commission put on the table with the aspect aspect on the continent, the African digital transformation strategy, for, 2020-2030.  That is very big.  Where every African country, every African industry must put hat on and make their job quickly taking in the way one route.  We need to contribute to a development in 2030.
It's not been good to have Africa outside the challenge.  It is important for us to bring all the people to that strategy and work on that in each of our countries.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Great.  Yes, so what you say is that we have strategies in place already like the SDG so we just need to work at it.  And then as a Digital Transformation for the Africa we want by 2063, so we should really pay more attention to that.  Thank you for calling our attention to that Kossi.  Jane, over to you.
>> JANE COFFIN: On the topic of strategies and policies and funding has to get better and more agile and be done not just at the high International institution level of billions and millions, but smaller amounts of money that small and medium-sized enterprises can digest and use for sustainability and get more money but to show that they can move forward.
So again, universal service and change in financing, licensing and more agility on licensing and thinking about authorizations for technology and for development of networks, making it faster so that people can deploy networks more quickly.  Spectrum more innovative use of spectrum.  Shared use, secondary yews and direct allocation that is can be made.  We have to move quickly to try and help get more agile and collaborative and cooperative and community-based networks out there as well.  So picture community networks.  And if you're talking about supply chain, it's back to your point about clarity and information for businesses.  How to do business the ease of doing business, and just simple information so that businesses can get started and know what to do and where to go in government agencies.  It's really important.  Maybe centralized website.  So that supply chain isn't a question.
Thank you for the shout out to the Ambassadors.  It's so important for us to have youth along with us to inform us, keep us agile and also to learn more and to help us stay fresh.  So I think that is something.  And by the way, I think we can support, we hope, I can't speak for the chapters, but we'll pass along the day of code idea and perhaps you can work with some of our chapters to get that done.
>> MELISSA SASSI: I would love that.  I'm happy to coordinate that.  Before we end, I'll share another opportunity for engagement as well and I got some other exciting stuff too.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Jane, let me follow-up with you quickly.  You're talking about infrastructure.  I didn't hear you talk about security.  What are you doing to have security level?
>> JANE COFFIN: We have lots of promotion.  We have a global coalition right now on encryption.  So if others want to join us on promoting end-to-end encryption, this is highly important.  I'm going to make a shout out to my colleague, Joseph hall, the other Senior Vice President for our project work and the team have a coalition that anyone can join on end-to-end encryption.  We also have mutely agreed norms for writing security for the Internet Service Providers out there, content delivery networks and others.  If you would like to join us in the manners programs, we would love to have you join us with certain principles based on secure routing.  Secured routing is very important and essential for your country.  So those are two things we can actively have you join.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: So can you post the link in the chat?  If there is.  If not let us know later.
>> JANE COFFIN: Yes, sir, I'll put it there now.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Yes, I had the privilege of being at the U.N. Working Group that is the Commission for science and technology and development Working Group on enhanced corporation on International Public Policy matters related to the Internet.  And we talk about yes, capacity, capacity but this time around it focused more capacity development, talking about capacity development.  In line with the systemic development goal so they use the term capacity development.  So in line with development goal.  So what do you think about that kind of phrasing?  Is it capacity building, but 2030, is for developing countries mostly.  You think it makes sense to really streamline that kind of transformative language among your innovation?  Please go ahead.
>> KULESZA JOANNA: Thank you.  I believe it is very relevant -- cool, cool. I believe we better meet the needs of Developing Countries.  So the U.N. and policies surrounded since we are speaking about cybersecurity, there clearly are current efforts both on the intergovernmental and the multi-stakeholder level that address the need to advance capacity building and norm development when it comes to cybersecurity.  However, to be more specific, just to address the concerns you have been talking  about, and I welcome all the suggestions and the feedback; when we are looking for targeted approaches, addressing the Developing Countries, I have mentioned the GOC.  I'm going to do it again because they are right now launching a call for research projects that focus on capacity building and cybersecurity.  It might be something you might be interested in and I'm happy to share details.  Wearing the European hat, let me highlight there are big resources being put on the table by the European Commission both on research and capacity building doing Academia would be focused on the Horizon 2020 and the next research program that is just around the corner.
So if there is need for funding in terms of capacity building, I believe that there are office to pursue and Developing Countries would be the usual suspects to funnel that funding in terms of not just infrastructure, but also the soft skills.  I'm going to stop here but I'm happy to specify the details of this.  Thank you very much.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Thank you very much.  We would like to tap into that definitely the project for capacity development.  We look forward to that.  So following up on that, I'm sure the Chairman is ready and grinning.  That is a good one.  They might chip in on that when they are making their summary.  Next will be Dr. Jalo.  Are you working on some specific policy?  What you are doing for sustainability?  And do you plan to begin Internet of Things to play with regards to your record system?
>> ISA IBRAHIM JALO: Jimson, I must say that that is already a policy on the Digital Economy that was developed by the Ministry of Communication and Digital Economy.  And we are leveraging on that.  Equally also, this new spacial data infrastructure that we are rolling out at the moment which will go full blast in 2021, has that interface that will accommodate data from Internet of Things.  Already this year, we are starting working with the pattern of road traffic.  We are doing a study to study the locations of all the traffic lights in the city and we intend to deploy sensors to gather data on traffic, which is very critical as we are aware that traffic management in the city is an issue.
So we also intend to liberate on the 4G technology, wireless technology that is available in the city.  So we can now pick up this data and also use this technology, most of the traffic lights are being powered by solar.  And so we intend to gather this data and then deposit it in our warehouse already, have subscribe to technology platform, we signed with Microsoft so we are hoping we are going to do that.
Equally also, the CCTV's in area security infrastructure we acquired right now will be able to accommodate the deployment of CCTV on the infrastructure as well, so it's just to develop the system and have an integration CCTV.  We already have a pilot in our office and there is also an access in deployment within our Secretariat which we intend to do as a pilot.
Equally, also, we have other areas that we are working in terms of, this is the environment also.  We are also working with the environmental agency to be able to see how we can now work together to work on the issue of management and also to be able to deploy environmental sensors that will monitor the environment in the entire city.  This is what we are doing in that direction.
I'm also aware that the Minister of Communication and Digital Economy just recently -- there was (?) they are working towards establishing the exist expense is identity.  And Chairman I'm sure you're aware of that.  This is something that is ongoing, like I said, we are a key stakeholder.  We are at the centre of the development of the city in which the blueprint was earlier, so two years back, was developed by IBM.
Provided the funding for that development.  And my agency is at the centre of the infrastructure for this city and we are of course on that.  Thank you.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Great.  I can see Melissa grinning there.
>> MELISSA SASSI: I was getting gel when you say he was talking about Microsoft and I was wondering if he was going to start talking about IBM.  So now I'm not jealous anymore.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Leverage on what information is there.  No wonder ICT is going to put in more 10% to Nigeria's GDP.  It's like if things are correctly, we will come about progress which is commendable.  But there is a question in the question room.  So maybe you may take that up when we get to the next slide.
Mark, tell me, do we have everybody uncovered when it comings to banking?  Do we have everybody covered?  We need technology.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: So unfortunately, we don't and the thing was, and this was what was scary, when the pandemic hit and we have an emergency payment was approved to keep people afloat somehow, then you have this situation in which the distribution is being done in agencies and public agencies and people have to crowd in the same space at the same time to receive the stimulus that is supposed to help them not be sick.
It's the situation in which when you look at it, you see how us from the developing world, we still have a lot of catching up to do in terms of how do we protect our own people in a situation like this?  How do we make sure that we have a structure?  We don't need to have the structure the same as a developed country.  We don't.  We can make our own way.  I'm a big believer in that.  But certain things, we need to be on par with them and when I saw that to me, that was the first sign of, okay, we have some -- somethings are more prior Terry than others.  Because if you look at the situation of how everybody has been affected by this crisis, you will see that of course, the developing world is the one we end up suffering the most in the long run.
There is no way of getting around that.  And how do we compete?  And when I think about that, I think about the work that we have been doing in terms of informing technology companies here in Brazil.  My consultee we have been working with small and medium enterprises and trying our best to make them aware of what is going on in terms ever the global technologies.
So we try to bring this information in a way that makes sense, and in a way it is not too technical as well.  Often you are talking to people who are entrepreneurs, not necessarily from the technology area, even though they do technology, which is interesting.  So you have to find ways to make it interesting.
So we are currently working a lot with IOT.  That is the next big subject, I guess in a lot of ways.  And how do you explain that without making it A, boring, B, hard to understand?  So we do a lot of videos, images, we make simulations.  We take the devices themselves to show them to people.  I'm going click this one and it will activate that one.
I think that if we want everyone to catch-up, we also need to sort of step down from our high horse.  We are all people very involved in tech.  We try to understand this, right?  We really love this.  But not everybody has to be as passionate as us, right?  How do we make it nice for people to understand it and maybe they don't need love it at much as we do.  Maybe just have a fresh look at it.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: It is a challenge.  So we are continuing to make a lot of efforts to bring in everybody to the benefit of the information age.  Thank you very much.  We completed two rounds.  And as we are going to --
>> MARY UDUMA: There is a question already.
[ Multiple Speakers ]
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Can you read it out, please?
>> MARY UDUMA: This is from (?) it says -- the future of technology, which I believe rely on digital identity.  The question is, how do Africa and other under Developed Countries handle the issue of lack of digital identity, which I believe is a common challenge to most African countries?  To support us?
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: It's a very demand question.  Very good question because without that data, you can not really get much done when it comes to e-Commerce.  And when it comes Information Society.  So, government, Dr. Ice what are you doing about it?
>> ISA IBRAHIM JALO: For me, it boils down to the issue of regulation, the necessary framework that will now enforce that everybody should acquire the digital identity.  And also to make the digital identity easy for people to acquire.  This is very critical.  And the issue of infrastructure was discussed earlier.  If you don't have the necessary infrastructure to allow, create and enable the environment for citizens to acquire the digital -- it becomes a problem.
Then the issue of security, security is very, very critical.  How do you create security around the digital identity?  And also for people to be aware because individuals are vulnerable.  They can share their digital identity if they don't know how to make good use of it.  That's my contribution.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Very good.  Very good.  So digital regulation.  Issue of (?) I think Nigerian government and the Ministry of Communication and Digital Economy they aligned their work scope to bring in National Identity Commission into their per view and as we mentioned, as they say, realignment to focus more on the digital identity.  So there is new orientation and direction and we will see the effect.  Kossi, what are you doing in that?  Can you respond to the question as well?
>> KOSSI AMESSINOU: Yes.  Digital identity is important.  Every government in the West Africa know that.  You have one project (?) for all of our region in West Africa helping us to put in our country in our different countries, the digital identity for people.  We have some funds for that.  The project called (?) WULI.
>> WULI right?
>> KOSSI AMESSINOU: That's right.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: It's very important.  We mentioned something last year that is good for to do peer review.  Taking from the implement project it's good to check what your neighbor is doing, maybe Ghana, maybe Nigeria and Brazil is also what they are doing.  So it's good to ask around so that we do not make any mistake in implementation and then learn from the experience of others.
Let me bring in the Chair with regard to government.  So identity in regards to unlocking the development potential of Internet.
>> HOSSAM ELGAMAL: We have been working on digital identity, I think, since 2009.  The issue is related and then as three companies providing services for this.  Unfortunately since then and with what happened to now, it did not become that much, except within the government itself.  So we have digital signature, digital identity within the government.  Still for normal citizen, they are still doing it on the development and for specific goods.  But it showed what interesting and I think that a year ago we started with a new program for financial inclusion and with this program, they are starting to enforce digital identity for everyone so that we have cashless transactions everywhere, which would minimize corruption, all of that, and would also increase and improve cash flow for different organizations.  So this is for the --
I just wanted to add if I may, along with other -- regarding capacity building.  We talked a little bit about industry for technology solutions.  And I think what we need currently is to have more and more national programs for transformational training and especially on the level of vocational training.  As jobs are shifting with the new technologies coming in, so people working in factories, people working in retail.  People working in many industries will not have the same skill set required anymore.  And this we need to prepare properly our countries.  Otherwise we will really have -- we will lose jobs.  So we have to focus on transformation programs on March 11.  We are starting a program here with the Minister of Manpower on different government entities to help people start choosing systems and people using cybersecurity for OT, operating technologies.  People using design solutions and such.
It showed that it is more and more important for this -- it's not anymore the future.  It is the current situation to be ready for it.  And I may add only one other point.  Is that we have it here and we are looking at the government and it is related to the evaluation of R&D copyright.  Unfortunately, when we are more and more encouraging and people to go and make social development, especially in technology side, because this is the future, it is not valued in the products.  And this is clearly identified in manufacturing, et cetera, where when you just develop a new product do not include (?) the part of R&D into it, which is something, unfortunately, is not helping moving more and more into innovation.  So we need more policies that would encourage evaluation of R&D and the copyright of it as well.  Because where we are moving in the future, it is no longer only access and IT.  But it's the merge of control, IT, manufacturing and all of that and we need to be ready for it.  Thank you.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Yes.  Very right.  We really need to be ready.  And in this regard, security is so important.  I don't know if (?) is there.  Has been involved with the review of the Nigeria policy and strategy.  So what do you see with aspect to cybersecurity as we move forward in industry?
>> OLUSEGUN OLUGBILE: Thank you, Mr. Moderator.  I'm glad you made mention of the security in Africa.  One of the key things that Nigerian governments has done, Nigerian government is (?) essential.  Ambassador of Security and (?) right now the measures now, national policy on cybersecurity for 2020.  Now what that what is Nigeria is not just going to recognize that sector and then that will be (?) encouraging to move into -- invest in this area.
Another thing I will share is Nigerian -- the country has also developed some capabilities in the areas of computer emergency response.  What we are doing now is to enhance what has already been done, to take it from where we started from and -- what we are going.  Let me make mention of something.  I think right now Nigeria is looking at how to mainstream industrial -- especially in the context of the vaccine and the youth issues in the country.  I think it is essential to start to begin to look at how cybersecurity -- how the skill can be built into the ministry and then we can begin to build a foundation that is needed to empower our country.  Thank you.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: So you mean in the curriculum?
>> OLUSEGUN OLUGBILE: Yes apart from the school setting, the country has policy in which, before anyone can be employed in Internet services, they have a minimum digital skills which has been mainstreamed into the (?) not only that, if we teach training before you can become a teacher in Nigeria, I'm aware that we have embedded a policy in which every teacher now has to passthrough some level of skill.  We are not talking about computer competencies.  We are talking about doing their work fully.  So across the sector we have that going on.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Very good.  And I would like to note indeed that the Nigerian government has involved a master plan and with that master plan -- I think there is an echo somewhere.  Can we mute our lines?  So the master plan and with the government master plan they are trying to bring onboard number of governments to -- can you mute your line, please, sir?  There is echo coming from the line.
Apart from this, there are a number of executive orders that mandated the ministries, departments, and agencies to automate and to bring onboard on to the Internet their services so that government citizens do not need to travel far to use government services.  So I think this is something we believe to be perfectly implemented as the Prime Minister is doing a good job thus far along with his team.
So tab oh, what is it like in South Africa in regards to supply chain?  The COVID issue and their supply chain, inflation and what have you?  So how do we tackle this issue going forward?  What are your recommendations thus far?
>> THABO MASH: Thank you, for that.  If I can start especially in regards to COVID-19 itself what it has presented us.  It's a crisis that fortunately we did not let go to waste.  From the perspective that it actually gave a lot of different stakeholders and interests, a common why.  So you see a lot of people who usually didn't necessarily come together and actually work together without any financial interest.  So they actually came together.  You saw that a lot in this era.
And I think what is happening is now we have become deliberate in trying to define this why and to define this goal that is com pending for us to be able to adopt today the digital initiatives and for us to be able to work together.  So in South Africa, what do we also realize we saw a lot of changes that have happened.  So changes from the education front and yet minister is speaking about disruption in the education.  So there was a lot of disruptions that happened and we saw schools trying to respond in a myriad of ways and the government also trying to weigh in on the problem since we have the challenge with Internet connectivity and data not being as an affordable thing as well as devices not necessarily if you want to have access to devices.
While private schools they have gone that direction of using platforms such as teams, using Google Classroom and Zoom and all that.  Government tried to implement it using the television and network itself.  So it was not now direct one-to-one type of a approach, however they were trying to breach this gap.  They even brought in some celebrities that kids are used to.  I hear somebody speaking about some musicians being invited.  So almost the same thinking that was put here for teenagers and this work is excited to start watching these programs which we are try. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-9-ws180-trust-media-ethics-governance-during-covid-19-crisis^^

 
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  You need to show your PPT.  It's okay now.  We can see.
   >> YUN LONG:  Can you see now? it is there for us in the conference it is available.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Yeah.  This is it.
   >> YUN LONG:  Okay.  This is my PPT.  Great.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Can you stop the sharing, we have to start now?
(no English translation).
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Great.  Thank you very much.  Okay.  Let's start.  Okay.  Hi, everyone.  Welcome to the panel, this session which is Trust, Media, Ethics and Governance During the COVID-19 Crisis.  So good morning, good evening, and welcome to our session.
So, first of all, let me introduce myself and also my colleagues.  So, I am Dr. Chin from China, so I'm the Section's Moderator.  I will moderate the section with my other colleagues, Mr. Wang Shu and also Mr. Koene.  And this is to discuss the impact of COVID-19 and global impact system and related citizens related to the issue of trust, media, and information flow.
So our section combines the local and global perspectives of Internet governance and also media communications, so we would like to build up with speakers from China, Europe, India, Singapore, to discuss those pressing issues in the disciplinary and multidimensional approach from diverse geographical and stakeholder perspective, so therefore our panelists will speak from this two platforms, audience research, policy and regulatory, and algorithm perspective.  So, the issue we want to discuss today is the role and responsibility of digital platforms, social media, governments, and the public in articulating information and also protecting human rights during the COVID-19 pandemic.  We also want to discuss the best practice to refute disinformation, fake news, hate speech, during the pandemics.  And most importantly, the role of technology in developing and educational programs to empower citizens.
The best practice to uphold in the integrity of individualism and public trust during the health crisis, so we have six speakers.  So, let me introduce them first.  So, we have Professor Eun Long from the Chinese Communication University of China and he's she's Director of digital ethics and chair of ethics division of Chinese technology for science and technology journalism.  We have Ms. Amirita Choudhury and President, and western Asia-Pacific Internet Governance Forum.  And we have Mr. Shu Wang deputy Chief Administrator of Board in China.  And we have Elinor Carmi postdoc research associate in digital media and society at University in UK.  And then we have Professor Peng Hwa Ang and is he professor of school of communication and information at Tech logical University and Weinan Yuan and from global ethics, and so welcome to the panelists and so we will invite each speaker for eight minutes of presentation and of that we will some minutes discussion among them, and then we'll open the floor to invite you to ask your questions.
In the meantime, you can also post your questions in the chat room and also Q&A sections.  Okay.  Let's start -- let's invite Professor Long, so Professor Long, are you ready?  Can you share your PPT?  Thank you.
   >> YUN LONG:  Hi.  I can share my screen now.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yes, please.
   >> YUN LONG:  It's okay?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yeah.  We can see.
   >> YUN LONG:  Yeah.  It's my PPT.  Yes.  Hello, everyone.  I am Yun Long and today my topic is Regain Trust Communication Governance in the China and Beyond the Post-Pandemic Era.
So, the Coronavirus Is a Public Health Event Which (Audio Breaking Up) it is an epidemic of citizen field is informed, and the challenge to governance of communication in such European context is also mixed with an overwhelming information.  The most diverse communicator and quality of the content virus.  The epidemic community has shown great concern about the new situation and the new challenges as well.  A service of academic studies analyzed rumors and choose cooperation between different media and incorrigibility of different information channels and discussed the trust dilemma, trust restoration, trust reconstruction, and the role of the government.
This research results provide a Chinese context and global perspective for communication and governance in the post-pandemic era.
So, if it there was ever a time for the media to act as a force to holding power to account in the public interest, the coronavirus pandemic is it.  (audio breaking up).
We're trying to illustrate the landscape of media reports as well as channels fighting against the COVID-19, combining with related data and case analysis and discuss hard to gain and trust of communication governance in this era.
The topics and the questions are as follows, the rumors and the truth at the beginning of the coronavirus outbreak, the credibility of different platforms and communication channels, including the traditional media, social media, and other content producers, the public welfare organizations trust reshaping, such as regular society of channel hoping which related some key issues with media ethics.  The synergy and the framework competition among different media reports, and the how to deal with the dilemma between academic, policymaker, and media and public, and also platforms as well as government playing in such a pandemic crisis.
So, disaster crisis and social -- this direction of public opinion is in the context of the new corona epidemic, and Dr. Wang from University of China did analysis based on the specifics based on the socialization of context of disaster crisis.  The study illustrates that first Hubi and Wuhan people resulted in incomplete trust from the government and preventable and -- by the local health commission and governance measures.
This related to the -- of all the people.  (audio breaking up) at the beginning of the epidemic, and second forced information, forced news or rumors such as traditional Chinese traditional medicine, and can suppress the new coronavirus which triggered panic and related to group behavior.  The information released and embeddedness of people accelerated the social reproduction of rumors.  However, the contradictions of information release and absence of mainstream information relates have led to uncertain information in the post era and interferes with the spirit of public opinion and the overflow of negative has caused emotional transformation of the people.
It can be seen that in the early stage of the outbreak the public opinion field was faced with such phenomena as the crisis of trust and uncertain information and the creditability of it into personal communication and media is information in the channel (audio cutting out) -- in the public opinion is closely related to the trust status of the public opinion environment, and makes sense of the differences in creditability of different channels should be very important to regain trust.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Professor Long, you have three minutes.
   >> YUN LONG:  Okay.  It's almost.  So, the creditability doctor selected when Wuhan was closed and conducted a survey of medicines in five citizens in Wuhan, Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Chengdu and of the channels it's significantly higher than interpersonal communication and self-media.  The second trust of Wuhan medicines in the place where the epidemic occur -- (audio breaking up).
The official channels -- internal communication is more trusted than media blasts, and creditability of media about the epidemic -- (no audio).
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  I think we're unable to hear Professor Long.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yeah.  I think Professor Long, can you hear us?
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  I think she dropped out.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yeah.  I can see.  So, we'll just wait for her, you know, for a few minutes.
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  We could perhaps continue.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  She's coming back.  Okay.  Hello?  No?  Or maybe we can move to -- okay.  So probably we have to wait for Professor Long and at the same time we can probably invite our second speaker, Amirita, maybe you can jump in and when Professor Long comes back, we can switch to her.
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  Right.  Thank you so much, Yik Chan and hello everyone and welcome to the session.  Certain things which I would like to share, you know, that the issue related to trust online, misinformation, fake news, has been prevalent for a very long time and it has been there much before the pandemic.  However, what COVID-19 did is amplify the issues, bring it out in the open and into the spotlight.
So, today, I would be sharing the Indian perspective, primarily because I belong to India and, secondly, India presents certain very interesting paradoxes.  For example, we are a country with second largest Internet user base, but we have nearly 70% of our people yet to be connected online.  We are an emerging country with limited resources, and at this point of time, we're having more than 8.64 million people infected by COVID and the numbers are rising.  Thankfully the mortality as per health officials is not so high, so we are at the midst of the pandemic and we're facing it day in and day out.
What we realized during COVID-19 was our dependency on the Internet has grown tremendously, and in fact all aspects of our life, be it education, work from home, shopping, interaction, entertainment, health, et cetera.  In fact, as more and more of the citizen-centric services with information related to the pandemic moved online, it was a bone for people who had had access for the Internet.  However, for people who did not have Internet access, such as women or marginalized communities, or certain rural pockets, many of these services and opportunities became unavailable or diminished, and that is a concern.
Also, many of the direct benefit facilities which were provided by the government as relief during the pandemic, especially for economic by backward people or the marginalized communities, was through mobile banking or Internet-enabled use.
But in a country where people do not have Internet access or the cost of smart phones are really high, despite all of these good intentions, this created a disbalance between the haves and the have notes.  Therefore, we realize that Internet is crucial for all, especially if we want to build an inclusive and empowered society.  And governments really need to focus on getting people connected and making access affordable.
What we also found like other places was there was a surge of misinformation and fake news during the pandemic.  In fact, we witnessed hundreds of thousands of migrant laborers from cities such as economic hubs which was triggered by panic, created by fake news regarding the duration of the lockdown and concerns related to adequate supply of basic necessities, such as food, drinking water, health services, and shelter because many of these migrant laborers were unemployed at that point of time.
Even though the government took steps to address the issues and even platforms started taking actions, however as the issue had become so viral fast, it took quite some time to manage it.  Therefore, it is important for us to learn from these experiences so that we can build strategies to deal with such crises more efficiently.
The Indian Government on its part issued an advisory for social media companies to initiate awareness campaigns on the platform against such false news, take immediate action, disable and remove content on priority, disseminate authentic information related to the coronavirus, and platforms did introduce several measures to reduce the spread of misinformation such as notifying users who engaged with COVID-19 misinformation, restricted, preventing policies of unverified claims or showing resources of who and other unverified agencies relating to the pandemic.
However, looking at the sheer size of the issue there is definitely scope for much more to be done.  Another thing is while the platforms were facing a lot of flak during the pandemic, we also saw a lot of good being done from the platforms.  For example, this was a time when we used these platforms to communicate and stay in touch with our loved ones.  It was used to mobilize resources, help people, including migrants, economically impacted people, and also helped stranded people, so there was social good which happens and this needs to be magnified.
Further, during the infodemic, we also found -- you know, it also highlights the need for media literacy across different communities and sections and age groups.  Governance technology companies have come together and need to work much more collaboratively, especially with grassroot level Civil Society organizations to build digital literacy and media literacy amongst people in a more concerted effort so that they are able to distinguish between authentic and fake news.
Also, while government took steps to demystify the myths and misinformation being spread around COVID-19 through media such as print, television, radio, and even online, we observed another phenomenon which actually worked.  This was the community health workers played a substantial role in clearing the myths in the local languages amongst communities of which were part or economically backward at the ground level.  This combined rule of online and offline campaign or initiatives actually worked pretty well, and perhaps we need to explore this hybrid model more if we want to actually address these issues.
To conclude my initial remarks, what I think needs to be done more to build the trust deficit online is, firstly, connect everyone meaningfully, focus on media literacy, governance and businesses need to be more transparent about their initiatives as the opaqueness around initiatives creates a trust deficit, and while platforms are taking initiatives to curb the spread of misinformation, hate speech within their platforms, they need to be more transparent on the takedown policies, the way their algorithms take decisions, et cetera.
And lastly, we need to look at innovative approaches to rebuild trust over the Internet and it has to be a concerted effort amongst stakeholders, amongst nations so that we can, you know, address the gaps together.  Thank you so much.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you, Amirita.  Just on time.  And, also, you bring very interesting question about platform's role.  And so next we're going to invite Mr. Wang Shu and he will actually talk about those things.  Mr. Wang, you can please share your screen with us.  Thank you.  Can you start, please.  You have to unmute yourself.  Okay.  Yeah.
   >> SHU WANG:  Oh, I'm sorry.  I'm sorry.  Oh, you can hear my voice now?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yes.  We can hear you.
   >> SHU WANG:  Oh, okay.  Hello, everyone.  I am the Deputy Agent in charge of Weibo, largest China social media platform and we have just more than 500 million and now this is just in the media account in Weibo and today I will share some from us with the time and we know if we use the international meeting, sometimes it will delay, so I could or the main content in the PPT and I give a brief explanation here.
So, during the outbreak and most people worked at home and people had more free time, and actually we know that social media becomes the major resource for coronavirus information, so this is a number of the visits to Weibo is 9 times higher.  Most media accounts responsive 24/7 and had update in no time.  Actually, in Weibo, media accounts have posted 2 million related posts and then about more in China.
So, the social media opens the last mile of the media in the situation.  The last mile means that the media cannot only provide valuable information but also meet the needs of ours.  Okay.  Let's see some examples.
The official account of people daily and personally is Weibo and set up a special topic called Patients Sick Help, and the hospitals or the patients could post the Weibo and the sick have topic to project.  Once was confirmed, the message would be passed on to the local government and available hospital.  So, actually, over 140,000 people have received help with this.  Many people share their experience of getting help on Weibo and some story.  To identify the close contrast of the infected is very important and Weibo original media of our search noticed special column, so they were to push the travel records and the transportation information of the confirmed case, so therefore a close contact may identify the risk of the infection and sign up for medical tests through the fast channel.
So, in the 5G areas live broadcasting is very popular so the media carried out the broadcast of the construction of the Wuhanhuosheenshan Hospital and Leishenshan Hospital with a total of more than 1 billion people watching.  The special product live charity sale for Hubei province and with Weibo campaigned with the media and people 10 million people watched the live and 10 million U.S. dollars of goods.
Another of the media was the rumor.  The rumor comes out from the fear of the unknown and meeting rumors is one of the same importance of beating the virus.  So, we can see in the social media the credible media were granted a special privilege by Weibo to leverage the rumors and therefore the public could know about truth in time.
During the epidemic, we can see the 740,000 posts to dispel rumors were published by credible media and in total with over 6 million forwards.  Also, Weibo increased the number of staff processing rumor complaints by 6 times.  For the messages that could not be -- and we know that in some messages that could not be tested in a short time, so we gather together different opinions to help us to make their own judgment.  Any account that tried to spread rumors or take advantage of the epidemic to increase their sales were banned as punishment.
Okay.  The next idea I would like to share some of our thoughts and questions.  Firstly, about the credible of the UGC.  We know during the special areas and we witnessed very active performance of the user generated contents.  Many of them offered huge first-hand messages from anti-epidemic frontline, but there are still no effective procedures or standards to help us to confirm whether it's true.
Secondly, in terms of the balance between the free expression and public security, and we were totally aware that those who suffered from the epidemic growth have the right to express their angers through the social media, and they do have the demand for emotional release.  However, such messages can sometimes hurt other users, so how to deal with this situation?  We just need some standard.
Lastly, about the privacy right protection.  As we try to help more people during this special time and some personal information was revealed, such as travel records, living place, or family information that's made possible during travel, so technical solution is required.  And this is the end of my speech.  Thank you for listening.  Thank you.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Thank you very much, Mr. Wang Shu, and actually here are some interesting questions about with how to, you know, monitor or regulate performance well, and I think this question will be also touched by other our speakers following speakers like Professor Ang and others who will also talk about the platform as well, so hopefully we will have some discussion, you know, for following these issues.
So next can I invite Elinor Carmi from the University of Liverpool to share her presentation on the audience side of how to use -- or how to empower audience and public during pandemic crisis.  Thank you.  Elinor?
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  Hi, everybody.  I just want to share my screen, and I'm really happy that I already saw -- can you see my screen now?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yes, we can see you clear.
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  Fantastic.  So, I saw that people are already talking about media literacies, digital literacies, and I'm really excited that the discover is on that because that's exactly what I'm working on.  I'm Elinor Carmi, a post-doc at Liverpool University.  Working on projects around big data.  Developing UK citizens in literacies, me and My Big Data.  It's sponsored with Glasgow and Sheffield Hallam and the other one is Being Alone Together Developing Fake News Immunity funded by the UK Research and Innovation and Liverpool University and Dundee University and so I'm going to talk about some of the initial findings that we already have and I'd love to hear your questions at the end.
So, it's really great that I saw people are discussing the kind of different definitions and differences between digital literacies and media literacies, and we have, actually, an article which is open access and I'm going to share it later in the forum where you can see how we analyze the literature of all of these things and how we wanted to propose a new kind of data literacy framework because we felt there were a lot of things missing.
So, in our model, we focus on three main dimensions.  The main ones are, the three ones are data doing, data thinking, and data participating.  So, data doing, we're thinking about the everyday kind of actions that we're doing.  Data think something the critical thinking that people need to have, and I'm going to show you the kind of activities that we were talking about.
And then we're talking about data participating, which basically means how can people use data to their own benefits in their communities.
So, when we're talking about data doing, we're talking about accessing information, assessing, interpreting, creating, citing, and things like that.  When we're thinking about data thinking, and this is something that is very crucial to us because one of the main things that we want to emphasize is the need for people to have critical thinking, which means being aware of different data protection rights, being aware of different kind of privacy settings and what they actually mean.  If you live in Europe, what does the consent mechanism mean?  What can you actually do with that?
But also, understanding, how online platforms work.  So a lot of different organizations, including in the UK, we have different kind of organizations that show that people don't actually know that companies like Facebook and Google are funded by advertising, and this matters because this basically means that people can have more critical engagement of the platforms and know what is their initial kind of business model and how that shapes what they see online and what kind of data they maybe want or don't want to share online.
So, these are the kind of critical thinking that we're talking about when we talk about data thinking, so it's not only about being aware of data protection and different kind of privacy-related things, but also to understand the online, sort of the broader online ecosystem and how does that work and how it is funded and things like that.
Now, that doesn't mean that you need to be a programmer and know exactly how algorithms work, but you do need to know that algorithms can microtarget you or create different kind of biases and different filter bubbles and those kind of things.
The last one is data participation where we basically talk about how can citizens use data for themselves.  Online hashtags that can be created around a specific topic, and that can be an example, we had an example of our groups of people that wanted to save their local libraries or to motivate people to go online if they were lonely and things like that.
So we identify five different user types, and so in the data we have two main stages, and the first one was a report where we had a national survey, and then we have focus groups which we actually are in the midst of them, so we realize that there are five different types of users, and the way that they differed is according to their socioeconomic status and education.
One of the most interesting things that we discovered is that although there is this myth that, you know, young people are digital natives, what we discovered is that this user type, which uses only social media and maybe some online websites, is that these are young people who come from poor backgrounds and who don't have higher education attainment.  And these are the kind of people that we really want to focus on because we think it's really important not to automatically assume that if you're young then you automatically have all of these skills, and that you know, your background really affects the way that you engage online.
So these are kind of the questions that we got from our surveys, and I think what's really interesting here is that a lot of people don't really -- don't really trust social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter, as you can see here, the blue represents if you don't trust them, but also you know on the left side, I don't mind sharing my data with companies, but actually most people say that they do care, which means the blue means they don't want to share their data.
Another thing that we see is that, and this is where we talk about critical thinking, so people don't really connect between the right side, which means that you know, people don't want to be tracked -- or that their behavior would be tracked over time, but then they don't really connect that this tracking leads to the personalization of their experience, so these are the kind of things that we think need to be further developed.
Another thing that we thought is really interesting is that most people don't think that companies provide services that make it easy for people to change their privacy settings, and a lot of people think that there is actually no point to change their privacy settings because these companies, you know, disregard this anyway.
So, that was from our survey, and then when we talked about people and we've talked with people throughout October and we're going to talk with them also in November.  One of the interesting things that we found is that people's trust in social media or media in general depends on the kind of activities that they're doing.
So, one of the main things that we discovered, for example, is that when people want to verify information, some people mention that they're going to check it on BBC and different kind of things, but a lot of people actually talk with their family or their friends.
Another really important thing is that as you saw, most people that we talked with, both in the survey but also in the focus groups, they don't really trust social media but they don't feel that they have a choice to go on social media, so this is something that we really want to emphasize that trust is contingent and fluid with people but not the only factor and really depends on the kind of activities that you're doing.
Another thing that was really interesting for us is when people want to learn new digital skills, most people mention they use different kind of friends or the expert family member, but also a lot of people mention that they're going on YouTube to find different kind of videos to help them understand that better.
So one of our sort of main findings is that unlike the past where a will the of kind of frameworks around media literacy and digital literacy was focused on the individual, we want to focus on the networks of literacies because what we discovered is that actually people rely on other people that they trust, which means their friends, families, could be the experts, you know, colleagues that they know, and we really want to emphasize that this is where the kind of interventions that companies or governments or education institutions should focus on.
So, networks of literacies are the ways that people engage with other people, it's where they -- I'm sorry, it's where they engage with them to gain different kind of understanding, skills, and competencies.
So another thing that's really important for us to emphasize is that there is no one, you know, no one program that fits everybody, and this is why it was really important for us to focus on different kinds of user types because in the end of our -- in the end of our project, we're also going to create different kinds of education material and programs for different kinds of people, in a way that makes sense to them and in their context and everyday life experiences.
So, that was very brief but mainly the Big Data Project and the other project we're working on which is developing this kind of chatbot where people can understand better how to understand the kind of rhetorical tools that the different kind of people, could be politicians, could be news media sites, to help people understand which kind of rhetorical manipulations that they're doing and to play with it with the chatbot.
With the chatbot as well we're encouraging people to play together and to talk about how they learn together, what kind of things they can understand better or not.  Now, of course, a chatbot is not a miracle solution to these things, but what we really want to emphasize is, again, this kind of working together on different kinds of critical understandings, and because we believe that this is where the power is sort of the empowering people lies.
So, I think I am on time, and again if you have any kind of questions for me, I'm very happy to answer them in the end, and I'm going to post our article which is open access on the chat now.  Thank you, everybody.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you, Elinor.  And that was a very, actually very interesting we all discuss about digital divide with also including of the skills of the digital literacies.
And so, we pass the time to our next speaker, Professor Ang from Technology University in Singapore and his presentation is also a little bit related to the media literacy and digital literacy and audience receptions.  Welcome, Professor Ang, please.
   >> ANG PENG HWA:  Good evening.  I hope you guys can see this.  Okay.  So, I'm talking about privacy and trying to understand how privacy connects, given this current situation, and I'm talking particular about contract-tracing app in Singapore and probably write some reports to say that it is the most successful, so kind of the inside story about that.
I'm using full-screen display because I have some issues and I want to see you all so I'm putting in this mode.  Okay.  So, this app is developed by a unit in the Singapore government called Govtech and they use Bluetooth technology and done some things with the Bluetooth and so this technology will actually be able to tell based on strength of signals how close you are to the next Bluetooth device, so the strength of the signal is also involved.
And they used privacy principles from the very start, and so really incorporating privacy by design.  Collected minimum information and just the phone, contact details, and that was it.  But people avoided it, so it's kind of interesting to see, you know, why and so forth.
So, the question that came up was, you know, do people really understand privacy?  So here we're talking about privacy, and actually what I'm going to present is that people don't really understand privacy.
So, to tell you more about this app, this is new logo TraceTogether and its voluntary installation, no required installation.  Minimum information, no location data, no GPS data at all, and the data is stored in the in centralized government database but on your phone, and it will be deleted after 21 to 28 days if not useful and can tell you how close you were to somebody carrying phone and person was infected based on the strength of the signal as well.  Right.
And then give information to database and then contact other people that may have been infected, right.  That's kind of the principle behind it.
Many governments asked about it because it incorporated privacy-by-design and even quote "inspired" apple and Google together which is pretty big deal, basically copying, basically, we know how, right.  And to have Apple and Google together from opposite, one totally exploiting privacy and one selling privacy as a reason for buying products and services, right, so it's come together was a pretty major deal.
There are some downsides, drained the battery, version 1.0, so falling asleep, and two-third of power was gone and second version, 20% of power was gone.  And my friends told me if you go to use and carrying it aren't it pings so you actually lose more power so it does drain the power a little bit.  I told the government had some success stories but seems to be no success story, I don't really know.  You hear some success stories.
They talked about 25,000 contacts using it, but actual number of cases of people infected with that people is very, very low.  I mean, talking not even single digit percent, right, so very, very low, you know, in terms of that.  This would be why they didn't kind of publicize the contact details, so this is actually very high sort of false alarms here.
So when app came out petitions against it, two petitions and recent toke than came out so all together three petitions talking about contact tracing devices, and interesting the petitions the other way around from India and Italy saying that you guys should get a Singapore app, you know, because you know you could use it, kind of interesting how this happens.
So, the last time I checked, a total of 480 petitions globally speaking against contract tracing, but if you look through the log, 480 petitions mostly against contract-tracing.  All right.  I wrote an op Ed to talk about why people misunderstanding it light of the petitions in Singapore, and I want to carry on with what I'm presenting, in the Singapore case we have a very high trust environment, so if you look at the chart based on the Trust Index, the barometer, and Singapore ranks high in the trust area, right.  Other governments, the media based on the index ranks relatively low.  You can see that we operate in a high trust environment.  Nevertheless, right, we have a relatively low, you know, download rate.  There is an Oxford computer model saying you need 56% and again this is also misunderstanding here and again there is if you have 50%, you know, having that it would be like 25%, right, 25% based on how this thing works.
So, 56% of people downloading the app in the country is enough for the country to be sort of covered.  I mean, it's different thing, but so 40% is not quite there, and so but every percentage -- so every person downloading contributes to this coverage, and globally around 20%, right.  So, you can see actually pretty low from the 56%.
So, my point is that people don't understand privacy, even when their lives are at stake, right.  I mean, tell me now if I tell you that if you give me a bit of details about you, I can contact you earlier to tell you whether you've been infected or not, and people are saying no, I want my privacy, right.  So, the thing is sort of give me privacy, nevermind give me this.  Right.  Totally private, right, but that's not all.  Okay.  We have distributed a token now so to make it -- so this is like if you don't carry phone you need to carry this phone.  My friend, and I just met for lunch day before asking him about this, and why are you having this token, and he says so he can leave it around so he doesn't always have to carry around, so whereas phone you have to always carry, so people can trace you.  I told you how will you know you infected, but it's different, so I don't quite understand.
So, the local people ran these big stories about what does this token contain, you know, showing you the Bluetooth antenna, the memory, so forth, the battery, and then the government come out and say if you tamper with this, it's illegal and committing a crime.  Right.  So, people are collecting these devices, tampering with it so they cannot do what it's supposed to do.  Right.
So, people are snapping this up because they're supposed to -- it's more convenient than phone, doesn't drain battery, if you move it around it does brain because pinging, if you leave passive at home, you wouldn't be talking, so wouldn't drain battery, so people are picking it up.  We suggest an almost of sort of convenience here.
So, my conclusion now and being academic, I always end with questions.  We academics, we end with questions, right.  So, the conclusion is that does convenience trumps privacy?  Or convenience trumps death even?  Or people don't understand what should trump, right?  So, my question is your call, what is really, really important in this situation?  Is it privacy?  Is it convenience?  Is it so that my phone battery will not die?  Maybe it's living, right?  Okay.  That's it.  Thank you.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you very much.  That's very interesting presentation from Professor Ang, and we probably can leave Professor Ang's questions to later and invite other speakers to reflect on it.
So, but then let us invite Ansgar Koene first and he will also talk about the algorithms, media and relationship of the platforms.  Okay.
   >> ANSGAR KOENE:  Thank you very much.  Thank you for inviting me to participate in this panel.  So, I've been involved in two main research projects, both collaborations between the universities of Nottingham, Oxford, and Edenborough that have been looking at how do really people understand online platforms that they're engaging with, what are their kinds of concerns regarding these?
So, the first one was the unbiased research project, which was really focusing on how younger people understand their engagement with online services, with social media, search engines, recommended systems and those kind of things.  So the target group there was 13 to 17-year-olds, and this project has been followed by a second project called We Entrust focusing on two user groups, one being young adults, so 18 to around about 30, and then the other is elderly adults, so 65 plus, and maybe trying to understand if there are differences in factors that will make people feel that they can trust the platform that they're engaging with, depending on the kinds of age group.
I will be putting some links regarding the project websites for these into the chat after my talk.  So, one thing that is important from our results that we've gotten from engaging with these stakeholder groups is that many of them feel the kind of information that they're receiving about how social media platforms operate or the content moderation of those don't really address a lot of their underlying concerns.  They're, basically, being presented with instructions like to do this, do that, like if you're getting a message, you should check what is the source of the message.  You should be doing, you know, look whether you can find corroborating messages on other platforms and those kind of things, but what is actually lacking is an actual understanding of what is the basic premise on which these recommended systems operate?  What is the business model of a social media platform, as was mentioned earlier by Elinor, the fact that they don't really understand how does Google or Facebook make money is one of the things that is driving their concerns in not being able to really know how they should gauge their trust in these kind of contents?
For instance, in the current research project, the We Entrust one, when we were talking to the two different user groups, young adults and elderly adults, the interesting difference regarding what they really consider important for deciding whether they're going to trust this particular platform that they're engaging with, is that while the younger adults were really referring to their experience online with the platform, and a lot of that experience was basically around whether it was performing adequately, whether or not, you know, when you put in a request, it actually gave you results that seemed to answer your kind of question.
Whereas, the more older user group often referred actually to their understanding of the business or the organization, more did they feel that the organization reflected the kinds of values that they feel are important, and so it was really actually separate from the way in which the technology operates.  They're kind of judgment of whether they would trust this content.
Now, I think one of the important aspects that has been coming out from our thinking, also, around where does this problem with misinformation, disinformation come from, and particularly around the use of social media is also the way in which people actually engage with social media platforms, and really the psychology around critical thinking.  So, one of the things is if you ask somebody, you know, here is a news story, do you believe this or not?  You're triggering them to actually engage with critical thinking around this, and they will often do a proper assessment and will not accept the fake news kind of story.
However, the way in which largely these platforms operate with push notifications, you're not fully engaged with the social media platform and you're just holding your mobile phone, it pushes out a news story, you're seeing it sort of in the corner of your eye and you're not critically engaging with the content, and you may not even be fully reading it, but same as the basic premise behind a lot of advertising.  It's really not so much about reading and engaging with the story, but it's about just having the headline appearing frequently.
Basic psychology of humans is if you have seen something frequently, it makes it more likely that it is true, and so if you just keep hearing somewhere in the corner of your eye, 5G is related somehow to COVID, you know, if you were to critically really read it and critically engage with it, you would immediately dismiss it.  But you just are always seeing this, and in a sense, it becomes an underlying thought.
So, one of the issues really is around this model of the way in which information is being pushed out to people who are not critically engaging with the process, and they weren't actually in a mode of saying I want to be engaged and looking for news at this point in time.
Another aspect that I would like emphasize and actually connects to this example that was actually listed in the Q&A around, for instance, is 5G connected to COVID, a lot of the misinformation campaigns that we're seeing related to COVID are actually building on longstanding misinformation campaigns that have been out there.  Stories about that mobile phone transmission would somehow be leading to diseases, previously a lot of the links that were being proposed in these, in this fake news was around things like does mobile phone transmissions cause Autism or those kind of things, and it's just basically building on those existing narratives and slightly shifting them over to say well at this moment the health condition that everybody is concerned about is COVID, so we'll just tweak the story and say that it's not Autism but it is COVID that we're going to link it to.  And we see a similar thing with the anti-vax movement, for instance, which has been co-oped into the whole Qanan kind of narrative so a lot of the information that we're seeing relating to the COVID condition are basically building on an underlying kind of narrative or misinformation that has been going on.
And just to connect to one of the other questions that came up in the Q&A, which was around why have certain governments engaged differently with the COVID situation than others, there we also actually see that has been building on a prior narrative of how these governments engage with experts, engage with the scientific community.
In the UK, for instance, there was already an ongoing narrative of criticizing experts and researchers in various fields, which was used in the runup to Brexit and those kind of political domains, and that kind of built a sense of disconnect between health experts and the kind of engagement that was being built in the narrative, and so that is again a case that it hasn't come up from nowhere within the COVID situation, but it's really building on an ongoing narrative of misinformation that was already present.  Thank you very much.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Thank you very much, Ansgar.  I think that's a very good kind of conclusion of all of those issues we have discussed so far, so before we open to the floor and to the questions, I would just like or ask all the speakers probably can share on two questions that I think we have discussed so far.
So, first of all, I would like to ask everyone whether you can share or trust that whether people in your locality and model of the social media whether they have a trust of the social media?  I think we have people from different societies, so probably it's interesting to know that the knowledge of the local peoples, they have knowledge in terms of the social media and their functions.  So, can we start with Professor Long?  Can you say something about Chinese situation?  The role of the social media and the peoples' understanding of the business model and, you know, how do they work in the pandemic situation and also, yeah?  You have to unmute yourself.
   >> YUN LONG:  Can you hear me?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  We can.  Please.
   >> YUN LONG:  Yeah.  I think in China there is an epidemic that broke in the beginning of this year and the investigation shows that in social media, maybe more credibility -- the official, media, because but some difference between Wuhan and other big cities, the difference is in Wuhan the citizen is a lot of trust of social media, but in other cities, it's especially the young people pay more attention on social media, and they understand and trust the social media as official media.  Yeah.  This is the case in China.
So, I think maybe other issues, you know, in other countries are not the same, but internally it's very special and after the period, the official media and more is more powerful and the people have more trust to the official media after the maybe after January and February.  Yeah.  This is the situation in China.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  That's interesting.  And Mr. Wang Shu because you have Weibo, do you agree that the social media like Weibo has more trust than social media because you also mentioned that do not know how to moderate some of the hate speech and contents but that is surprising because even without doing the -- even not in the pandemic time, you should have some rules to follow to moderate the content, is that right?  (no English translation).  I just did a translation for him.
   >> SHU WANG:  Okay.  No problem.  So just as I answer some questions for the moment as social media platform and Weibo or not to take define and use as rumors, and we are not too judgment for these things, actually.  We give the right to the government and from the medias, and we know that the media in China just has some different background.  It's a different -- it's a different situation just than the other countries because most of the media, in China and they have the government background, so we can trust for this, and because they have very strict rules and just some strict processes and to post the information, so the people in China always trust the media.  And sometimes, if we just want to post some important information, just for example it's about how it coronavirus and how to defend the coronavirus, and maybe some cities in there is in how to use the right medical here for there -- for them and we always to let just beg the media to post this information to the public.  Yes, it should be -- and this is true and the people always trust and we use this channel.  Okay.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Thank you, Mr. Wang.  Any other speakers or panelists, can you share some of your country's situation, like in India whether people trust more social media than traditional media?
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  Okay.  So, if I look at the Indian perspective, it is mixed.  As in, there is a section of the people who are the new users of social media or instant messaging and they believe whatever comes to them, especially in instant messaging because it comes from someone whom they know.  So they kind of relate to it, and I kind of agree to Elinor in when she says that people like to believe what aligns to their thought process, so there is a section of people who believe it, and however we did speak to a lot of young students late last year and we found that they do not believe everything which is online.  However, they do not have any alternate to get information because they do not read traditional newspapers, and neither do they like to spend much time looking at television.
There is a section of educated people who are now getting aware of, you know, what they're doing online, whether it is harming them, whether it is beneficial, how the companies are monetizing this information, and everything which they are getting for free.  But by and large, people still believe the information they are getting and that is why misinformation is also flourishing and being spread across because most people believe what comes.  If someone says, okay, you have this and it will help to you prevent coronavirus, they find it the easier way to use this rather than looking at something else.  So that is why education, capacity building on how to manage the kind of information which comes is important.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yeah.  And Singapore, I think Singapore people also have more trust than social media.
   >> ANG PENG HWA:  Nobody says I believe in social media.  Right.  They smart, when it comes, they believe in social media.  I believe in God, but I'm let me cheat on this side, so I believe in God but I'm going to cheat.  So, this juncture between what they say and what they actually do, so we see this.  Yeah.  So, it's also present in Singapore, unfortunately, yeah.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  As element, you know, given people use social media but still more trust like guardians or BBC so do you think this is issue of decline of mainstream media or trust in media in your country if they have more trustable source like BBC or Guardian, and they may not rely on that and rely on social media?
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  Are you asking me?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Everyone, just if you have any idea you can jump in here.
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  I do have to say that actually from our focus groups, what we discovered is that a lot of people, so I think social media as a whole is a wrong way to look at it.  So for example, in our focus groups, most people thought that Google Search and YouTube are trustworthy to look for information, and this is where our data thinking is really crucial I think because people don't understand the kind of information that Google presents to you both on YouTube and on Google Search is very skewed and it depends on a lot of factors.
And I think like Amirita said, a lot of people don't feel that especially young people are not exposed to other kinds of more traditional media, and however a lot of news from some more traditional media is then shared through different kind of means, so we discovered that WhatsApp is at least in the UK the most common way to share information and news between people.
So, I think that when we're talking about social media as a whole, we need to distinguish between different kinds of social media, and I'm guessing that in Asia we will see different kinds of patterns.  And I think that it's quite important, as I said, to have people, to have these kind of critical tools to be able to identify how these companies have power to shape which kind of information reaches them and what to do about it.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Thank you very much.  And, yeah.
   >> SHU WANG:  Hi.  Okay.  So, I would like to add a point if it's okay.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yes.  Please do, go ahead.
   >> SHU WANG:  Okay.  Okay.  I just want to add some more points in.  Just I say that just on in China, the media and the media in the social media platform and where to get more the credibility.  I just want to say that the media can also make some mistakes, we can see mistake.  But they often apologize to the public on social media when the media makes a mistake, and which is timely and very truly, so just that sometimes the mistake is a want to factor their credibility, so it's truth.  Okay.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Ansgar wants to say something.
   >> ANSGAR KOENE:  I just want to build on what Shu just said.  Unfortunately, we have also been seeing that the so-called traditional media have been copy and pasting stories from the social media with very little background checks at times, in part this has to do with the high levels of competition in that space, the reduction in funding for journalism, and the sort of need to get the story out there as quickly as possible so that you won't be scooped by somebody else, and then they don't take the time to do the fact checking themselves.  So, they push out the story basically picked up from social media and afterwards they may or may not do fact checking and may or may not publish an apology.  Obviously, it depends on which particular media we're talking about.  This tends to happen more with so-called Tabloid kind of media but a lot of people read those kind of media as their main source of news as well.
So, unfortunately, it is not necessarily the case that the traditional media are that much more trustworthy in this kind of high-competitive environment.
>> KUO WU:  Can I join in?  I think basically the social media, I think the term of the name of social media is kind of misleading.  I think you are in the study in the media, so you know that, you know, social media is actually not a media.  It's just a chat for the people to just, you know, without a checking -- without editing and they can publish whatever they want to say on the chat wall.  You know.
I think the social media term is a little bit misleading, basically, from my point of view.  You can take it easy, you know, it can laugh and take out humor and you can share some of your information, but if you really like to take it serious about anything published in the social media, that basically is quite wrong, and I think we should educate young people to understand social media is not a media.  Media, basically, has a code of conduct.  The media has a certain process to publish their information, and social media without such a process.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Any feedback?  I'm sorry.
   >> ANSGAR KOENE:  I would say, I agree with Kuo that a lot of sort of content that can be thrown up on social media is more or less stream of consciousness thinking as something came to my mind and I'll throw it up there.
However, if we're thinking about the way in which people are actually engaging with social media, they're not just using it, especially for if we're thinking about something like a social media platform, like Facebook for instance, you're not just using it to engage with the messages that are coming from other users.  These platforms have also become a conduit for traditional media to communicate their information to people, and I mean Facebook has been building that as part of their business model, they've been pushing to try to get -- for them to be the platform that you're on even if you want to read the story from the Guardian, you're supposed to read it through Facebook, and one of the problems is that the way in which the notification of what is the actual source of this information, that does this message come from the Guardian or somewhere else, it's often easy to overlook, to not catch that little notification in the corner or whatever, and that is supposed to tell you what the source is of this information.  Then it becomes blurry, because I was just reading a story from the main news source and then the next thing that came up is actually a story without any kind of source reference to it, but you know I was just in a mode of reading news stories, and these other things got in between and it becomes -- it sort of gets back to the point I was making earlier about how the ability to critically analyze the different news stories.  You know, do I realize what kind of system I'm currently engaging with.
   >> ANG PENG HWA:  Ansgar, I agree.  I think social media and media are all learning and also changing, and but at this moment, at this moment now, it's still too early to say that social media is a media, and the second point -- the second point I would like to mention about it is -- (this is Kuo -- is that I just don't think social media has a right to filter.  You know, who gives them a right to filter whatever they think you are not, you know, not allowed to publish.  So, it's kind of, it's not -- you know, there is a kind of strange.
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  If I can intervene.  I actually disagree with the whole notion of social media are not media.  I think that the way that we define them should be different.  I think that, you know, my glasses are media.  A lot of things are media, and actually platforms, you know, different Facebook and Twitter and these kind of companies want us to think of them as social, but actually they define how socially is conducted in them, and the kind of things you're talking about filtering either with content moderation or algorithmic ordering is editorial decisions that they are making in different parts of the communication channels, and this is the kind of definition is actually very disputed because if they would be actually called media companies, they would have the same regulations that broadcasters have like television and radio and, you know, newspaper, television, radio.  So, I think that this is the reason why these companies don't want to have the kind of tagline of media, but they are definitely a multi-type of media.  We can communicate there, we can share other types of media, so I disagree that it's not media, but I definitely think like you that we definitely need to regulate them and to start to destabilize the huge power that they accumulate in shaping how we understand news, information in our societies.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you.  And Professor Ang, please.
   >> ANG PENG HWA:  Okay.  Thanks.  I'll try to make it quick.  So Kuo, I'll still have dinner with you if you can.  But I'll say you're wrong.  Let me just say upfront.  I just had a test with my students on this point, you know, the impact of social media on journalism.  Right.  So, the example I gave actually in the class was this, right.  So now when these people ask, they don't like search for, you know they like for social media I need a am radio, where can I get a room, and people respond and just social media I need a room, where do I go, and people respond.
Similarly, they were like is this place flooded or not, it is flooded I see news is it flooded or not, so social media people respond.  It's news, it's usable a, news that you can use right away.  So that's the problem.  Blurring of line.  What I call snacking, take a bit of bite of the news.  It's not what you and I would -- I mean, we're about same age, we kind of read in articles and so right, so the way they're reading news is quite different and definite blurring of lines.  I posted medium where you can post anything you want, and obviously anything you want, and in a way, you create your own news and media, right.  So the point is that the social side is coming up and you're taking -- so way, is content part of it, and in particular advertising as well, so they are really competing head on with, so if you want to go to this place and know if it's flooded or safe or if there are good restaurant, who do you turn to?  Normally the media in the past.  But now these guys don't.  They turn to social media and each other, essentially, so in a sense I'm closer to Elinor here and really this is blurring of line, and continuum and not one not this or that, but blurring of lines and now we're all wrestling with how to manage so doesn't give out false information, fake news and make it trustable, this is the kind of information we're wrestling with.  Okay.
   >> KUO WU:  For all of you, just one short comment about it.  I agree with that but just that should we give the same regulation for the social media and the media company?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you, Kuo.  So, we, yeah, Mr. Wang Shu you are from social media, yeah.
   >> SHU WANG:  Okay.  Yeah.  Okay.  And we always call social media platform, so because in my opinion, I think all the media is social media, so the whole process of the media operation is highly social, so in China in just most of the media must become APP, on our mobile phone, it can be survived, so we don't think this is different between the media or the social media.  It's just only the different between the media and the social media platform.  So we will call it just like Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, or the Weibo, we say it is social media platform, and just to be a platform and we only to do the more technical cross approach and sometimes we more like post and transmit the information but we don't protect the information, so I think when we talk about the media, and which we need to come from and how is the media the background, so it's a company, UGC, organization, or this is actually government?  So, I think it is persons.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  So, you do not think that the social media, like should go to same regulation as traditional media, is that right?
   >> SHU WANG:  Yes.  It's just a platform.  It just is to transport the information, but do not to protect the information.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Okay.  That's their opinion.  They're not media and only platform.  Okay.  So, great.  Any other opinions from audience, and any other questions you want to?  Yeah.  I got one question from the chat, so one question, his question is the younger generation is generally more source and do you think the generation can consume the interpret from age group creates stronger generation divide across the world?  Anyone want to respond?  Okay.  Amirita, please.
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  Though I did mention here that it would not create a generational digital divide, primarily because there may be certain issues where the different age groups may be aligned, and there may be certain issues like in real life, and they may be not aligned so they could not create a generational gap.
When I look at India perspective, between the economically different sections, you know, children who have Internet access readily available, they're more skeptical about what comes on social media and different messaging platforms.  However, new users or people from economically backwards sections or who are new have not had much exposure, and they kind of lap up all the information.
So, I don't think it would be a very great diverse divide, but it would be normally like we currently have in our real lives, where in there is a generational divide but not significantly.  It would be on the thoughts.
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  If I could chime in.  I just want to say that from what we see in our research, actually the divide, the social inequalities come from people who are already excluded, so people who have or come from lower socioeconomic status or also who have lesser opportunities for better education, so I think if we want to strengthen young people as well as older people, we need to first tackle the other social inequalities that we have and that will, you know, bring everybody to similar levels.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you very much for all the comments.  So, we have only a few minutes left, so I just want to each of you give one sentence to conclude your presentation.  What is the kind of policy recommendation you would give to policymaker to improve the trust in the media environment, and in the Internet governance in general?  Yes, please, one sentence.  Thank you.
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  Get everyone to the table and not take a top-down decision and really involve communities when decisions are taken, especially when it relates to those communities.
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  I would say provide data literacies to different kind of communities, tailor it according to their needs and according to their everyday life and to focus on the networks of literacy in order to strengthen everybody.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yep.
   >> KUO WU:  I would say, I would say, yep, education the young as early as possible of what is trusted information.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Professor Long?
   >> YUN LONG:  I would say the government and informative citizens is equally important in these issues.  Can you hear me?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yeah.  We can hear you.  Thank you.  Mr. Wang?
   >> SHU WANG:  Okay.  I will say and actually we have to believe in social media because we don't have any other choice.  The whole world is under the influence of the social media, so we must accept this.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Professor Ang?
   >> ANG PENG HWA:  I don't have -- and a statement with you I have a question.  How come people don't understand privacy, you know?  It's so important in their life.  I don't understand this one.
   >> ANSGAR KOENE:  And I would add to this to recognize that close to one-third of users of online media, especially social media are young people below the age of 18 who have recognized extra kinds of needs for protection, and we need to recognize that we cannot expect all of them to do the same level of kind of assessment of quality, so we need to take that into account when thinking about how to craft proper regulations.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you.  And, actually, we've got one last question, and this post here from audience member.  And his question asks whether we should have distinguished regulatory dimension between the social media and traditional media.  Social media intercept -- should we have a different regulatory dimension regarding to the social media and traditional media?
   >> KUO WU:  Well, my point is that the government learns very slow.  You know, so it's not enough time for government to really understand how to regulate in their social media.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you.  Any other response?  Okay, so now probably is right, the regulatory framework come slowly and we'll see what happens next.
Anyway, thank you very much for all the panelists, and participants.  Thank you very much.  We close out our panel here.  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-9-ws210-nobody-left-behind-interregional-cyber-capacity^^

 
       >> Welcome to our webinar.  Please be informed that the session is recorded and hosted under the IGF Code of Conduct and UN rules and regulations.  And the link will be pasted in the chat.  And the chat feature is for social chat only.
     And Q&A feature is used to ask questions.  Please do that, and please enjoy the session.  Thank you.  We can start.
     >> KERSTIN VINGARD: Good morning, colleagues.  It is my great pleasure to welcome you to this IGF discussion Nobody Left Behind:  Interregional Capacity Building.  
     I'm Kerstin Vignard, and I have had the honor to lead through the process since 2009.  Capacity building is a fundamental component to empower all States to reap the benefits of the digital environment while protecting themselves and their citizenry from those who will try to destroy it from malicious purposes.
     We have seen an explosion in the quantity and reach and breadth of cyber capacity building globally focusing on different stakeholder groups and different themes and different objectives.  In the formal and informal meetings at the United Nations, the importance of capacity building has been an area receiving near consensus support by States and non-State actors alike and stressed there is a need for more capacity building while at the same time noting that capacity building needs to be guided by agreed principles such as reciprocity, sustainable and effectiveness and we should use better use of existing structures and organizations to do so.
     And as this pandemic's exposure of our digital dependencies has only underscored the importance that they said we should redouble our efforts while at the same time doing more to ensure that capacity building is effective, respectful and sustainable.  Today we will be considering how greater interregional capacity building could put some of the principles into practice.  How do different regions approach capacity building?  How do different approaches, how can they be shared or better leveraged to embody this two-way street we talk about in capacity building principles? For the next hour we will explore the benefits and challenges and concrete actions that could help different regions get the most out of it.  The four panelists bring a wealth of experience from different regions.
     But one of the exciting things about this is all of them have represented different stakeholder groups throughout their careers in governments and think tanks and regional organizations and the private sector and Civil Society so they really all have sat at different seats at the table, so to speak.  So we're really going to get like double the benefit from the panel today.
     By way of housekeeping, we'll start with a discussion amongst the panelists and then we'll open up to questions and insights from you the participants.  At any time you can submit the questions and comments via the chat function.  When you do so, if you could share your region or your stakeholder group affiliation because that's an important context for us in this conversation.  
     With that, I think I'm going to kick off with Latha Reddy, Co-Chair on the Global Commission on the Stability of Cyberspace.
     Ms. Reddy has had a long and distinguished career in the Indian Foreign Service.  She's the former Deputy National Security Advisor of India and has also served as Commissioner on the Global Commission on Internet Governance.  
     Latha, like many of our panelists, you have been a different stakeholder at different points in your career.  
     Now, based on your experiences, what do you see as the strength that Asia-Pacific governments and multi-stakeholder groups bring to cyber capacity building?
     >> LATHA REDDY: First, let me say how nice it is to be with all of you and talking on this global platform and talking in a multi-stakeholder group.  
     As you said, I had the opportunity to both work inside government and outside government.  Just to set in context, I'm from India but I have a global avatar, if I may use the word.  I have been on the Global Gommission for Internet Governance and the Global Commission for the Stability of the Cyberspace as co-chair.  I think I can take a broader local, national, and regional view.  Asia-Pacific is a very large area, and we are divided into very many groups and I think it is done very well in the Asia-Pacific so far as a region is as young, you know.
     They have really come up well with capacity building initiatives and I would suggest that every subregion, if I may use the term, within the Asia-Pacific could use that as a model, you know, the more advanced countries in terms of cyber capabilities like Singapore and others have really come forward to build centers of excellence, to take the lead and yet at the same time as you say, being very respectful and trying to introduce an element of reciprocity as well.
     This is always the trick with capacity building, you know, I mean it shouldn't just be one person giving and the other person taking whether between regions or between countries.  Both must feel that they are contributing to the conversation.
     And you know, in some way helping to build better capacity in their respective regions and between regions.  And now talking about South Asia as you know because of our geopolitical situation the SOC has not been as effective as it could have been.  Again, talking in a regional sense, India has been able to reach out to many of the smaller partners in South Asia and Nepal and Bhutan and Sri Lanka and Bangladesh and the Maldives and try to help them build capacity.  There is also capacity building within regions apart from between regions.
     I would say some systems are working very well.  SIRTs are constantly in touch and when SIRTs compare their experiences it is very, very useful as a learning process and as a strengthening process for how effective SIRTs can be.  And there are best practices set up between countries and it will have to be a mixture of bilateral, regional, subregional capacity building exercise to be really effective.  I will start with that and if there are any other points, we can come back to that later.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Latha.  Your point on respectful partnership amongst neighbors in the same region is really well taken, and I think it helps transition to Folake Olagunju, Program Officer of Internet and Cybersecurity at the Cconomic Community of West African States and serves as co-chair of the global forum on expertise advisory board.  Folake, what do you see as the strengths of African regional or subregional ability in terms of capacity building?
     >> FOLAKE OLAGUNJU: Thank you very much, Kerstin, for the kind words.  And also for what Latha has said is pretty much the same thing.  It is always good to know that you are not doing anything completely different.  
     So from our situation in terms of cyber capacity building in West Africa, our region is very -- we're still trying to find our way.  And which that is sort of a good thing.  A good thing in the sense that we can actually now borrow from other regions and see what they have done instead of reinventing the wheel.
     Being the regional body what we are trying to do is establish relationships with donors to act as a bridge between our member states and the donors because we are looking at economies of scale and economics of learning and it is also a harmonized approach.  Within the region we know it is somewhat different in developing countries as it is in developed countries, issues are somewhat different. What we are trying to do is make sure within our region, like Latha said, we want to do cooperation so we can have a few key players within West Africa, Nigeria, Ghana, Côte d’Lvoire and even Cape Verde, the smallest country in the region.  But they are actively doing other things, so what we are trying to encourage the lesser member states that haven’t gotten to that level, to actually start engaging with individual member states.
     We built relationships with donors such as the EU.  We are learning from them as well.  The EU, they are a big brother or big sister, for lack of a better word. They are a regional block.  And one of the ongoing partnerships is with the EU and looking at African Union to see what they have done.  It is quite important that we don't over reinvent the wheel, for lack of a better word, because capacity building is capacity building.  We want to ensure whatever we actually build, it actually trickles down so we want to make sure and use the word that nobody can really explain, sustainability.  Sustained capacity.
     We want to make sure when we build the capacity, we are building it and people actually sustain it and we keep building on that.  Pretty much almost the same thing as Latha said is what we are doing.  We haven't done anything completely different as yet.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Folake.  I'm glad you brought up the definition of sustainability, that amorphous good sounding word but what does it mean in practice.  
Perhaps we can circle back later in the conversation.  Both of the first two speakers have mentioned the importance of regional or subregional organizations as being that bridge of helping increase effectiveness, whether through matchmaking or asserting us at bridge and that is maybe something that we can circle back to if people are interested.  I sometimes wonder if we are investing enough in building capacity within regional and subregional organizations as a force multiplier to play the role.  Maybe we could circle back to that if people are interested.
     Now, Liga Rozentale, Security Director for the EU Emerging Press and Cybersecurity at Microsoft and former Cyber Diplomat at the EU and NATO.  What do you see as the strengths of the private sector and regional arrangements in Europe in the field of cyber capacity building?
     >> LIGA ROZENTALE: Good morning, Kerstin, good morning all panelists and all the participants.  It's a pleasure to almost be in Katowice at IGF in Poland.  So thank you to the organizers for all their work in turning this event to digital, which is a bit unprecedented at this scale.  
     As Kerstin mentioned, I've had a career in both government and the private sector, and so I think looking back, multi-stakeholder is sort of the theme of my CV.  But I just may speak from the perspective of Europe where I have the best visibility of what the governments and private sector are doing.  
     However, being a representative of Microsoft, I also have a strong visibility of how the global company is looking at these issues on advancing cyber norms, on looking at capacity building, and trying to find how we can work across regions as a global company.
     So looking at Europe itself.  Europe has a slightly different arrangement on cybersecurity and capacity building because in Europe there is the EU that has a very strong legislative framework and cooperative framework that is very positive in some way.  We have legislation that requires certain minimum levels of capacity across the EU which is excellent and also forms a lot of opportunities for cooperation across governments.
     However, moving from government to the private sector, I see that, you know, the work among governments is excellent but how we could turn that into a multi-stakeholder process is slightly different.  A two-track process.  The multi-stakeholder process which is sometimes in competition with the government processes.
     So how do we make that bridge to make the government processes more partnered with the multi-stakeholders of Civil Society and the private sector to take best advantage of all of the resource?  Both regionally and then how can Europe work with the rest of the world in this kind of format?
     Microsoft is very active in capacity building and we are looking at the Paris Call by a tool to supplement processes going on by government.  The Paris Call addresses nine different principles on building cybersecurity through various cyber norms but we want to go beyond that to see how we did actually implement these norms to work on capacity building.
     The UN efforts that are ongoing are excellent and we support that as much as we can.  And there are various initiatives looking at how the multi-stakeholder process can go forward but I think it is important to share the lessons across regions and compare what are the differences so we don't make assumptions about what works and what doesn't work.
     I think the two previous speakers have identified how different areas differ and I think that is excellent.
     I think that in Europe, there is an excellent government perspective on this with the EU cyber dialogues.  I would be interested to see if there is a process that could accompany and build bridges.  I was pleased there was an EU-India dialogue after many years of discussion.  Perhaps we could see how there could be an EU-India not track two but next day process with the multi-stakeholders engaged in the process and see how that could apply to different regions.
     So getting the understanding of how different regions are approaching capacity building is quite important and I wanted to highlight one step we are taking on building this understanding is yesterday at the Paris peace forum Microsoft in the global forum on cyber expertise announced a new joint project on a new Africa program manager looking at implementation of the Paris Call in Africa over the next year.
     So we are looking forward to that cooperation and looking at how that could supplement capacity building in Africa as a first step in the next year.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Liga.  And that was an exciting announcement yesterday for sure.
     And perhaps next year when we are having this conversation we can be doing specific lessons learned from that experience.
     Now, lastly, we have Bart Hogeveen.  Bart, in your role it is inevitable that you would be on the panel because your title even has cyber capacity building in it.  Head at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute International Cyber Policy Center and worked on cyber capacity building in the Asia-Pacific.  What do you see as the strength of think tanks in academia in your region's cyber capacity building efforts?
     >> BART HOGEVEEN: Thanks and good evening to fellow panelists and everyone listening in.  As you mentioned, I'm working with a think tank based in Australia.  And as my previous speakers mentioned a bit of their background, my background is a nexus of international peace and security and development issues.
     Now as the role of as a think tank, I think it is obviously a bit different from the previous speakers who are either working with the regional organization or a bit multi-national or national government and we don't have those resources behind us to do and decide on capacity building issues.
     What we can do and what we are doing is obviously to look at what is happening domestically but definitely also in our region.  So provide a level of analysis.  Provide advice what is currently going on and look at the gaps so the duplication and additional issues that government, industry or regional organizations could tap into.
     One of the other things the think tanks like ours play a role in, and Liga mentioned, is organizing 1.5 dialups and where we, indeed, big government, private sector and Civil Society organizations together in a bilateral, trilateral or whatever lateral dialogue with other organizations.
     Now one thing I just would like to share let's say based on my experience working with cyber capacity building in this part of the world for the last couple of years is that working from Australia which has obviously been active in cyber capacity building.  There was even a dedicated cyber capacity building program with the Department of Foreign Affairs but looking at three very different kind of cyber capacity building conversations or dialogues in the region as obviously kind of internal capacity building and within the country but also with kind of similarly mature nations.
     Then let's say on our eastern side, I mean Australia and New Zealand and to a part Singapore are also engaged in the South Pacific and there you have a completely different dynamic from conversations elsewhere where it is much more about connectivity and how do we make sure that people are actually taking up the benefits of ICTs in a responsible manner as I sometimes tend to say they are not entering the internet of the late 1990's but the internet of the 2020 which is so substantially different.  And in southeast Asia where the focus is less on regional security but more on connectivity and how do we transform economies as industry 4.0.
     So you have different kind of dialogues happening.  And to pick up on one point, I think it is for a -- for less of a cyber capacity building nation where it is also looked at providing, it is hard to provide expertise and sorry I'm using catch words that isn't really sustainable and really make sense in a very different local context.
     And I want to echo I think the point made at the start of the conversation that capacity building is very much kind of a back and forth between multiple partners, I would say.
     But I don't see that really happening in practice.  I see what I see happening in practice is obviously that lots of capacity building is offered and that those with their feet on the ground get lost out of it and get a feel for local context and what is required.  How that should go through and programming let's say at the policy or higher level, I think that is a very big challenge and we see that partly represented in some of challenges that we are facing but also regional capacity building centers that have been stood up here in the region for instance in Thailand and in Singapore.
     I will leave that for now.  And, yeah, I will leave that for now.  Thanks.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Bart.  And I see that you brought up sustainability again.  So I think we are definitely going to come back to that.
     I kind of would like to scratch a little bit deeper on this idea, there seems to be, we have a whole panel about an underlying assumption that more cross regional sharing, that region to region sharing is either necessary or would be beneficial.  So let's unpack that assumption.
     It is something that uniters worked on in 2018-2019 we did a series of meetings in cooperation of CSIS of Washington on exactly this and specifically looking to see if there was appetite for more structured conversation between regional and subregional organizations.
     So maybe we could start with that and look at why do we think that cross-regional sharing is something to be pursued rather than just a simple interest or I mean why interregional?  Latha, do you want to take a first stab at that?
     >> LATHA REDDY: Yes.  I think it comes from the fact that, you know, cyber is essentially a borderless regime, right?
     So we can only be as strong as the weakest link.  So it makes sense that it is not just being strong within your country, within your subregion, or within your region.  To really have a proper open, secure, safe system, we must really cooperate between regions.  So I would say that is the fundamental reason.  The second point is it is a game of catch up really because there are some countries which are very advanced and have great cyber capacity building already in place.  And there are many who don't.
     So unless we really reach out between regions, how are they going to bridge this gulf?  Your problem is that the largest share of future users and even now the largest share of users don't necessarily come from the highly developed countries.  The largest user of cyber space today is China followed by India, whereas it is widely recognized North America, maybe the five I's and EU that you have got the strongest cyber capacity already installed.
     So how are you going to reconcile these two unless there is interregional cooperation?  That will be really my take on it.
     And I think that if you don't give the global south a legitimate voice, you know, when they are going to be providing most of the future users and even today provide a very huge proportion of the users of the internet, you are going to have an inherently unjust system which is really not correct.
     I would welcome any and all efforts at bridging this gap and bridging the digital divide, connecting the unconnected and bringing in more inclusion.  I think it would be wonderful if every region could cooperate, you know, in this.  As I said earlier, even within the regions that -- the ones who have more advantages, who have more skills should really take the lead within the region.
     And more importantly, the more developed regions need to really reach out in a big way, which is why I think it is very exciting on what Liga said about the announcement at the PPF yesterday.
     That is really the sort of thing we should be looking for.  And Liga, incidentally, you were talking about the EU India cyber consultations.  In a sense that was a track 1.5 because, you know, I was part of that.  I actually chaired a panel.  Because you had representatives from the EU, you had the ambassador of the EU to India, this was held in Delhi.  And yet at the same time you had private experts such as I would render to say myself and other colleagues, academics.  You had some private sector as well and you had think tanks whether the German marshal fund or the EU institute of strategic studies or the ORF who were the cohosts.
     That is the way to really build capacity between regions.  In this particular case, it wasn't between two regions, it was between the EU and India but the same model could be extended to interregional cooperation by establishing track 1.5 dialogues between regions and I think that is very, very important.  I saw it for myself when we had the AVEM, the at the Asian Plus 6 and the EU dialogue only many other issues.  I don't see why the same shouldn't be happening on cyber as well.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you for that concrete example.  Liga, you mentioned in your initial intervention about how we check our assumptions when we are engaging in cooperative partnerships across regions.
     So could you say more about that?  And maybe why even -- the challenge of checking one's assumptions, how do you do that?  And again, why is this so important, this cross-regional sharing?
     >> LIGA ROZENTALE: Yeah, sure.  Latha, thanks for the information about the EU-India dialogue.  And it is quite positive to hear that there were non-governmental actors in that that and I certainly encourage those processes.  
     But back to the question about checking assumptions.  I find that as being a global player and being quite a force sometimes in global issues, a company such as Microsoft really needs to tread carefully when moving into the space that is a bit on global governance issues and we want to have a firm understanding where we can supplement and help other processes ongoing and do that in a constructive manner and not derail some things going on at the UN and in other formats.  Understanding how resources could be shared in a thoughtful and sustainable way is very important.  And how we go about that is -- has to be careful and has to have a lot of feedback from regional actors.
     I think whether I speak from the side of Europeans or from Microsoft, you know, we sit in our own environment and we know it works in our own environment.  And that doesn't necessarily translate across regions.
     So to be able to ask the right questions I think is part of the first steps in approaching cross-regional dialogue to be able to see really how resources could be matched, how we can you mentioned this two-way street, and how we can make that two-way street really work.  And you know, and how we can fit in as a global actor.  We are a U.S.-based company, but I would say a lot of the actions on building sustainable development and working with the UN is a much more global process than just the North American process.  How can we take place across regions as a global actor and connect the input we have on cybersecurity looking at a global scale on a more regional/subregional scale and how we can be useful in this process without making assumptions.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Liga.  Maybe we could pivot to circle back to something that Bart mentioned and then maybe this could be a good place for him to come back in.
     In your experience, to what extent can good practices from one region be applied to others?  You had the experience working both in the Asia-Pacific but also on your international projects that have a more global focus.  
Where in your work have you seen or wish to have seen greater cross-regional sharing or felt there was an opportunity being missed either for lack of capacity, lack of sustainability, lack of resources?  Could you say some words about that, Bart?
     >> BART HOGEVEEN: Sure, by all means, and it is one of the points I would be keen to follow up on.
     Because I might want to take a different approach because I'm not so sure whether kind of capacity building that is from one region to another reason or let's say that relationship is as productive as we sometimes want to think.  And I think it is precisely what Liga just mentioned.
     And I'm coming let's say for the moment let's say from a Pacific perspective where there is no strong regional organization.  There is no body which kind of either coordinates or is really kind of helping nations with articulating what they really need based on the local context and what makes sense in a local context.
     So for instance, an Australian or Microsoft solution in the Pacific in nine out of 10 cases would not make sense.  Even the lessons learned would probably be difficult to apply in a totally different socio-economic setting, and also in a totally different kind of governance setting.  That is really important I think to consider.
     So, for instance, there is definitely value for instance where we compare experiences from the Caribbean with nations in the South Pacific.  Or whether you compare maybe experiences in Latin America with Southeast Asia.  I could see there might be some similarities.  I think in most cases and that is also part of capacity building is how you learn as a single economy and how do you learn as a region.
     Because we all have particular trajectories how the internet came to our nations and how we started adopting new technologies one way or the other.
     And I just want to -- when Vint Cerf was talking at the one and only Internet Governance Forum that was hosted in a Pacific Island in Vanuatu I think two years ago, the regional one.  
     He said, every country needs to kind of write up its own, let's say history of how the internet came to the country and how it grew.  And I think that is very important kind of to take that perspective because it is very much kind of a national learning path.  
     So I'm not so sure whether interregional capacity building is as valuable and as productive as we sometimes want to think.
     That ties to the other point I wanted to bring in.  One thing that is really missing in lots of the cyber capacity building work and people who are working in the space and that is the developmental expertise that ability to talk with kind of potential recipients of support to really articulate, define and reassess assumptions what is really require and what would make sense in their particular context.
     That might mean that you are well, that in the end you take a completely different direction than what you would initially think would be appropriate.  So that would be my other point.
     Developmental expertise I think is really lacking in the space.
     >> MODERATOR: Thanks, Bart.  Folake, can I put you on the spot on that since you would, in regional or subregional organization that has an economic development et cetera focus.  Could you respond to what Bart just said?
     >> FOLAKE OLAGUNJU: Bart and I, sometimes we agree and sometimes we don't agree.  I'm kind of in the middle with what he said.  I kind of think there is room for inter capacity region building on one hand.  On the other hand, I understand where Bart is coming from.
     There has to be international buy-in and ownership and commitment, and if we are not there we are wasting our time.  We need to make sure that those three things are in place.  Wealth builds a nation, if you have money and the funds you can do capacity building.  We don't have that in the region.
     When we get donors or partners coming in, we have to assess the capacities and the resources they have to see if they can actually filter through or make a difference.  I think a lot of donors are dangling the carrot and then they expect you to just take the bait.  As the Global South or developing countries we need to do a little bit more and show that we are not just taking any carrot that is thrown at us.
     So I think in that respect if you look at the traditional donors and the non-traditional donors, you find that quite a number of countries are moving towards the non-traditional donors because the requirements are less and less stringent which sometimes might not be a good thing and sometimes might be a good thing.
     You have to see where each country is coming from.  The economy is different, each country is different.  There are certain nuances in West Africa that we won't find in the Asia region.  We need to talk more even if it is at the regional level because the regional bodies understand what is going on in their member states.  I can say our member States take what we say as fait accompli.  If we say to the member states please join the GFC, there are resources available, most of our member States will do it because they do take what we say as authority to a certain extent.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.
     I think that really helped give us a more nuanced picture.  And I appreciate you jumping in like that.  And that resonates with one of the comments we received from one of the participants.  
We have Teresa from the DiploFoundation who noted in cross-regional capacity making sure support is neutral and unbiased.  As you said a lot of times it comes with strings attached and that is something we talked about in the OEWD.  I was wondering if other people on -- OEWG.  I was wondering if people on the panel want to talk about strings, no strings, now it works and making sure that that buy-this is there.  Does somebody else want to jump in on that question?
     >> LATHA REDDY: I would like to jump in on that question.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.
     >> LATHA REDDY: I had experiences early in my career when we were successful in promoting tele-education and telemedicine models to many developing countries.
     Building on that experience, I would say a country like India that has been able to build very good platforms for payment platforms, e-commerce platforms and FinTech forms and online banking platforms at not a very great cost, you know, would be happy to share that expertise with the other developing countries provided there is an interest.
     So how this would fit into interregional is a question.  Because obviously the cultural contexts are different in different regions.
     But, in some ways you know, these models that have been developed in developing countries, maybe more so for the global south and I think we have, you know, sort of special fund for Africa.  So even the funding could come from that.  And I think by and large India does not attach conditions like, you know, that only Indian firms should do the work or that we want to bring in our own workers to be installed in that country.
     The interest is very much in training local people to take over and to keep it sustainable.  So I mean I'm just throwing that in as an idea that, you know, there is possibilities of this sort of cooperation as well.
     >> MODERATOR: All right.  Liga, did you want to jump in on this as well?
     >> LIGA ROZENTALE: I was thinking about the strings attached to any sort of capacity building.  When we look at the UN processes, I think it is one approach that any capacity building we want to have also accompanied with respect for international law.
     And so building a foundation that looking at the future once capacity develops in a region that this will not become a region that suddenly does not respect international -- the equitability of international law and responsible behavior in cyberspace, as already identified in different UN GGEs from 2015 and prior. So how can we partner capacity building with norms is quite important from our side.
     I mean we see that from a corporate responsibility perspective.  We address cyber norms quite -- with some fervor and we would like capacity building to two along the same lines.  How can we make that work and how can we emphasize that responsible behavior plus capacity building is good for longer term development?
     >> MODERATOR: Right.  Thank you for bringing in the linkage between capacity building and the responsible behavior framework that we have already in place at the international level.
     Does anybody else want to jump in on this because I think it is a nice segue to talk about trust.  We have a question and also a comment from the Q&A about, you know, cross-border or global capacity building for cyber security and even internet governance.
     There is maybe a lingering what the person says here is a lingering mindset of distrust across some regional or economic blocs.  How do we address the issue of trust and efforts to build trust in capacity building?  We talked about the carrots and the sticks and the only -- not obligations but the linkages or conditions, conditionality.  Trust and legitimacy are key criteria for successful capacity building.  And not just capacity building in and itself but for building the enduring relationships that we believe are the foundations for success here.  If your view, are there existing regionally focused organizations or partnerships that are maybe underutilized or underleveraged that are trusted partners that have kind of inherent legitimacy in particular regions?
     We talked a bit about subregional and regional organizations.  Bart has mentioned the value of think tanks in track 1.5 or track 2 initiatives.
     And so first, within the region, are they under utilized and how could we better leverage those sorts in cross-regional/regional sharing?  I will throw that out to the whole panel.  Maybe Folake, would you like to start?
     >> FOLAKE OLAGUNJU: Thank you, Kirsten.  Leadership is key.  If you have a -- thank you, Kerstin.  Piggybacking on what Liga said, when you're talking about the norms the OEWG in West Africa still talking about SIRTs, talking about SOCs and digital labs.  So we are not quite at that level.  
     So I think it is important that we start educating our leaders so that they know what needs to be done.  And this is the time to actually start doing that.  So we need to leverage the relationships with the GOCs, the EU and Bart's organization and you name it.  I think if we start building those bridges and use the regional bodies a bit more because we have got more power in terms of trying to get our member States to actually come in as a group.  So you can imagine, if you take ECWOS, for example, you are talking about 400 million people, it is easier to drill down than going individually State by State it is not going to work.  And that way you are sort of killing 10 birds with one stone.  I think we need to look at that approach.
     And face to face matters.  Member states, countries, people, they want to talk to people they already know.  You need to build that trust.  I mean if Liga goes to, for example, Senegal, if nobody knows her in Senegal, she is not going to get anywhere.  It is the reality as we know it.
     Even if Microsoft wants to build a relationship on the Paris call agreement you have to have strong partnerships with the regional bodies and then they will take it through.  That way will be a more success.  Approach.  Utilize the platform such as the GFC.  They are tried and tested and run initiatives in several countries, Senegal and Gambia and those have worked.  We need to use the structures in place.
     >> MODERATOR: Interesting that we are talking about both trust in kind of institutions and organizations but also the personal trust and relationships that get built up and that is also part of the sustainability question, isn't it?  And how much is personal.  And maybe some of the challenges that the current pandemic and the lack of, you know, the ability to hop on a plane or do a three-day workshop or do what you need to do on the ground, how that has kind of set new challenges for developing new relationships.  It is much easier to maintain relationships that already exist in a digital environment than it is perhaps to establish new ones.
     Other panelists on this question of trust and?  Yes, Latha and then Liga.
     >> LATHA REDDY: I just wanted to actually talk about another issue, you know, when you are talking about capacity building, you are talking about the need to build infrastructure, you know, to connect the country.
     You are talking about the need to master technologies, particularly advanced technologies that Folake spoke about.  I think the policy issues are also very, very important.  You know, because this idea of educating the political leadership to take the right decisions the idea of building capacity on policy issues is very important.  A lot of people say data is the new oil and they really don't know what they are saying, you know, it is just a catch phrase.
     The real issue whether it is data governance, data protection, data privacy, you know, what are sensitive personal data.  You need to go into these things in a little more depth to be able to talk with any authority.
     And the same is true of internet governance and of norms, the various efforts going on to build norms around the world.
     I would say there is a need to build all of the three capacities, and I think that if partners come forward with very concrete examples of how they can help with each of the areas or some of the area, that in itself will build trust because you realize that you are not just saying give me a contract to build something, right?  You are actually saying I want you to become self-reliant and I want to teach you how to master each of these areas.
     So I think that is a great trust building exercise.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Latha.  Liga?
     >> LIGA ROZENTALE: I wanted to speak from the experience of Europe on the trust-building issue.  We have close government cooperation but trust has -- is something that is always something that has to be constantly readdressed.
     Europe did this through legislation which was quite controversial so have sort of a forced cooperation and trust building through the NIS cooperation group and the C-CERT network adopted a few years ago.  In my experience sitting on the side of government at that point, it was quite controversial to force all countries to send one participant to discuss strategic issues in cybersecurity because it was a mandatory cooperation.
     And that process is still under way.  But over the course of years if you make people meet three times a year and look at each other and discuss their families over coffee then they do build trust eventually it turns out.
     The important thing is to keep the same people in the room over the course of the years and that is difficult.  And the situation of COVID, it is more difficult.  To talk to people over the computer, we are getting used to it.  How can we take the European best practice of making people get in the same room and see if that works in other regions?  I realize what Folake says, if I go to Senegal, nobody is going to listen to me regardless of who I represent.
     So how can we built the trust along the European example and see if that works?  SIRTs from all over the world that goes quite well.  C-SIRTs don't even want to talk to their counterparts on the sort of strategic government side as well.  Within a government you need the strategic side to talk to the technical side openly as well.
     So there is lots of layers that need to be addressed.  But getting people in the same room is quite important.  As soon as we get this COVID problem taken care of maybe we can look at that in a bit more detail.
     >> MODERATOR: Bart, I think you are the only one that hasn't come in on this get.
     >> BART HOGEVEEN: Thanks.  And I'm still expecting Microsoft to come up with a vaccine that will get us all traveling very soon.  Without kidding, maybe I will share an example of the point you raised earlier Kerstin.  Kind of the UN processes.  
I wish it wasn’t brought up in this conversation but one example project helping the southeast nations with the implementation of the UN cyber norms.  Whether you like it or not or it is effective or not, it is seen as kind of an agreement that is kind of being pushed towards these nations and many countries are looking at these nations to subscribe to it and they have done that in public and in the public state and kind of how do you kind of build a deeper level of comfort and awareness of what these actually mean in practice?  
We set out a kind of a program which looked at, first of all, looking at what would be local knowledge partners, local think tanks in the region that could help us and that we could kind of train up and help develop their own knowledge and skills and engaging with their government counter parts.
     When we ran the trainings and workshops, it was really trying to listen what would for instance D-11 UN norms mean for them in practice and what we found and hopefully not too long we will also be able to share information because we have done that in confidence in most countries you see practical examples of the norms.  When Folake is talking about the SIRT development, that is in fact having the capabilities and having policies around these institutions is part of the implementations or the norms and what we also say is that in the absence of a UN blueprint with you I don't think that will happen any time soon or at all, I'm not sure whether we should want to either, that also allows an opportunity for each nation to develop its own interpretation of what an international agreement means that their specific context.
     I think we have been successful in creating a level of trust and being there for the long run and delivering something concrete but also being critical about our own nations that we represent and that we don't have all of the answers to all of the questions.  I think this is an example of where sustainability can work at a very practical and operational level and where you build let's say greater awareness and a deeper sense of comfort with what is happening let's say at the global level.  Because I think despite what we believe, things are happening very quickly especially when you talk about the UN processes unless you are deeply involved in it.  For most countries it is still a very quickly evolving road show which they find difficult to really follow and really grasp.
     >> MODERATOR: You know, thanks, Bart.  I think that helps round us out.  But I wanted to share with everyone a few of the comments and insights that have come from participants here.  A colleague, Silvia at the SAE has -- says she agrees a lot with what the panelists have said but following on Bart's remark that interregional capacity building is maybe not as productive as we would like to hope it would be.  
     And Folake reply, she says she would add that exchange between regional organizations can be fruitful not with the aim to copy from one to another but to exchange best practice, specific practices and see what can be done for a specific sub or a specific region.  And a forum for regular exchange would be valuable.  That is certainly something that I know that Silvia and I have talked about in the past about how do we even in informal ways help regional and subregional organizations connect more amongst themselves to exchange their experiences.  
     Another person commented and said personal relationships and personal trusts is what expands between nations and regions, which echoed some of the things that have been said on the panel.  
     We have a comment that says my personal experience is a minimum of three meetings, and the third meeting something changes.  There you go.  That's an endorsement of the European three meetings.  Even between police, C-SIRTs and regulators it is about learning positions and if and where there are common goals.  And I have seen some enlightening experiences there.  So three is the magic number apparently for breakthroughs.  And this is from a Dutch colleague representing at this IGF in part of the Dynamic Coalition on Internet Standards, Security and Safety.
     We have another comment says she agrees strongly with Folake's point about building capacity through and of regional institutions.  It seems like we have a lot of interest and agreement on both the personal side, the importance of regional actors as being trusted partners that are probably under utilized and they need capacity to be enlarged and that is perhaps is a force multiplier we can do more on.  
     I'm conscious of the time, and I think this is a great discussion.  I wanted to dig down into the question of sustainability.  I think we have been skirting around it by emphasizing both the personal relationships are being important, but people move on, people retire, people move in and out of positions.  
     So how do we balance that personal connection which is important with sustained institutional trust and legitimacy.  How does that work?  Have to start with the personal and then kind of colors institutional relationships?  Is there some sort of transfer that happens?  Or how -- we can't always rely on personal connections.  So I just was wondering if the panelists could quickly if anybody wants to tackle that one.
     >> LATHA REDDY: I would like to come in on that, Kerstin.  When I was in government it was very important to build that personal touch.
     I don't know if the magic number is two or three or four, it could be different.  But yes, because your first meeting is essentially to state your positions.  It is to make the other person aware of where you are coming from.  And in subsequent meetings you take that for granted and then start seeing what are the things you can agree upon.
     And certainly by the time you have three or more meetings, trust is built.  And as far as changing the personal relationship to an institutional relationship, I would talk about, you know, very briefly about my experiences as a diplomat.
     You move on in three years, but certain relationships have been built.  What do you do?  You leave a handing over note for your successor saying these are the usual contacts, these are the institutions it is very good to cooperate with.  And I think a wise successor would actually take note of that and build on that.
     But it is still somewhat personal because it depends on how much each person wants the successor to succeed.  And it is not always the case.  So I would say sustainability is very important.  Keep the same relationships going where possible.
     And where it is not you create a mechanism that says this institution it worth cooperating with no matter who is in that one and who is in your own institution.
     >> MODERATOR: Starting with the personal and --
     >> LATHA REDDY: Starting with the personal.
     >> MODERATOR: And allows creation of the institutional.  We only have three more minutes, colleagues.  And I'm -- I feel like we could continue on this for some time.  And this is such a great topic.  
I think in the remaining three minutes, I would like to ask you all to just in lieu of closing remarks or final words just before we wrap up, I would like to ask each of you imagine we are at IGF 2021, thank you for giving us the background there, Liga for us to look at, we are all imagining and reflecting on interregional capacity building a year on.  And Liga might be joining us from Senegal at that time, I'm not sure.  But regardless, taking into account the challenges of capacity building during the pandemic, which unfortunately seems to be with us into next year, certainly.
     And also that sense of urgency which has been amplified during this time for all of us.  A year from now, what is the one thing you would be looking back and saying in your role where you are now, what would you have been most pleased to see change in the next 12 months on international capacity building?  What would you like to achieve that is realistic under the current circumstances and environment?
     Folake, could you?
     >> FOLAKE OLAGUNJU: For me, I would say I would really hope that the countries in West Africa are moving slightly into talking about CBMs and norms that would actually encourage more responsible behavior because right now the conversations are still all around the technical side of cyber.  So for me, I think we need to start talking more about the diplomacy side of cyber because I think that is important and they go hand in hand.
     >> MODERATOR: A good priority for the next year.  Bart?
     >> BART HOGEVEEN: Two things.  I would be very happy that within a year from now we can look back and talk about a very dynamic GSCE Pacific hub that has just been announced a couple of weeks ago where we are looking at establishing a regional center expertise or operational hub that can support companies with a global headquarters back in Europe and with a local hundred in the south Pacific region.  I'm looking forward to how that is developing.
     And secondly echoing Folake's point and finally we are back on the same page again.  I would be very content when we see more countries and more organizations feeling comfortable with expressing their views and their positions on a whole range of cyber security and cyber development and ICT development issues than we see currently.
     >> MODERATOR: A good metric of success.  Latha, in less than a minute, what is your wish for 2021?
     >> LATHA REDDY: I want to see a universally trusted global agency emerge on cyber capacity building.
     >> MODERATOR: What about you, Liga, final word?
     >> Liga Rozentale: I would like it to be multi-stakeholder so Microsoft can participate.  But also building the trust necessary in the multi-stakeholder environment to look at how to address the cross-regional cooperation a bit better.
     >> MODERATOR: The first meeting out of three next year.  Okay.  And with that I would like to thank the fabulous panelists.  I'm sure you found this as stimulating and thought provoking as I have.  I wish all of you a continued and productive interesting discussion at IGF 2020.  
     Thank you to the organizers and thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak with you this morning/evening/afternoon depending on where you are.  Thanks so much.  Have a great day.   
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-9-ws212-learn-from-home-during-covid-19-raw^^

>> EDMON CHUNG: Let's get started.  Welcome, everyone.  This is Edmon Chung from DOTAsia and welcome to this session, learn from home during COVID-19.  This is a topic where when we first submitted the workshop, of course, it's a new topic.  Now it's like a talk to death by now, anything to do with COVID-19, we have to cover your ears to something.  But hopefully, what we want to really talk about here is not just reviewing what has happened and what to do right away, but also pointing towards the future.
Lots of things were done in the last half year, nine months or so, in response to COVID-19, especially in terms of education and learning.  We are really excited to have a number of speakers with us, including Veronica Stefan, from Romania, and Tim Unwin from UNESCO, Rilla Gusela Sumisra from Indonesia and also from part of the net mission Ambassador program from DOTAsia, very excited to see you here.  And also Paola Galvez from Latin America, and to share with us different experiences about how the response from the education sector has been during COVID.
As a parent of two kids, one just into grade one and one getting to grade 3, it has been a very difficult time, I could tell you, to suddenly have them always at home.  I always miss them but it's very tough for a parent working to have kids at home all the time.  So this is also, this particular topic, I hope to - besides the Panel Discussion, really hoping this is a topic that we almost know by heart by now and hope to engage in open dialogue.
This is also a topic that was discussed in the Asia-Pacific Regional IGF.  So this is sort of a following on or a series that the net mission Ambassadors and DOTAsia, we have been promoting.  Here is some takeaways from the discussion from the Asia-Pacific Regional IGF.
There was a lot of highlight on how we implement and how different education institutions implemented the on line learning, very much ad-hoc to start with.  Everyone was trying to shuffle and adapt.  And then after the summer, especially in the northern hemisphere -- sorry to talk about summer or Winter that way -- but after the initial outages, if you will, coming into September a lot of things changed.  A lot of schools were much more ready.  But then a lot of the inequalities and the social infrastructure starts to show.  When most of the students are expected to get on line, things started -- other types of issues started happening.  Internet connectivity, physical infrastructure that supports it, the digital divide within the classroom, even the situation where your background, maybe it shows that you're home is in a very crowded area or those types of issues become a kind of issue that needs to be looked at.
Of course education-wise, the loss of physical, non-verbal cues within the education programs.  But then also discovering that education programs can be disseminated through on line platforms.  That really challenges educators to a number of things.  Here is some of the conclusions that we came up with in the Asia-Pacific Regional IGF session.
Teachers really need guidance and documentation on how to use these technologies.  They have been working ad-hoc and trying to figure things out but if this is going to go on and if we look at a future where digital support for education is part of the future, that is going to be important.  How we approach it, the utilization of them, and really to rethink what we -- we often talk about the new normal these days.  What would be the new-new normal post-COVID, afterwards?
The next pandemic -- hopefully not -- or post-COVID back to normal, what we have learned today in form us for the future.  So those are some of the things that hopefully we will touch on.  But before I pass it on to our first speaker, this is what it looks like in my kid's classroom today, which is really interesting.
Usually you would have a bunch of kids with tables and stuff and most -- this is a setting where it's back in my days, which is like 30 years ago -- well, sorry, 40 years ago -- when I was in grade school.  This is the setting of the classroom.  Nowadays usually classrooms are in little clusters and groups.  This is not your typical classroom but now they are back to this.  They are back to doing this.  But not only that, it's more.  Look at all the barriers that are surrounding each of the kids.  That's a very interesting time.  I think this is a very interesting time in the entire education system that we are looking at.  And hopefully this session will lead us into, not only talking about what happened in the last nine months battling COVID, but leading towards what the future might look like for education with that learning and with that infrastructure in place.
So, without further adieu, let me have our first speaker.  I'll go by the list I have here with Veronica first and then Tim and Rilla and Paola.  So I'll pass the time to Veronica who will talk a little bit about her research in terms of the digital behaviors and the youth in terms of inclusion and in response to COVID.  Veronica?
>> VERONICA STEFAN: Thank you.  Thank you to all of you for being here and for having the patience to go in a debate about education.  I'll be honest.  I think if I am to share a perspective, we are talking a lot but it's also that we might remember the wrong side of history in a certain way because it's like we are just discovering that on line education is a thing, first of all, and we can do it.  So of course we are forced about the circumstances but so many things could have been foreseen or anticipated a little bit.  So probably this is the food for thought for all of us and it is the way we prioritize digital issues and digital learning as a whole, as a process, as an organized structured process.  So it's not just accidental as it is right now.
I'm also afraid about inflation about digital everything and not so much sure that actually digital is reflected in any recent policies.  So short-term programs and projects that we can see and know structural change that is can anticipate at least what is happening in one or three years from now.  With this in mind, I believe it's always good to start from the data we have.
Just brief introduction about me.  I'm basically in Romania but I do work for many years now International context.  I have been working with the UNICEF for 15 years and let's say lately I have been working with the youth mission with the consulate and European agencies a little bit as well to frame a little bit and have a better in-depth analysis and understanding how youth participate in the new digital world.
But the data I put here is the data that we already knew.  So based on this data in 2017, and this is of course Gross data from the countries we do have certain sets of data.  It's not comprehensive.  We know about 71% were connected to Internet to a certain extent.  And that was much more than the overall population.  Since I'm from Europe and I will be talking about it, it is important to know that here the connect activity is way much better.  So at least in terms of Internet usage we already have young people connecting about 97% quite often.  So at least a couple of (?) and world population was really great.  But here is the data that I never understand why is not reflecting in national policies and sometimes the European institutions framework.  That is the skills.  And we imagine I come from Romania and Romania ranks the lowest.  So we range between Croatia in terms of expense.  More than 90% and for Romania which barely goes about 50%.  So the difference is at least if we add with the U.K. and Nordic countries, the situation is not any better.  So definitely some things could be differently and I have worked on research on youth utilization and inclusion and also of fun fact, we started working on this last year because digital was becoming the priority.  We never knew the crisis was coming.  But the data is rather important.
So you remember, 95% of young people use Internet Dala.  What do you know?  I'm happy we have our representatives here because their global monitoring tool show at the peak 91% of the world learners have been impacted by lockdown.  It didn't help anything.  And here the discussion should break a little bit because access to technology and Internet and what else is behind that?  What was, at least these obstacles were not at the centre of the problem because they were also part of the solution in the future.
And these are the details I like us to have in mind.  We are talking about on line learning but it is not on line learning.  This was distance learning.  We improvised everything with the tools we had available.  But this is not on line learning.  And I stress that because on line learning has methodology.  That is learning objectives and it has a different way of happening.  We didn't do that.  We haven't trained our teachers.  We haven't trained our youth workers or educators to be able to deliver this.  They are simply improvising so distance learning is the best that describes it.
And young people connected to Internet, some of them consider well skilled but how are they using the technology?
That should have been a sign so long time before.  So this is data for 2019, just 5% were using for on line education.  30% for civic engagement.  But they were using it a lot for social media and entertainment and some of them, and this is quite considerable for health information or applying for jobs, but at the same time we were missing many other things.  And the education on line should have been right there.  High on the radar.
And then we go deeper and the deeper part is, the one should concern us because this divides, these are inequalities that exist between my countries and highest level developed.  Imagine about us looking at the entire world from Asia to Africa to Europe to Latin America and so forth.  Young people and probably all of us were not actually designed for technology.  We have been suppressed by this technology and that's why mental health became quite an issue.  The issue would have been as well if we at least, as much as we could have through the services we created, could have provided support for this and the interesting research.  We are trying to map some models, some practices of organizations and people who have done a little bit on this because this services could have been at least for half of the population that was connected to the Internet.  70% of young people.
The loneliness, risk of suicide, learning and working from home is really concerning and domestic violence, especially for children, very young people and women.  So these realities should be concerning for us.
Then of course we did survive in this world.  And I think this is important to be remembered that we have survived with little -- next to nothing organized health because some other things were in place.  And even for -- remember 95% have access to Internet almost constantly but how many of them were able to work remotely?  Less than half because also many of them were affected by job losses, not just they had the possibility tow work remotely but also because jobs were disappearing.  And this is effects that will haunt us in the long run.  But also because we have been through another crisis and we can see the numbers already and anticipate the policies.  So my mission today is to say all of this data have been there before it is now, what we do with it now.  Not three years from now.
In terms of platforms.  This is also research I have done.  Zoom is the winner followed by Microsoft, Google, again available to all of you.  But it is important to say these platforms like this one we are using right now, they are not educational platforms.  They are not job management platforms.  They are communication platforms.  But that was missing a lot, especially for educators because the content was not there.  It was a school it's a tool that we have been using a bit too much.
And I would like to highlight some other things as well because we were living at home and learning and working, it also means being exposed to all sorts of content and the content was challenging here because it's clear that young people have been affected.  And this admitting that we are discussing now about data that we have identified through on line research but on line research in itself is limiting in terms of who responds to that.
The fact that young people, a quarter of them, identified that they are being influenced by the news and sources of information it's quite challenging.  And I will not go into the safety and security issues but I do think that what we can learn from now on, is that we need a more inclusive approach to education, to developing digital competence but also more standardized work.  I have included here two frameworks.  One developed by UNESCO sometime ago and another by the European Commission who looked in the entirety of what digital skills, media, information, so on and so forth.  We need to discuss about that.  We didn't discuss this before.  We are discussing about digital inclusion.  It is a core matter of access and that has to be cognizant and universal, right?  So I still hope that even we'll take onboard at least this recommendation and create the space or maybe regulation on that, access and universal free access to Internet.  But then on how we work on skills we have to have an understanding because otherwise opportunities will be lost in the future.
So these are my initial findings and I do not want to continue more because I would like to have more time to share feedbacks.  I'm feeling these realities will be extrapolated to different communities and countries.  They are not so new but it was a highlight.  In one of those very developed regions, things were not so much improved because we were simply oblivious before that.  And that is on us. 
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you, Veronica.  It's very true.  Everyone was really adjusting.  We look at it and it looks like it's really encouraging for digital or Internet learning but in reality, we are just trying to ad-hoc and not really utilizing to the full extent what can be achieved and that seems to be something that is interesting.  So that flows very nicely into Tim and what UNESCO and Veronica mentioned about the UNESCO framework as well.  I now pas the time to Tim who is from UNESCO and maybe share with us a more macro-view on how this is happening as well.  Tim?  Tim, you're muted.
>> TIM UNWIN: Sorry about that.  It's just been -- actually, I should say UNESCO and its relationship is complex but nothing I say represents UNESCO.
We were asked a whole list of questions that Jenna prepared and so what I'm going to do is pick on two of those questions and just say two or three things about each of them.  But to liven things up a bit, let's go into a school in northern Tanzania.  Here we are.  So this is the world in which we are talking about.
The first question I want to just say a few words about really builds on what Veronica was saying, which is what's the rule of multi-stakeholders in the implementation of learning from home?  And I should say it's wonderful to be with such young people.  I was programming in the early 70s and my kids are 32, 29 and 29.  So one is a teacher and his wife is a teacher.  Anyway, but lots of insights.
So three points about multi-stakeholder.  The first is, I think it's incredibly depressing how many people have gone on the ed tech bandwagon through COVID-19 and the amount of funding that has gone into initiatives that actually the thing they were meant to solve hadn't been designed but they are being paid tens of thousands of dollars to do it already.  There has been huge wastage in the system.
91% at the peak of COVID at the start of April.  And that went down to 57% to the end of May and it's only on the 13% today.  This hiatus is short-term.  And you mentioned is it going to last afterwards?  I think it is.
Under this multi-stakeholder umbrella, we need to identify the different roles and very, very briefly, just some thoughts.  I believe passionately governments have to take the lead on ensuring that means terrible inequalities that are caused by digital tech are reduced.  And my interest is with like the kids here, some of the most marginalized.  These children are in places where there is no electricity.  You could go to a school in Pakistan where actually it's only boys at school.  The girls aren't at school here.
So the most marginalized don't have access.  And actually, learning has continued for the most marginalized much as it has been for their whole lives.  So governments have to take a lead in doing something.  They have to have vision.  International agency is key in sharing good practices, donors giving a bit of program on them already, but they have to fund things that are appropriate and I think a key thing is not the latest idea.  We know what works in the use of digital in tech and that is what should be funded.
Private Sector crucial role.  Innovative and also enabling things that are sustainable.  If a business doesn't sustain itself, it's going to be bust.  Teachers, and I'll come back to them briefly at the end, learning to be more adaptive.  Families, communities, Civil Society, supporting learners.  And the learners themselves and learners being encouraged to take responsibility for their own learning.
So very briefly, many different stakeholders working together can provide solutions.
I'd like just very briefly, Veronica shared some of her findings.  This is also partly for you Marcel.  We have been working over the last six months or so to develop a report on how education and using technology can use the interest of the most marginalized.  And I just like to sort of focus in on the five green points in the middle.  I think these go some way to the solution T needs to be a whole society approach.  We have got to have infrastructures for education.  We have to be -- if relook up here, content-specific in both the technologies and the content.  We have to ensure that there are appropriate pedagogies and this point that Veronica mentioned about safe and secure, terribly important because if -- we have horrendous examples of where children, particularly girls, are being incredibly badly treated and harassed and abused in learning on line.
So just thoughts about multi-stakeholders.  The second question that you asked me or asked us to talk about, Jenna, was question 5.  How is the pandemic redefined the role of educators in society?  I think that's absolutely crucial and just three reasons why.  I think from all I hear in difficult parts of the world, one biggest impacts that Edmon, I'm not sure if you're going to agree with this, but biggest impacts of COVID-19 related to educators, is the huge respect that families, grandparents and parents now have for teachers because they realize just how tough it is to train their children.
I think we have to use that moment to go back to what we have known all along.  And this is really my second point.  We have to train teachers in the use of digital tech and Veronica, not in using off suites and software, but how to use this amazing kit and resources are available on it, to empower and enable young people and also with vocational training, older people, to learn.  So it's not just giving them digital skills but enabling them.
Look at this amazing teacher in China.  The digital techs there but he is here -- this was taken before COVID.  But I love it because the tech is there but he is actually here working with the children, one of those groups of tables you were talking about.
So respect for teachers.  I'm just shocked over and over again when I see laptops, tablets, digital in the schools but not into the teacher training colleges.
This is my second point.  Stories in some parts of the world, I have been hearing stories of how teachers are trying to teach as they are doing classrooms with Blackboard but using WhatsApp on their mobile phone.
That doesn't make sense.  So train teachers appropriately.  Give them the skills not just learning office.
And then finally and again in response to some of the comments on the chat, and maybe to disagree with you a bit Veronica because I'm old and have been doing this for 50 years -- almost.  But we know what works.  We are on a continuum.  And the first time I was in Africa working on digital in schools was more than 20 years ago.  We know what works.  We know how to do it.  And COVID has accentuated those trends.  It's being used as an opportunity particularly by the Private Sector who were making huge fortunes out of it.  And I'm not really serving the interest of the poor and mismarginalized.
We can be much more positive and we can rethink education for the future and using digital, and make sure that in the future, when something else like this happens, or in countries where there is a Tsunami or earthquake, that disrupts education, we can move seamlessly into new resilient education systems that use digital technology to serve the interest of everybody, and not just the rich.  Perhaps I can leave you with a wonderful cartoon by a superb Indian cartoonist.
This is a running track and here you can see the rich young boy with his laptop and Wi-Fi and connectivity leaping ahead and the title is on line education.  But here, we see somebody immersed in poverty who has an old textbook and is being left further and further behind.  So thank you for the opportunity to share very briefly some ideas with you.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you, Tim, and hopefully this story ends more like the hare and the tortoise where the tort us has the opportunity to overtake.  But in real life, we know it's much harder.  But what you mentioned about teachers and the appreciation for teachers is really interesting.  I certainly actually very much agree.  I really hope school continues.  We are in Hong Kong right now and we have schools, back to school about a month ago and hopefully that can continue but we are looking at potentially third, fourth waves coming in as well.
What you highlighted in terms of the -- it's a gradual process.  It's not something that suddenly happened.  We certainly have learned over the past 10-15-20 years leading us to here.  But I still think this is an opportunity as you said, because this is now headline news and how we really capture that is going to be something that will really change the course of history because the last 20 years, we have been struggling, really struggling to get this to become mainstream and now we have an opportunity.
With that, I go to Rilla who will talk to us about the Indonesian experience and also from a youth perspective.  So Rilla?
>> RILLA GUSELA SUMISRA: Thank you very much.  Maybe I would like to share my screen.  So, thank you very much.  I'm Rilla from Indonesia it is illegal to promote understanding and positive use of Internet in Indonesia.  And also I'm working at the (?) so automation system and software and so on.  So first of all, I would like to say thank you for the people behind me.  So actually when we heard about IT fails -- there is a lot of job descriptions and various positions.  So maybe the Haitians or so on, we did the team work to provide digital solutions that can be used today.
The best quote of 2020, and we already know about that.  And the first is, I'd like to talk about digital infrastructure.  Actually, in this year, it's really hard for me as a technical company because we get a lot of requests and demands but at the same time, we are very thankful because we can help everyone with our skill and so on, even I'm really happy to see that President of Indonesia said that he will give the Internet reach to the remote areas.  It's really great for me.  And even I travel to other cities in this area and it's really great experience to help the others to know and to -- can use the Internet.
And the next is, the practices now, for example like the Internet package.  We have to separate.  For example, like 15 gigabytes and the same gigabytes is for the media conference and then the 5 gigabyte is for the other.  And it's easier for students and even for the workers because mostly we use this App.  And because all of the mobile providers have a partnership with the government and Ministry of Education Indonesia gives subsidy like Internet tech package for students.  So the teacher will register the student's phone number and then they can use the Internet for access Zoom, Google Classroom, and the Best Practice that happens in Indonesia right now.
My brother is in senior high school and he still do on line learning.  Okay, it is the learning management system.  So this App is really famous in Indonesia and it provides additional lessons for students and also they help the government to give the skills to the students, to the first graduate because it is really important for them to get the knowledge and to get the active knowledge by these Apps.
I have some learning management system for some schools.  What I have learned is we have to listen and understand what are needs.  We don't have to provide all the features and things like that, but we have to listen about, so because this school or maybe the institutions have different goal, different conditions.  For example like they want to have on line chat and on line call feature for the students because basically Indonesia in junior high school and senior high school, we have a counseling teacher like psychologist or psychology scholars to help them maintain mental health, like that.  It's also the key points of last month.
For the general, Best Practice is, I think like microlearning, like we have to make the small modules to make them not really stress about, there is a lot of things to learn and so on.  So we can give them the Best Practice of this.  And for the interactivity, the UI/UX and gameification, what is important is on demand.  So for example, maybe the elementary student need it because like on math it needs gameification so they were not bored about lessons.  But maybe for University or so on, maybe have the different treatment.  And the vast mobile learning.
I have to -- last is mobile learning -- for mobile learning, not all of the students have laptop so they just have a smartphone.  That's what happened in Indonesia for now.  So we have to ensure that they can access from smartphone and from laptop so can use anywhere.  And for the spaced repetition, it's kind of maybe we can include or leverage the algorithm so which, for example, like the students get the answer wrong or the right ones and we can focus on the wrong and we can give the situation again to repeat the questions to gain the memorization.
Next is the Best Practice like the other speakers said before.  Like user documentation and guide and training.  Not only effective for teacher or for the students but also for the agencies itself.  In my experience, I have to sometimes get (?) if there is no user recommendation or things like that, it is really hard for me or for the others to update the software system.  So it's really great practice like the user reputations.
Or for the user guide in the learning management system, we can make it kind of the user guide inside the system itself, like if we hover the feature then will pop up the functions and so on.  And we can implement by demand.
Improvement in Technical Community.  What happens in my country is the Ministry of Our city provides official International (?) they have a partnership with Google and so on and it is really effective for graduate, for the worker to update your skills and to help because the demand of the IT people is higher than before because of this pandemic.  So this is a great improvement.
That is all from me.  Thank you very much.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you Rilla and very interesting to see what is happening in Indonesia, especially the Technical Community, educational and Technical Community, not just the grade school or secondary school.  But that is a very, not only niche but interesting and related to what we want to talk about here and what some of the challenges and opportunities there are.
So with that, I'll move to -- we heard from the European side, a little bit from the Asia-Pacific side and now we pass the mic to Paola Galvez who will give us a little bit of perspective from the Latin America side.
>> PAOLA GALVEZ: Thank you and good morning, good afternoon and good evening to everyone.  It's great to be with you all today.  First of all, I want to thank the IGF Secretariat as well as my fellow Panelists and organizers for giving me the opportunity to participate in this important discussion.
Regarding the challenges and the limitations faced by the management of the schools and educations in my region, I must say that according to the world economic firm (?) more than 154 million children are out of school due to COVID-19.  Or about 95% of the enrolled students are temporarily out.
Students in more Developed Countries have moved to on line learning but data location is not an option for everyone and I see the audience has been discussing this on the chat.  And in a study carried out, concluded in many lack countries the children under 15 years old who are considered Internet users, is under 50%.  This result exposed the region's significant digital divide.  After this I will share on the chat the link to the study.
Also, the educational management and information systems study revealed that most of the countries in the Latin region do not have basic digital conditions and therefore they are not in a position to provide on line education to all students except the only country in the Latin region that has basic data conditions (?)
In early September, we had an informal debate about education from home and I had the pleasure to moderate.
[ Internet disconnection ]
-- reach as many students as possible.  The crisis has exacerbated widespread educational inequalities due to factors relating to gender, immigration, or learning difficulties and special needs.
Likewise, the learning from home experience affects the student teacher relationship that is so crucial for students access and I have seen leaders myself since I teach at the University of Lima and I can see that this year the relationship with my students is not as close as it used to be.  There is no doubt that even the best technologies cannot completely eliminate --
[ Internet disconnection ]
-- primarily based on the use of data technology, e-mail, document sharing platforms.  The crisis has highlighted the need to develop teachers data literacy.  Many teachers still lack the required knowledge and it's just not to give them the platforms but to teach them how to use it and how to leverage those platforms.
There are disparities in teacher's abilities to integrate into instruction and transform their lessons into digital interface.  It has been a challenge for me even that I consider myself a geek person and young and actually an Internet native user.  It's been a challenge and it is still a process, but I believe with the right training from the University we will go through that.
Because at least in Peru, the on line education is mandatory until July 2021.
Another conclusion is that parents are experiencing difficulties in terms of their abilities and availability to support their children because they are working from home as well.  And of course as you mentioned, it is great to have kids at home, but they need parents and they need the parents to help them in their learning process and in the use of technologies and later on we will talk about the privacy challenges that are next to the situation.
This is also factor I like to bring into the discussion that parents are experiencing difficulties as well as teachers are.
Last but not least is students from more vulnerable context should be a priority in terms of crisis and it is the contents of this education with all students, especially those who come from more vulnerable context.
So, how did the governments in Latin America respond to the education crisis?  The administration incorporated different channels in order to facilitate teaching and learning.  In March, a broad consultation was organized to discover the initiatives programs that Latin-American countries that were activated in response to the crisis.  By that time, all participants have been implemented.  Another repository of data resources.  In Peru we are using the Cloud thanks to the private support.  Or also a learning management system where a student could connect with their team.
Internet is not accessible for all.  One way government in Latin America are still attempting to avoid interruption of education and access for all children at home, including those without Internet access, radio and television instruction.
For instance, Columbia, Ecuador, Peru and El Salvador governments have government programs on both television and public radio for students as well as through on line platforms.  In Peru, this channel is called, learning at home.  And it's great to see that also adults that didn't have the opportunity to finish school are now learning watching T.V.  That good news after this crisis.
Similarly, the workshops at the non-profit organization (?) join efforts to deliver quality educational television content to children in this region.  The programming was made available to the mainstream of education and it will run until June 2021.  That's also great news from a multi-stakeholder perspective because this is a joint effort between the public and private sectors.
In other countries such as Costa Rica, the government offered hard copies for resources.  For students who need to rely on their parents to collect physical copies because they don't have Internet access.  In Dominican, the government decided to increase public Wi-Fiaccess as a result.  More than 1000 free public Wi-Fiaccess points have been set up to facilitate resource distribution.  And as you have seen some governments work quick to take action and help secure students have a way to receive educational materials.
In spite of that, there is still significant gaps.  The education is a challenge for everybody.  I believe that in order to overcome the challenges of connect activity and warranty access to education for the region's most vulnerable populations, and later on in the discussion, I want to share where we see development opportunities I see in this new nor malty.  Thank you.  Looking forward to the discussion and questions.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thaws.  And it's very important -- thank you -- it's very important in terms of the digital divide issue and people and students having connection in order for education to work and also to not leave people behind.  One of the highlights I found interesting you touched upon that students can now learn, be learning watching T.V.  That's obviously very exciting for my kids.  Just a queer ago we would be in this forum talking about how to limit screen time for kids.  And I'm looking at how to limit screen time but now I cannot -- there is no logical argument to say you're not supposed to look at your tablet for more than three hours because you're actually having school through that for five hours.  So now we have a challenge for pulling those devices out of kids hands.  So on who hand, we have an issue of digital divide, having devices to people.
On the other hand there is an interesting dynamic that, how do we ever get these devices out of some of the kids hands?
Now I would like to move to more interactive discussion with the -- with everyone participating here.  I'm excited to see a number of questions that are already in the Q&A box.  So I encourage everyone to put in your question through there.  I will be biased and whomever puts their hand up and is willing to speak up, you have the priority in my mind.  So please feel free to put up your hand and I'll pass the mic to you to ask the question or add to the discussion.
Put up your hand at any time because we'll keep the queue and no worries for whenever we are speaking.  You can still put your hand up and we'll come to you.
Both Tim and Veronica responded to this question.  But to me, this is a very core question to what the session really wants to talk about.  What does the future hold?  How do you see -- eventually hopefully fingers crossed, we will come out of this COVID.  We will come out of COVID.  And we will get back to whatever you call the old normal or new-new normal.  We'll get out of this.  So how do you see going forward?  Will we really go back to the usual classroom settings?  And this is a question for all of the Panelists.  Do you see education going back to 2019?  And most of the teachers will forget all of the Zoom sessions and all the things that they learned?  And sigh a big sigh of relief and say, okay, fine, we are back to the usual.  Or do you see that there is a possibility beyond?  And we can really see almost like an augmented version of digital education on line, whether you call it remote learning -- is there a future where we would see a hybrid being developed?  And what are the key elements?  Is it technology and the digital divide issue?  Is it more of a management issue for schools?  Whose management decisions in or is this -- or must this be a government policy direction issue?  What does the future hold and how do you see -- whether we would see a hybrid or whether we would see us go back to the old normal.  Anyone want to jump in?
>> VERONICA STEFAN: Sure.  Well, tough question, I think on the mind of everyone.  I don't think there will be either.  First of all we should not go back.  We should not stay as we are either.  Also the hybrid, I think, has different understandings and practices even right now so I cannot assume it will be realistic to say we have one class of young people and another one staying on line -- I hardly have the feeling that will ever work.  But blending them and using on line tools, on line videos and materials complementary within the class and outside of the class, yes.  I think that should be the norm.
I'm including in my comments as well, we should not really have exclusively focus on technology and access.  But maybe even that should be prioritized or seconded fragmented in a way.  Either we focus on equipping all schools and then think also what is or could be outside of the schools that could have access to this infrastructure because I cannot expect that even by 2030 or 40 everybody home will have Internet access.  So I want to stay realistic and see what can be done in next year and two years from now.  So investing in infrastructure in schools, developing community centers where young people outside of the school can also get access to and then also creating a legal framework.  So if you don't have a legal framework that is it, digital skills are important for teachers, for employees in all sectors so they need to be reskilled and so on.  These things will happen by ear.  Everyone will do whatever they think and probably will lose more money.  So pushing for policy reforms now it should be the one thing to do at least.
>> EDMON CHUNG: That's very good.  So policy is a very important pillar.  Tim?  Rilla?  Paola?  You want to add to that?
>> TIM UNWIN: I tend to be very provocative.  I think one of the lessons we have definitely learned is even before COVID, digital technologies increase inequalities in the world.  I'm very against the use of the word, digital divide because that implies it can be crossed.  It can't.  It's getting bigger and there are processes deliberately creating that.  So one thing is for sure, and if we use more digital in learning, those inequalities are going to increase.  The -- as that cartoon I showed emphasized.
Everything will depend on where we focus our attention.  It's going to be content-specific.  We have to remember that there are tens of thousands of schools across Africa that don't have electricity and connectivity.  There are millions of children across the world who don't get near a school.  So all of these global initiatives connect every school, are actually increasing inequality because they are not concentrating on the needs and the lives of the poorest and the most marginalized.  People with Disabilities, children living on the streets, refugees.  The list is huge.
So I think that picture is driven by the interests of global capital who are making a huge amount of money out of digital tech.  And until we completely restructure that, we are not going to get much change.  And jumping long-term, I don't know how far in the future you want to look, but I very seriously, and this is a provocative bit, believe the future -- people are working on creating chips to put in our brains, neural connections.  So all the knowledge you will need as a biorobot, semi-human cyborg, will be chipped into you.  You can reboot, upload when you need to regrade to your new job.  Unless we are very, very careful, that is where the future is headed.  I said it was provocative.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Of course it depends on whose chip.  The Microsoft chip or the Apple chip?
>> TIM UNWIN: And who is doing the chipping.  Are the rich going to chip themselves for better life experience?  Or are they going to chip us just automated to do things.  That's also depending on -- that is really, really interesting question.  And I don't know the answer to that.  I think it will change over time.  But let's see.
>> EDMON CHUNG: And whether you get the Wikipedia in here or the bido Wikipedia in here.  But one of the things -- so I want to jump on this hopefully since you throw this provocative side, you're saying that this is going to increase inequality.  Is there a scenario where we can address this?  Obviously as an absolute situation, I understand that, but is there a scenario in your mind that the right types of policy can help these types of digital learning to -- for the betterment of at least the majority of people, if not understand the ultimate, the real vulnerable ones but is there a benefit to this or you see we really should forget about this and go back to paper and pen?  Where we can establish better equality and then address issues on the longer time scale?
>> TIM UNWIN: Before they answer, yes, definitely.  But it needs a complete change of heart in the whole sector and particularly governments to lead on the focus of equity in education.  We have had agreements around equity in education.  Almost -- our government certainly hadn't delivered on that.  You mentioned Paul oh, Uruguay, the only country I know where they actually started with the -- so poorest and most marginalized schools and built out from that.  So it started with the most marginalized.  And it's in our language as well.  People talk about the last mile or the next billion or the next billion.  Let's start calling the poorest and the most marginalized the first billion.  Let's design digital learning technologies with them to serve their interests, not kids in smart universities and richest countries in the world.  I'll shut up now.
>> EDMON CHUNG: I think that is a very fair question.  20 years ago I worked or helped work on the one laptop per child initiative, which you must know, and their starting point was trying to do that, at least the idea was to have --
>> TIM UNWIN: It failed abysmally.  They were throwing kits at the solution.  It wasn't really beginning with the learning needs of the poorest and most marginalized.  It was a great idea.  It's the same as giving tablets into schools across the world, which are often for just before elections so people will get elected.
>> EDMON CHUNG: It is a fair statement.  But I think that flows into Paula, some of the things you talk about, is there kind of a be where we can use technologies to bring about better equality in education and make the education quality better as well?
>> PAOLA GALVEZ: I want to just compliment what this team said.  A very good initiative to create smart schools, however by bringing tablets and not teaching or giving all the skills needed to the teachers right now this is not being used, for example.  And it was before COVID-19.  So, yes, I'm a little bit more positive.  I believe technology can be a Democratic tool but the government needs to establish holistic policies in order to tackle this very difficult -- in the north coast or Peru, they don't have -- maybe all the experience made him more critical.
But in Latin America, I am pretty sure that a hybrid education needs to be established because just on line, even though the President mandate that it has to be on line until June, it cannot be like that for these months because children are not receiving the quality education that they need.
We have seen Professors that go home to home, walking in Highlands just to do what they are committed to, to give education.  But it's not the way and the government needs to be more responsible and give them with all the access needed to educate as well.
 
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  So it seems like the consensus is that the government policy and direction is fundamental to whether this could work into the future.  Right now we are looking at a situation where once in a century kind of a situation where suddenly people ad-hoc has to solve certain questions, certain issues in this situation.  But Rilla, I wonder if you want to add anything to this?  Your community specifically on educating technical expertise might have a very different situation.  How do you see the future for that?
>> RILLA GUSELA SUMISRA: I can see that maybe there will be learning because I think the full on line learning will end.  I mean, like because actually like students like elementary student or kindergarten students, they have to like play with their friends, like face-to-face.  So I think that when the COVID-19 is end soon, it will be better for that learning.  And for the remote areas and students in the remote areas.  I feel like I really hope that the government give -- give the enforcement to establish the Internet connections like before because there is a lot of islands like 80,000 islands in Indonesia, so we have to take it step-by-step.  I hope it will be established all of them like Internet coverage.  Thank you.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  And I'll move now to each of the Q&A questions that we have received but again, I said if anyone is willing to put up their hands, I'm going to prioritize any brave soul who would put up their hands and join the conversation.  So we do have -- I'll pass it on to Roberto, first.
>> Is it Roberto: Hello, Edmon.  Nice to be here.  Good morning, good afternoon to everyone.  It's great to see all of this experience shared by you and the Panelists but also for the different attendance to this session.
I would like to share at some points that I heard some of them are already mentioned in the chat but since this rich chat we might be allowed to see by the people that are going to follow this later.  While this situation found everyone unprepared, no matter what region, what country, what developing situation we have, it found us in the same unprepared situation.
Worst of course in the global South where Internet is still not affordable and that indeed may increase digital divide, as someone said before in the chat.  Actually it did in my country because on one side we have the private schools that were working and were continuing their activities, but about 30% of the students population.  The other 70% actually couldn't afford to get connected and to continue normally their classes.  And of course they were in a very extreme lockdown, sadly.  Most of them lost the educational year.
And the first reaction that the people had was to move classes to Zoom.  And that is why Zoom was one of the best platforms to do that because it is really friendly.  But of course that was a situation for those that could use Zoom, for those students that could afford this platform.  For now, the option was to implement learning management systems, mobile teams and Google classrooms et cetera.  But these platforms responded well when you had proper training and also adapted content to deliver.  But this is not the case in most of the universities or schools.
And it was fine to quickly overcome the situation using this kind of platform but not smart to continue like this, because as also mentioned in the chat, educational process are not only about platforms, Internet access, it is a very complex process that needs a long debate and long reflection among the different stakeholders but particularly teachers, students and parents and communities.  And it should be performing a very holistic way taking into account not only all of this previously mentioned aspect but also it's not going to be an easy task.
The good thing is that this situation is helping the education process to evolve and hopefully in a better way.  But there is very important tests to do also and if we are going to use Internet as the main channel for doing this, well, we still need to work in inclusion strategies to make -- really make a lot of Internet affordable for everyone.  Thank you very much.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you, Roberto for the comment.  I understand it's a common building on some of the discussion just now.  Anyone want to, from the Panel, want to add to that?  If I'm not mistaken, it wasn't a question, per se.  But if anyone wants to add to it.  If not, I'll go on to the next -- thank you Roberto again.  And again, please put up your hand any time.  I'll prioritize.
>> PAOLA GALVEZ: I believe what Roberto said gives us the conclusion that a multi-stakeholder strategy is needed.  In fact, Civil Society has a great responsibility to -- a role to play in this situation because when we talk about the privacy effects of use in Zoom, for example, here in Peru, we have the digital rights NGO called (?) and they shared with the Peruvian citizens what are the facts, how to pick the platforms or for instance, you can see that the World Bank tech team curated an extensive list of remote learning distance education platforms.  And you can see they are organized by country.  I mean, what we need now is information.  And to have informed opinion.  We need to read and to see just not to use the platforms because they are available.
And I believe everyone have a role in this if we are youth, even upon if we are -- even if we are economists, we are Internet users so we can have an opinion on this.  And it's important we share and discuss these matters.  Thank you.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  And this is a topic that I don't see in the questions but I would like to jump on as you highlighted in terms of privacy because privacy is increasingly an issue especially at IGF and in the Internet Governance discussions.  It is always an issue and increasingly an issue.  And when we are really excited about the education can at least hobble along what impact is it bringing as we go into these platforms on a technical level, the privacy there, and also on what I touched on earlier in my introduction.
There are cases in Hong Kong because of the classes requiring remote connection, they usually initially at least, ask everyone to turn on their webcam.  But there are situations where their home is just in a very cramped environment and therefore there are students that are unwilling to turn on.  And they were actually punished or whatever.  But once they turned it on, it becomes, those who turn it on, they get laughed at and they get bullied somehow because they are picked on.  Their mother is hanging clothes behind them and those kinds of things.  I wonder what is the experience around and especially Tim, if UNESCO - eye know you're not part of the UNESCO but in your experience and view and Veronica, how does that play into the situation, especially privacy and privacy of students?  And how do you balance that with the need for schools and teachers to know that hey, we don't each know whether the student is actually joining the class or not.  What should the balance be?  And is that an issue?
>> TIM UNWIN: Just moving my mouse across.  Thank you for raising that.  I'd love to say more.  It's a huge area.  And I would love to put in the chat, we need to think about combined privacy with security and safety.  And all of these come together.  And actually, if you look at the end -- I'll put up the link to our report, we cover this in great detail.  It's very difficult to answer but I will just make some brief comments T does tend to be context specific.  People have very different views about what privacy is in different parts of the world.  And it's how we encompass that diversity.
I think secondly, to your point about balances, how much of your privacy are you willing to give away for what in return?  And I think people who are educated and know about digital own a position to weigh up those pros and cons.  Children, by-and-large, aren't.  We just think, for example, about the amount of sexting that goes on.  Now in the U.K. we are almost in a position where sexting is now the norm and it is, if you send a picture of yourself it won't be counted against you in a court almost.  We are almost to that point.  And I think that --
And the third point I'd make is, and this is again links to cultural sensitivity.  But in general, the poorest people have least privacy already.  If you're living in a house with a room, so a small apartment with six siblings and mother and father and a grandmother, you're not going to have much privacy.  It is totally difficult from the sort of small cellular families in many of the richer parts of the world.
So, and this is really difficult and I haven't quite worked through my own mind through this.  If you never had much privacy d it matter if you have no privacy on line?  I certainly think it does.  But there are those who would say that privacy is a western concept.  So I think we need much more deconstruction of what privacy is and there is a danger of trying to create general norms which by-and-large serve the interests of those who are creating those norms.
Quick final point, what do we do with all the data about schoolchildren?  There are parts of the world where children's eye movements, body position are tracked on line by cameras every 30 seconds and that is fed into the teacher's device so they can see actually how that child is interacting.  And then all of that data is kept.  And used by people for particular purposes.
So you touched on a huge issue.  I just skimmed the surface but I though gives some way to offer some suggestions.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Very useful, Veronica did you want to add to it.
>> VERONICA STEFAN: Sure.  Maybe bending a bit on what Tim said.  But I think it should be a bit privacy in the context of education which should be different than privacy in any other context as well because even here it should be very much connected to the methodologies as well.  So right now we are in a situation when basically whatever happened off line happens on line, which is a approach by itself.  That is methodology problem.
So, I will give an example or several examples.  Teachers are upset they cannot see the face of the children they are speaking to.  But then again, children should have that option, especially if they have to spend a whole day in front of the computer.  And sometimes teachers should consider to record or find other ways of young people to have access to that specific moment when a teacher is -- so nothing happened.  In a different setting when feedback is required and interaction is required and that's part of the whole teaching and learning process, which is very much based on the interaction and the creativity.  So it cannot happen with blind screens or just voices.  They cannot happen especially for the long run and for the younger children and students.  So I would separate those parts.  I think it's a very big problem we had from the day 1 and that they didn't know how these platforms worked, what data is recorded and how long they are in front of security challenges and with Zoom, we had all these horrible events we are aware of now.  Which the platform was not aware but we as educators were responsible.  So going back, we are using communication platforms, not designed educational practical platforms because those could be designed with a different mindset with different security levels.  For me it should be very much connected with part of a more structured well-designed process with different methodological approaches.  Obviously what he is happening now it's not fair and we should at least make sure the rights of young people, not the -- are not infringed and they are not being punished for something nobody is so much aware of.  At this point.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you, Veronica.  And quickly we are running out of time.  So I'll jump to Vrikson who put up a hand.
>> VRIKSON ACOSTA: Wherever you are in society, I have been listening to all the interventions.  I want to record something that if somebody doesn't (?) it doesn't matter how much privacy he or she has on line.  And that is global thing because I continue happens that way but.
[ Discernable audio ]
They say you can use this phone for classes but they also use for every other sense and they can get a lot of material who are not properly for children or even adults.  So it's a very troubled issue.  The lack of privacy and ethics.  (?) almost two million square kill meters here in Venezuela there is trouble because electricity doesn't get everywhere where there is electricity.  Even in the capital city.  Internet service is very, very limited.  So we have a very, very difficult challenge to adapt both on the part of the.
[ indiscernible audio ]
Even teachers have been having trouble getting used to technology because they weren't used to it -- they use WhatsApp or other things just to chat and they now have to use those skills to know what the homework the teachers are sending to their children.  And they have to control more than the children.
And everybody has to be having getting more digitalized but it doesn't mean that it has been most literalized.  So more utilization doesn't really mean more literization.  And it's in trouble.  If you look at digital literacy and ethics, it can go anywhere.  It can go anywhere.  Last point I want to mention is somebody mentioned about Zoom on line platform.  But even in this is it pandemic, people are really very tired of webinars and using cell phone for WhatsApp or telegram for classes.  They just had it.  Using platform, I know people in the educational status and they said oh, no!  Maybe March, April, May.  Okay Zoom was something new but now, there are so many.  Whatever?  How long?  What are you going to say to teach me?  Some people are getting really tired of technologies, especially for this use.  So there has to be some kind of a trade off control in the use of technology because we are being (?) and we have to get people to like access that people get data literacy and ethics.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  Suddenly we are getting zoomed out.  So digital literacy on ethics and learning and parenting is the comment.  I see Marcel and Rosalia.  Please keep it really short because we are running out of time.  About a minute each and we'll go back to the Panel to almost wrap up.  Rosalia?  We are not hearing from you.
>> JENNA MAN HAU FUNG: I think there is some issues on the audio.  We still have another hand up.  Marcel.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Marcel?
>> MARCEL: Can you hear me?
>> EDMON CHUNG: Yes, please go ahead.
>> MARCEL: This is Marcel from Germany.  I wanted to make a comment on Zoom fatigue.  I don't think it's an issue of the platform.  I don't know any student who likes school at all so I don't think we will find any platform that any student will say hurray, that is another class!  We won't find it.  We can just put a lot of effort into to make these platforms better and to develop methodologies to increase the comfort within the sessions and to educate our teachers and Professors or whomever is going to educate people to leverage these platforms at best.  Thank you.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  ROSALIA.  Are you able to speak?  I see you have muted yourself but you can try to unmute.
>> ROZALIA KLARA: I tried to unmute myself.  Referring to the dysfunctional digitalization, technology was supposed to solve the educational problems.  It won't.  Technology will not do the education instead of us.  I think it is coming to develop in a hybrid system, we have probably need also a new approach to education.  Participatory approach involving teachers and parents and students in the process of learning.  Something that Zoomers called connectivism.  So it's important to also to look at the methodologies of teaching and the technology aspect and the push button problems is not going to work probably.  Thank you.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  So the methodologies behind is highlighted.  The Zoom up issue, the Zoom fatigue issue, the digital literacy on ethics and learning and parenting.  And I also see that in the Q&A there is the question on, especially to Tim, what the KPIsare or should be in terms of the impact of the pandemic on education sphere.  So I'll go around just as we have in the very beginning.  Veronica and Tim and Paulo you have the last word and perhaps touch on some of these questions.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-day-9-ws273-enhancing-sustainable-computing-production-consumption^^

 
    >> MODERATOR: I think now we have all of the speakers.
     Chineyenwa, can you test your mic and video?
     >> CHINEYENWA OKONO ONU:  Yes, can you hear me?  Hi.
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, yes, we can hear you, that's fine.
     >> This is the IGF host speaking again. 
     Welcome to the webinar.  Please be informed that this session is recorded and hosted under the Code of Conduct of IGF and United Nations Rules and Regulations.  Please also be informed that the chat is for chat only, and the Q&A feature shall be used to ask questions.  Have a very successful session, thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  Thank you, Viktor, noted.  
     Hello.  I will go ahead and begin with the session.  So thank you for joining us for the Workshop Number 273, Enhancing Sustainable Computing, Production and Consumption.  
     My name is I'm Ece Vural, I’m working at Habitat Association as International Relations Department Manager, and I will be moderating the session today.
     I would like to first start off with presenting our agenda.  So I will be introducing our panelists and then provide a brief session introduction, and then we will move on to covering policy questions with our speakers.  And at the end, we are going to have time for Q&A.
     So I want to start with Mohammad Atif Aleem.  He is working as a business analyst at Tata Consultancy Services.  And he is also USFIG's Regional Engagement Director for Asia-Pacific.
     Jaewon Son, she is working as an advisor in Green Tech Alliance, and also as capacity building lead at Youth for IG.  
     Chineyenwa Okono Onu, she is a social entrepreneur.  She is the founder and managing director Waste or Create Hub. 
     And Dr. Daniel Dasig is a telecom company executive, also a professor ad De La Salle University and serving in Board of Directors at Internet Society of Philippines.
     So I want to provide a brief description of our session.  So reports and analysis show us that in the production have serious consequences on different levels such as environmental, economic and societal.  
     And growing conscious digital consumers have been increasing demand for more advanced computing ways.  And to satisfy such requirements of sustainable computing, production, and consumption, they have to undo the effects of climate change.  And degradation of environment is vital subject of discussion.
     So our panelists today will be sharing their experiences in various fields and where these changes were innovatable and vital.  
     So the issues we will be covering will be around the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 9 and 12, which are focusing as a call to build a resilient infrastructure, promote sustainable industrialization and foster innovation.  Sustainable consumption and production, promoting resource and energy efficiency and infrastructure and providing access to basic services, green and decent jobs and better quality of life for all.  
     So, these SDGs, they play vital role in addressing sustainable development issues without leaving anyone behind.  And the trends in emerging technologies for innovation and industrialization are expected to improve communities without compromising the environment. 
     And looking into the demographics, many developing countries still lack in the level innovation index based on their innovation performance.  So therefore, engineers, scientists of the technical community, government, academia, Civil Society, basically various sectors and various backgrounds and other interested parties, they should be linked together as policy makers and policy takers to map these issues and also develop policies fostering efficiently sustainable computing, production, and consumption.  
     Therefore, during this session, we are aiming to stimulate public interest in the effective development and transfer of environmentally responsible technologies and establish tangible results through a partnership of the IG community and other stakeholders.  
     So we what we expect out of the session.  First, we want to discuss the issues and the challenges and the scope of green company, environmental rights and governance, and regulatory frameworks and policies that are in the production and consumption.  And we aim to inform participants on these areas, and we would be aiming for them to engage themselves in these conversations even after the IGF.
     We also want to stimulate discussions on the different effects on damages to the environment and also its impact on the vulnerable groups and communities.
     We are also expecting to advocate green economies as outcomes through collaboration and networking.  And we all know that this could lead to innovation, capacity building for grants, and policy recommendations after IGF.  
     We also want to raise awareness about different vulnerable and marginalized groups who are exposed in the digital world.  And we also want to plan for launching an ethical online campaign to set forth the interests of such groups along with their means of sustainable livelihoods.
     And, finally, we also want to encourage the policy makers to reform the laws to make it more inclusive and sustainable for all.  
     So I want to move on to the policy questions we will discuss with our speakers.  So our first policy question is how do we advance sustainable and efficient computing production and consumption in the milieu of the fourth industrial revolution?  
     And Jaewon, maybe we can start with you.
     >> JAEWON SON: Thank you.  As a person working on internet governance and environment, initially when I saw the question I was wondering if the cloud engineers and computer scientists know about the concept of sustainable computing.  
     So I asked one of the friends working at one of the biggest companies in Korea like for internet and she says she has never heard of like such a concept.  
     So I believe not every environmentalist would have a good idea about it as well.  But just knowing about -- the computer scientist not knowing about sustainable computing was quite a surprise to me.  
     So in this regard, I believe having an environmental track on Internet Governance Forum will bring more people and multi-stakeholders having a discussion and letting the others aware more about the concept.  So I believe we made the initial step towards it.
     One of the examples that have advanced the sustainable computing and production consumption in the first industrial revolution, I would like to introduce Korea's recent new deal.  
     So to build back better and in response to COVID-19, Korea's investment is now being more focused on strengthening the data AI and network throughout the economy and fostering the tech industry by supporting the online activities and remote work among the SMEs so that they can create more job and more business opportunity in response to the economy that has been going down due to the COVID-19.
     So by investing in digitalization and infrastructure and technologies, we aim to utilize all of the 5G and AI in all industries.  And we believe initially it will lead to the sustainable growth around the country.  
     But not every country would be able to change into a digitalized society so we believe greater cooperation across the countries would speed up the process.  I will stop here.  Thank you.  
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you for your input.  We can continue with Dr. Daniel.
     >> DANIEL JR DASIG: Hi, everyone.  As a member of the Internet Society Philippines and as a researcher and telecommunication company executive, I have seen over the years that the geography of innovation continues to shift including the developing economies with the most significant progress with those of underdeveloped.
     Looking at the political environment, education, infrastructure, and business sophistication.  However, some of the developed and the regional leaders of innovations are also the most polluters in the world.
     So although we have the polluters pay principle, we should look into what underpins pollution affecting land, water, and air which derive from the use of the internet ecosystem.  
     While underdeveloped economies primarily rely on the primary economic activities which directly impact the environment, we need to forge and advance sustainable and efficient computing production and consumption especially in this fourth industrial revolution era and COVID-19 pandemic.
     We need to foster the use of services and related products which respond to the basic needs and bring a better quality of life to society by not compromising the needs of tomorrow.
     We need to bring into the table an innovation ecosystem and public policies that stimulate conversation towards integration of the social, economic and environmental objectives.  
     In my perspective as a professor, at the basic start of education sector that providing awareness campaign, programs and partnership because after all we need the community intelligence.  As we all know, there is no smarter than us.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Ms. Chineyenwa Okono Onu, maybe we can continue with you.
     >> CHINEYENWA OKONO ONU:  Sorry, I can hear you now.
     >> MODERATOR: It's okay.  Ms. Chineyenwa Okono Onu, let's hear from you then.
     >> CHINEYENWA OKONO ONU:  Thank you, everyone.  I'm very excited to be here.  
     I think that my colleagues have shed in more light on this and just to add a little bit to how we can advance our sustainable efficient computing.  
     I think education will play a major role to understanding setting policies that need to be put in place.  In the end, it all comes down to people and value for me.  And we need to shift the future that works for all of us by putting people first, by empowering them with information and knowledge.  
     Just like mentioned there is a policy and even the sciences do not know about this.  Education and information is very important in order to drive education.  And in order to drive information and implement setting policies.
     In the most pessimist form we need to understand at that time future of industrial revolution may have a potential to robotize humanity and deprive us of heart and soul.  
     We need to have creative and stewardship to efficient production and consumption in computing.  
     It is important that we look into a new collective and moral consciousness based on how we share information based on how we implement certain policies, understanding that the environment is the center of it all and people have a major role.  
     Inasmuch as we are identifying policies and sustainable ways that are efficient, we also need to consider the human face in champions of the solution.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  And finally, Mr. Mohammad Atif Aleem, let's have your input on this.
     >> MOHAMMAD ATIF ALEEM:  Thank you very much.  This is an important question how do advance a sustainable and efficient computing production and consumption in the milieu of the fourth industrial revolution.  
     So if you are talking about the fourth industrial revolution, many industries think it as industry 4.0.  It is the ongoing automation tradition and industrial practices using the most modern and smart technologies we have at hand.  
     Many -- the code of the agenda is in synch with what the policy question states that how do we advance these.  So definitely as my panelists, used the latest technologies, be it Internet of Things or the computing solutions, I thank we can rightly advance the sustainability to the computing in the production and consumption area.
     So sustainable production and consumption aims at doing more and better with less.  In current or critical times, we already all of us are sitting at home and we aspire to do more and better with less.  
     Increasing the network from all economical activities.  Because a sustainable development will be achieved not only by growing our economies but by minimizing waste in the process of doing so.  
     A lot of energy consumption has been cut since we are not traveling.  And the environment development on the backward track.  I rightly agree with the other panelists that government and policy making also has a key role to play in driving this sustainable and efficient computing efforts.
     For example, if I have to state the UN DP human development report points out that many developing countries lack the capacity and resources to assist climate related rates.  For instance, there is a severe lack of meteorological stations in Sub-Saharan Africa region where farmers mostly depend on rain for the agriculture.  
     There is basically a modern need of information and communications technology to penetrate these vulnerable regions and so that we can adapt to climate change.  
     So the more penetration of digital is there the better for production and consumption activities.  That is my view on this policy question.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you for your inputs.  I will move on to the second policy question.
     And that is how can we guarantee good use of the internet without harming the environment?  
     I would like to first start with Dr. Daniel for this question.  You're muted.  Still muted.
     >> DANIEL JR DASIG: All right.  Sorry.  Can you hear me now?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, yes.
     >> DANIEL JR DASIG: Thank you.  So the internet has completely changed our lives.  
     And with the current ramifications of the fourth industrial revolution milieu where it was characterized with more connected or interconnected end devices like our smartphones, computers, laptops, servers.
     Because of this demand of the fourth industrial revolution from construction of the minerals to the manufacturing of these electronic devices to posting the data center operations in managing the services that we are using as end users including infrastructure services towards that temporary and permanent flow of data online.
     We have had a huge impact to our digital footprints and higher energy consumption.  More importantly, with the COVID-19 pandemic, more issues with the higher demands of telecommuting.  It is a work-from-home setup, telework, modalities which requires more data centers.  
     And so these data centers requiring more energy to be consumed and thus contributes to carbon emission.  So how can we foster or guarantee good use of internet without harming the environment.  
     Well, actually, we can reduce by way of doing household occupational or into a global landscape reduction of our digital footprints.
     So at the large part of energy consumption being linked to internet use nowadays comes from actually the values of our equipment and on the enterprise and corporate level we can develop policies which transcends policies, equipment or asset management that allows employees or users to be responsible in the consumption of cloud services because reduction of cloud services constitutes reduction of energy consumption in the data center.
     So as to limits of video streaming as large volume of video streamings as well with high energy consumption on the aspect of data center and infrastructure management.  
     Looking into the industrial technologies, many consumers also continued to use fourth generation technology at home instead of using the wi-fi which consumes less energy when you are using mobile network.
     So we need to educate.  We need to establish local, national or global policies which advocates responsible consumption at the household level, at the national, regional or the global space.  Thank you very much.
    >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Jaewon, maybe we can continue with you for your inputs on this policy question.
     >> JAEWON SON: Sure.  When it is easy to imagine what is coming out from core consumption, I think not many people realize the impact of e-mail.  Like, for example, if you have long e-mails with all of the attachment it can have a carbon footprint of like 50-gram.  
     And it is because they use all of the data centers and the computers spend the energy in sending filtering and reading all of the messages.  So minding about the influences about the internet, I think we should talk about what can turn to the environment.
     Along with the Green New deal also having a Green New Deal and a response to the climate change.  So government is planning to transform the public urban areas into green zero energy whereas the building with the clean water supply system to security drinking water supply and strengthen the prevention outlying the IoT and AI.  I think not many people are familiarized with the IoT and water management so I would like to touch a bit upon that.
     In Asia-Pacific region, there are still a thousand billions of people having both economic and social loss due to the water management.  And when there is tsunami, it is hard to observe the areas by going there.  
     When there is a disaster with the large disaster, the IoT can be utilized by having the satellite images so they can look around without going there to see the immediate aftermath of the disaster.  
     By detecting the surface of natural disaster area, utilizing the AI and state like image that type process by the specialized computing and then move on to the person who has been specialized with all of the geometrics and stuff that which it has been used to save the people and deal with the environmental disaster that might have came with the climate change.
     So utilizing the IoT or the internet technologists, advanced technologists has been increased in the field of disaster management and has been extremely useful tool to having an immediate follow-up for flood or hurricane or any other natural disaster.  
     So I believe the internet, say, are useful in terms of those kind of environment disasters.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Mohammad Atif Aleem, if we can have your input on the policy question.
     >> MOHAMMAD ATIF ALEEM: I completely agree with the panelists here.  
     So to guarantee good use of the internet without harming the environment, first of all, it is important that we understand the digital carbon footprint.  
     So it was quite -- I mean I was amazed at knowing that the computer scientist is not knowing about how much carbon footprint is generated out of a data center or for that matter because it is very necessary that we have knowledge about that.  And then only we can take those actions that my fellow panelists mentioned about.
     And every time we perform, like Jaewon mentioned about e-mail, so even simple daily action like browsing of websites and sending and use e-mail and saving an app on the phone, data is transferred between the devices and service into websites or software are hosted on.  
     The more the data is stored, the more electricity and energy is needed.  Even though as an individual it seems relatively small, but when multiplied by billions of people globally that are all connected to the internet, it really amounts.  
     So the IT industry greenhouse gas emissions are predicted to reach 14% of global emissions by 2040.  And the United Nations International Telecommunications Union has set the industry the target of reducing emissions by 45% over the next decade.  
     So one interesting thing that we as a government and responsible citizens can do is make the directory or check the directory of the server that our website is hosted on.  
     For that, many tools are there.  For example, there is one called the Green Web Foundation which maintains a directory of all server data centers and hosting providers using hundred percent renewable energy.  So they have a free tool on their website which allows you to test any website you are on and discover whether it is powered on 100% renewable energy or just using fossil fuels.
     Because it is more important to make sure companies that are building the internet are switching to renewable and phasing out fossil fuels.
     Because that is when the searching will be more guilt free.  And if I have to talk about my individual company, so even the IT companies in India are taking steps to make green buildings and green offices.  
     But in a remote location for now I think it is more about the data centers which needs to run on renewable energy rather than the conventional fossil fuels we have been running on.
     That is how we can guarantee good use of internet without having much effect on the environment.  Yes.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And I would like to give the floor to Chineyenwa for her input.
     >> CHINEYENWA OKONO ONU:  Thank you so much.  I think Mohammad really hit on some of the points I was going to make.  
     But for the individual, the inputs come from streaming videos and watching Netflix, you know, amongst other things. And we need to as people be able to educate us, we need to be able to facilitate education to get people to understand what their carbon footprint is individually.  
     And even like you mentioned, the internet that we use.  What is their capacity?  Are they looking at renewable or fossil fuel or however.  And also looking at how the pandemic has, you know, made quite a number of us focus on doing more stuff online than we would do in person.  
     So I will just share a few opportunities at which we can reduce our own footprint as individuals because even though we are looking to pass on policies, I feel like as individuals we have the major role to play in ensuring and making sure that those policies are implemented by what is changing ourselves and changing our behaviors as well.
     We can try to use, you know, use our phones more than using our laptops because of the electricity voltage that is used.  It is very important.
     We can also unsubscribe from e-mails and mailing lists.  The speakers touched on the importance of understanding what carbon footprint you are making.  By leaving all of those mails in your newsletters that most of us mostly never even open.  
     And also consider using cloud-based storage as compared to having most of this stored on your devices, on your phone.   I was interested to find out that Google operates some of the most highly efficient data centers in the world.
     And it has been one of the largest corporate purchasers of renewable energy.  So we can consider backing up pictures on cloud as compared to using -- they can give you a list of organizations and green web hosts hosting for those of us who are into the technology space and developing sectors and amongst the digital could use the green hosting sites to host your softwares however.  
     And just really just understanding that every single imprint that you make on the internet has a ripple effect on the environment one way or another.  We need to create the conscious education to let people know of the endless opportunities available and how they can access and utilize them.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much to all of the speakers who provided input for question number two.  
     Let's move on to the third question.  This one is on SDGs.  So how can SDGs 9, 12, 11 and 13 be fostered digitally and lower the impact on the environment?  
     Atif, maybe we can begin with you for this one.
     >> MOHAMMAD ATIF ALEEM: I basically think that the information and communications technologies can help the United Nations SDS achieve these goals that are mentioned there.  
     So I mean helping to build resilient infrastructure for promoting inclusive sustainable industrialization and fostering innovation, which is SDG 9. 
     A lot is still being leveraged for the use of these services.  For example, there are education startups, or there are food delivery startups.  So a lot of innovation in the e-commerce sector has come up which leverages this SDG and contributes to SDG 9 by using a robust technology framework.
     Then if I have to talk about SDG 12, it is responsible consumption and production.  So one of the issues is of e-waste to buy the communication and information technology.  
     So if this e-waste can be tackled like global strategies and standards and policies can be laid done by the government.  Because during the pandemic, a lot of dependence has been there on the electronic for the items in digital medium.  
     So a lot of e-mails being generated.  If they can be disposed of sustainably, we can make some good progress.  
     Apart from that, if I have to talk about climate change action, then again revolves around green data centers and green power feeding systems for the information and communication technologies.
     So it is upon organizations to, you know, plug in those sustainable parameters and whatever the scope of business in the digital media.  And if they can do that and maintain the dichotomy between sustainability and profits because we have to do that if we want to make a sustainable environment.  
     That will be the key, maintaining the dichotomy between sustainability and profits for larger organizations for the SDG levels of 9, 12, 11 and 13.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Dr. Daniel, we can move on to your consideration.
     >> DANIEL JR DASIG: Thank you.  So with the full effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, information and communication technologies have been on the front lines in building the response and mitigating the risk.
     The crisis has actually leveled the world. The crisis has also accelerated digitalization of many businesses and services, and that includes those other sectors of the economy.
     Now I would like to cite an example of a service industry innovation which fostered digitalization by providing the needs of the communities and the cities.  
     In the Philippines, we have service delivery providers which allow the Filipino people to place their order online and their products ordered, and food are delivered at their doorstep.
     And so with ICT has actually aside from work, it provided access to healthcare and nowadays while subscribing to the essential goods and services.
     So on the other note of responsible consumption and production, ICT has also leveraged the manufacturing sector with the use of internet of things, or IoT, artificial intelligence which has removed the manpower in the production line.  
     And so with the removal of the manpower going towards the robotics application it has, indeed, reduced more energy consumption because of the automation and the robotics application.  
     And in the service industry and manufacturing sector, with the application of the line manufacturing, and green center we have reduced the carbon emission while we are sustaining the needs of our communities and developing these communities into becoming a smart communities and cities.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Ms. Chineyenwa Okono Onu, maybe we can go on with your contribution.
     >> CHINEYENWA OKONO ONU:  Can you hear me?
     >> DANIEL JR DASIG: Yeah.
     >> CHINEYENWA OKONO ONU:  Okay.  Sometimes it feels like it is off and on so I'm not quite sure.
     Thank you so much for that question.  Now for me, understanding the SDGs and how we can lower the impacts that are fostered digitally, we need to look at it from the targets.  
     I would like to highlight a target on SDG line says look at how to increase the access of small-scale industrial and other enterprises particularly in developing countries to financial services including affordable credit and integration into value chain and market.
     I feel like it is very important that they are able to have access to set certain information and certain skills that can enable them scale up the value chains in order to marginalize impact.  
     Because some of the challenges that they face or what I say that is affected in the different areas is around people not being able to have the necessary enabling infrastructure to be able to structure across the board.  And that way they are not able to manage any form of impact, not think about lowering the impact.  
     So the challenges are around providing them with affordable credit that integrates is very, very important.  
     Another area that I would like to talk about is supporting green initiatives to equip the different sectors or the different actors across the world and to understand the challenges and opportunities of the coming transition.  And to have them take up role that must play in managing the change, managing the necessary change in the way that they could also look at lowering the impact, especially with regards to the environmental sustainability.  
     It will further be the case that the work approaches a social dialogue in order to be able to drive a truly transformative change.  Providing the necessary skills capacity and education and information and mostly financial needs would help lower the impact digitally.  
     That way they are able to marginalize certain information in the way that it is clear and in a way that it is approachable and in a way that it is relatable and in a way that you can actually create an economic transformational change via that process.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  We can move to Ms. Jaewon.
     >> JAEWON SON: Sure.  I think there are several ways to contribute to those SDGs while having lower impact to the environment.  
     For example, to conserve the energy, I think we should implement intelligent smart system while expanding clean and renewable energies like wind, solar and hydroelectro in power.  While to minimize the pollution and put in smart factories what the industrial heat and waste and investing in the green innovations through R & D I think green tech businesses can be promoted.  And those businesses would, like, use less carbon footprint while leading the green industry.  I think it will be helpful.  
     While we can also support the technical implementation of clean plans for reducing the contamination and establish the low carbon and green industrial complex.  
     In conclusion, adding the industry innovation to urban spaces and building smart distribution system would be a key to contribute to enhancing sustainable computing production and consumption with the good influence to the environment.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much to all of the speakers for the contributions.  I want to move on to the next policy question.  
     So what is the role of quality education in enhancing sustainment initiatives?  
     I would like to start with Dr. Daniel for this one.
     >> DANIEL JR DASIG: Thank you.  I would like to answer that directly.  
     Educational development and management of education institutions should transcend at enhancing quality education as a cornerstone of sustainable development goals. 
     Students are exposed to communal, real societal issues and the current ramifications.  So good education will advocate open innovation that encourage students and teachers to explore and investigate problems and uncover and promote novel ideas and advocate innovation as a solution and design and delivery and assessment.  
     The frameworks policies and standards and models of sustainability of transformative relevant and socially significant education modalities will strengthen the teachers and student development as our future leaders.  
     Quality education also enhances sustainable initiatives as it guarantees open-minded, innovative, service-oriented, relevant, and socially responsible citizens.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Atif, would you want to take the floor?  You are muted.
     >> MOHAMMAD ATIF ALEEM: Hi, can you hear me now?
     >> MODERATOR: Perfect.
     >> MOHAMMAD ATIF ALEEM: I think the role of quality education in enhancing sustainability initiatives is immense.  
     I was just browsing through some of the questions, and I see a very important question asked in terms of education only.  Like Weronika asked if we know any country where sustainable computing is in the curriculum of IT degrees at the university. Being a minor of information technology, I didn't have a dedicated subject to sustainable computing.
     Only a part of it was in some of the chapters of computing architecture and also e-waste.  It is very important for the academic institutions and private companies and technology-enabled companies to develop partnerships in -- collaborative partnerships with the research think tanks to deliver lectures to students where they can explain the role of effective sustainable computing.  
     Unless and until the computing generation doesn't know the harmful effects of the computing can have, they will not be able to, you know, do the coding analysis and develop solutions forward.  
     And now I think since we have been coming up with a lot of ICTs now and there is a concept of associated energy with respect to each transaction that is made and even the data has been at the forefront like data is the new world.  So a lot of transition has move on to data science.  
     There is a huge gap in terms of still imparting quality education for sustainable computing.  I think that gap can be filled by research institutions, by academia if they develop partnerships and include them in their curricula to impart new technology and what latest developments are there, then I think the youth has a capability to solve and tackle these challenges.  A big positive yes from my side, I think.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Chineyenwa, could we have your input on the subject?
     >> CHINEYENWA OKONO ONU:  Thank you.  This is very, very important and key to the work that we do where education is a lifeline of the life process of the entire work that we do.  
     Now, quality education for sustainable initiative is paramount because of the role that we think that young people especially have key ideas and ways that sustainable innovations can solve some of the challenges even around sustainable computing and consumption and production, amongst other things.  
     I would like to highlight an organization in Malaysia called the BGBG initiative.  They have a maker space and part of what they do is educate people on how they can use steam-based approach in developing some of the ideas and some of the innovations as a way of driving education in the more practical way in Malaysia.  
     And we are excited to have partnered to drive more education on sustainability as a focus place in technical skills like production, producing packaging, coming up with new product design and secular product and design, amongst other things.  So I think quality education is important.
     In Africa, we will think about education from a particular perspective, you would understand that the curriculums are different.  
     But if you look at it from a sustainable point of view, which is one thing that we are doing currently is to look at how we can incorporate steam-based solutions as part of a streamlined curriculums of students, even with the master classes and sites school programs that we run with the secondary schools and also with some of the students.  
     It is important because it will help give them a general perspective.  Research is important because when you are able to come up with streamlined blueprint solutions as to what it means to even consider sustainable computing as a course in the university, then you realize that they need to be more information that needs to come off of that process to be seamless.  
     So I what say that sustainable initiatives would drive these innovations with the necessary capacity, with the necessary information, with funding, financial enablement to be able to research more and find out information, practical information that they can use to be able to drive impact in the long run.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Mr. Jaewon, can we also have your contribution.
     >> JAEWON SON: Yep.  So when you are making a pair of jeans, it requires like 10,000 liters of water.  And to make it into a denim jean, you use the toxic coloring material.  
     And some of it when it goes to the waterway, it really harms the environment.  But when people know about the fact that the plastic bag is really harmful for environment, they do not know when they are buying a blue jean that they are harming the environment.  
     So if they are aware and being educated about the decisions they are making and what it is being influenced to environment and stuff like that, they might have not buying the blue Jean or anything at all.  
     Education would make more informed consumers and them having more responsible decision.  So I think this shows quality education is taking place when it is advancing the sustainable initiative and building on to the more informed consumers.  Not to mention that everyone should have more access to education when it has been digitalized.
     I just wanted to highlight we should more increase interdisciplinary department and research so that more people will know the linkage between environment sustainability and internet and share others why is it important and how is it linked between each other because this space in university and everything is so specialized.  And not every department know about the link between each other and stuff like that.  
     And I think in this digitalized world we should more promote having interlinked research and everything.  Not to mention about the multi-stakeholder model and policy making process.  
     Not many people know why it is important for everyone to be engaged all together.  If we educate them about why is it necessary for every stakeholder to be engaged in the policy process, and how can it stop the vicious cycle and everything, I think it would be a first way to have more sustainable initiatives.  I will stop here.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And thank you for the contributions for this policy question.  I will move on to our last policy question that we are going to cover during our session today.  
     And that is how can gender equality be promoted through digital ways and in the associated SDGs for equitable distribution and representation?  
     For this final question, I want to begin with Chineyenwa.
     >> CHINEYENWA OKONO ONU:  Okay.  Thank you for this question.  
     How can gender equality promote through digital ways is tremendous as we can already see education and campaigns and different ways at which people raising awareness which ways people are looking at inclusive way of representing, you know, all forms and genders in communication.  
     And I think the internet has enabled what I say the technology has enabled the seamless process of that.
     But even at that, there are still more work that needs to be done in terms of ensuring that gender equality is targeted and mainstream especially when you are looking at it from a representation point of view especially.
     So when you think about the conversations around how not necessarily men or women are represented in certain areas with the digital communication, you realize that the SDG has highlighted several ways we can do that, looking at it from the different targets is also very important that we consider that as a mainstream way of communication to ensure that people who are in the digital space that it is important to do so.  
     And looking at the policies, I really don't know much around the policy around quality mainstream distribution, maybe Jaewon or Mohammad can touch a bit on that.  
     But one thing that I know for sure is that the technology and the digital solutions that enable that process, the promotion of educating people, incorporating people, creating an inclusive space has been done, but there is still a lot more to needs to be done.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Atif, maybe we can continue with you.
     >> MOHAMMAD ATIF ALEEM:  Thanks.  Thank you for your input, Chineyenwa.  
     And I think you were very right about how equality, gender equality, there are innumerable ways and non-exhaustive ways of promoting digital ways in terms of SDGs for distribution and implementation.
     So if we go into the statistical terms.  There is significant differences between female and male labor force participation.  Globally, it's around somewhere close to 63% men versus 94% women.  As well as two-fold representation of women in informal area of employment.  
     Around only 11% of executive positions at Silicon Valley companies are female.  So even in the digital corridor, there has been less numbers.  Even in the Fortune 500 companies it comes to around 5% of the CEOs who are women.  
     So when we talk about representation, they have been relatively low, but it has been increasing in the recent times.  For example there was a stark increase in the Indonesian region where around 34% of the women labor force was there and has been increasing since then.
     But if you talk about economies like in the Global South, for example, in India, we have around 14% of business owners who are women.  
     So it again comes, boils down to about, you know, spreading information about how women can participate in the digital on the equal footage and even do better than their other counterparts.  It is just about that.  
     And there are innumerable opportunities for that.  For example, many corporations are launching gender-based like same opportunities, creating opportunities from the view of a gender lens and promoting women to come forward and participate and contribute for the cause of SDGs.  
     A large part of the Indian economy is about agriculture.  So there has been a rise in females there.  So if see we a rise female agri-trainers, definitely the future of agriculture would be digital farming.
     So if these female agri-trainers, if they can be taught the basics about digital forming, about how weather predictions and modelings could be done to have better yields of crops, then hat goal of SDG12 of better production, a large contribution of it can be attributed to a gender-specific audience.  
     It has a huge scope, as I said, and there is some very good NGOs.  For example, even the United Nations women are helping to empower women and girls across all age programs and advocacy.  They launch very exciting campaigns and advocacy programs related to all of the SDGs where they invite female entrepreneurs and leaders or technologists who are working or bringing radical changes in their society.  
     I would -- even in the session I would like to encourage all participants to actively reach out for these opportunities and like compete in that with an equal footing.  And the rest would be good, and the numbers will automatically increase.  So that is what I think about this.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I want to move on to Ms. Jaewon for her inputs.
     >> JAEWON SON: Thank you.  For the percentage of women in the global tech workforce along with the statistics, 73% of women has been exposed to or experienced the violence online.  
     And I think having other skill would allow people to protect themselves from the cyber harassment.  
     While the social media can be a risk of having those abuse, it can be used as a tool to express the steps and promote equal utilizing.  For example, there has been a hashtag me-too, and I think it was a good example of promoting the gender equality on the social media.
     So currently the gap between skills are wider in older less educated and women in remote area in developing countries.  And I think nurturing them and investing on shifting towards the economy is central to provide the increased access to online resource for those people, especially during pandemic so that everyone can benefit from this.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you.  And finally, Mr. Daniel, we can have your inputs for this policy question.  Could you unmute your microphone?
     >> DANIEL JR DASIG: So I agree with inputs from my colleagues that gender equality besides being a fundamental human right, it is an essential element to achieve peaceful societies and with volume and potential for sustainable development.  
     And in this digital age, India has a key role in issues.  And its women are excluded from the process, then we would have an emblematic way of our society exclude women from giving them their voice.
     And so while it is true that there are advancements of women participating in the global outreach, although they have less understanding of technology based on some researchers fewer digital skills and less presence in online platforms and are less likely to own mobile or technological devices.  So we need to further advocate and advance initiatives and programs for women to -- for women to achieve digital literacy including access to digital devices and technologies with the affordability of the same technologies.  
     I think we need to educate women to use these tools proficiently so that they can also shape their own strategy and participate in some directives and conversations.
     To this end, I would like to view that education is the key.  So we need to educate more women and girls because good quality education will lead to innovative and sustainable initiative.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  We don't have much time left so I want to move on to Q&A.  
     We have two questions from the audience during the session.  So do now know any country where sustainable computing is the curriculum of IT degrees at universities?  
     Jaewon, would you please answer to this one.
     >> JAEWON SON: Sure.  Thank you for the question.  
     As far as I know, Australia National University ANU, offers the IT sustainability as part of the roster courses in the technology and engineering master program.  
     And I am not sure if I'm right in pronouncing, I just put on the chat, so Athabasca, this university also has like green IT strategy courses.  
     But if you want to have final degree with the sustainable computing in UK there is Leeds Beckettt University.  You can check on those university website and see if there is anything that you might be interested.
     >> MODERATOR: Do you have any inputs for discussion, Mr. Daniel?
     >> DANIEL JR DASIG: Thank you for the question.  
     I'm teaching in the graduate program of the University in the Philippines and part of the curriculum is technology and project management and emerging technologies.  
     So these courses on course with the green IT computing.  We also have the lean project management which coincides with the sustainable computing as part of the curriculum.  
     So well, it is a good question because in the design of emerging technologies, we need to consider technology roadmap.  
     And in building technology roadmap, you need to look at the space of the environment, it's impact in the society with, of course, the best economic, social and technological.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I will move on to the second question.  
     It is actually more a discussion question.  So it is true that cloud-based storing solutions pollute less than the local storage, however for many organizations local storage is a matter of security.  
     The tradeoff between environment and security is a difficult one to manage.  Atif, would you prefer to answer this one?
     >> MOHAMMAD ATIF ALEEM: I can take this one.  So to answer, it's not exactly true.  Like I haven't seen any comparison between cloud-based storage solutions or local storage.  
     But definitely the cloud-based solutions are more energy efficient because if you are using in-house data centers it requires several servers and backup systems to be running 24/7.  And that will take a lot of energy in terms of generated carbon footprint.  
     If we compare it that way, energy efficiency wise, then the cloud is more the suggested alternative and also has the benefit of allowing remote working and having a paperless like mode of working.
     Also, one negative point with the cloud is that it all bounces to like the data centers where the larger amount of data is being stored.  
     For example, AWS, the Amazon Web Services, the majority of the data centers are in Virginia.  And like it has committed to create the new data centers 100 renewable energy, but the old ones, the majority, 70% of their data centers still run on other sources of energy apart from renewable.
     So that was a concern that some environmentalists also raised.  And Jeff Bezos announced he will be opening new data centers which will be fully run on renewable energy.  
     As you mentioned, absolutely the tradeoff between technology and sustainability is a very tough nut to crack, but with time we will be realizing that it is a very important step in -- so a lot of steps are being taken.  
     And I hope these will be for the good.  So for now you can store your data on cloud so there is no issue.  So let the technology companies handle their data centers.  So yeah, on that note I would like to end this.
     >> MODERATOR: Is there any other contributions for this question?
     >> DANIEL JR DASIG: I would like to answer that good question because the cloud services with the ramifications of the fourth industrial revolution.  
     And Philippines, for example, is one of the outsourcing hub in the world.  So subscribing to cloud services will reduce carbon emission from the data center because instead of putting up your own data center, procuring your own servers and having your own staff to mobilize and having the personnel to do the security and all IT stuff, subscribing to cloud services is one of the best outsourcing models that you can employ as an organization.
     Secondly, having the cloud services will entail financial efficiency and personnel efficiency as well.  
     So I agree with clean computing initiative mentioned by Atif as to enterprise and organizational level.  And I think I will end there.  Thank you.
     >> MOHAMMAD ATIF ALEEM: And a new technology called distributed cloud which is coming.  
     So instead of having multiple data centers, they will create replicas of that.  So that will further use the carbon emissions.  
     We still have a long way to implement that industry wide.  But steps have been taken by companies.  You can log on to AWS and IBM and like resource centers and you will see a lot of resource materials on how cloud is making green initiatives.  That is one suggestion I would like to get.  That is all.
     >> MODERATOR: I would like to say thank you for all of the speakers for the contributions on the policy.  
     And we went over time so thank you for the IGF for letting us talk.  And I wish everybody a nice day.  
     >> I think we can have a quick photograph.  Can you allow that for one minute, Viktor?  I think any one of us can maybe click the photo with all.  Even if we can have participants.
     >> You can use the print screen as well.
     >> I can send it over.
     >> CHINEYENWA OKONO ONU:  Thank you.
     >> This is your host.  Thank you for your participation at IGF 2020.  Please leave your feedback through the form you will be automatically redirected to after closure of the session.  Thank you very much.
     >> Thank you so much, everyone.
     >> Thank you very much.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-1-%E2%80%93-igf-2020-introduction-and-orientation^^

 
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  Welcome, everyone, once again.  My duty as your host is to ensure that you have signed with the platform and to introduce you briefly, we will be using most of the time the Q&A for questions and answer as well as the chat window in case we have any issues to address.  I wish you have a fruitful discussion this morning or this after nan.  Thank you.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Thank you very much.
We'll just wait a couple more minutes.  Usually when we host meetings, we start at 2 minutes past the hour just to give people a chance to log on.  Sometimes the software is a bit slow, so we'll start at 2 minutes past. 
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Can somebody please make Anja Gengo a panelist?
>> Please, who?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Gengo.  I'll type it into the chat.
>> Okay, please do.  Anything. 
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  I think it has been added already.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  No, I don't see her.  I don't see her there.  She's in the attendees list, AG.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  Gengo?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  GENGO?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  Okay.
Anja.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  Okay, done.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  All right.  Thank you very much.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  You're welcome. 
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Sorry, not yet.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  Oh, okay.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Luis, if you could help.
Okay, great, then.
And it is 2 minutes past and I think the numbers are quite steady now, so I think we will start.
And, well, thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen, for joining our orientation, and newcomers session.  My name is Chengetai Masango, and I'm in charge of the IGF Secretariat, and with me I have our Chair, Anriette Esterhuysen, and Anja Gengo as well, who is our focal point for National, Regional and youth initiatives at the Secretariat.
Before I start, according to the agenda, it's a welcome so I think I'll just say a very brief welcome so I'll hand it over to Anriette.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thanks very much, Chengetai.  I'm trying to use the IGF virtual background but it looks like it's not really working, but welcome, everyone.  If this really is your first IGF, please prepare yourself for a great adventure.  The IGF is not an easy forum to feel part of, but once you do feel part of it, it's something that you look forward to every year, and you'll find yourself wanting to participate in some of the National/Regional initiatives, Youth IGF initiatives and so on.  So my name is Anriette Esterhuysen, for those of you that don't know me.
I am the, I'll switch on my video even though it's a bit scrambled, and I'm currently the Chair of the Internet governance Forum's Multistakeholder Advisory Group, and I think, Chengetai, we'll probably come to that in the agenda.  We'll tell you a bit more about the MAG, about how the IGF works and who organized the IGF but most of all I really would like everyone to ask questions.  There's no better way of us making this orientation session relevant to you than for us to be able to respond to your specific questions.
And, Chengetai, is it possible for you to share the agenda even if it's just in the chat?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, I'll copy and paste it in the chat.  Oops.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  While Chengetai does that everyone, and you can ‑‑ you have different ways of asking questions.  You can type a question in the chat, or you could type a question in the Q&A.  And by just clicking on those at the bottom of your screen, and I dearly would also like you to speak should you need to speak.  I see actually there's some old timers here, aside from myself and Chengetai and his team we have several members of the MAG, the Multistakeholder Advisory Group, who are also able to address your questions.  So, Chengetai, back to you for the brief historical overview.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Okay.  Thank you very much, Anriette.  So I'll be very brief, because I do assume that most of you do know about the IGF, and if you have any questions, please feel free to ask at the IGF.  We do prefer people to ask questions, and then we can expand on that instead of just telling you a whole lot of stuff that you may or may not be interested in.
But very briefly, the IGF is one of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society, and the world submit on the Information Society was in two phases.  There was the Geneva phase in 2003 and the Tunis phase in 2005.  So during the Geneva phase in 2003, there was a whole lot of discussion about Internet Governance and while they were discussing Internet Governance, they didn't really have a definition of what Internet Governance is or what Internet Governance should be so as the UN and the UN always does is that it formed a Working Group so this was the Working Group on Internet Governance, which was to operate between the Geneva and Tunis Summit and submit a report in the Tunis Summit on the definition of what Internet Governance was.
So they did come up with a definition, and it was really a multistakeholder effort, and the definition that they came up was that Internet Governance is the development and application of shared principles, norms, rules, and decision‑making processes and programs that shape the evolution and use of the Internet.  So that's just the short version of the definition of Internet Governance.  
And also with the WGIG report, Working Group on Internet Governance, they produced some models of how to go forth, and that model and one of those models, the model that was chosen of course, was they asked the Secretary‑General to, as you can see here, in paragraph 72 of the Tunis Agenda, we asked the United Nations Secretary‑General in an open and inclusive process, to convene, by the second quarter of 2006, a meeting of the new Forum for multistakeholder policy dialogue called the Internet Governance Forum, so the Internet Governance Forum was born then, and this is just a whole brief of the IGF mandate in Paragraph 72.  Interface with appropriate intergovernmental organizations and other institutions on matters under their purview.  Facilitate the exchange of information and best practices in this regard to make full use of the expertise from the academic, scientific and technical communities.
So you can read it on the IGF website underneath the "about," or go to the ITU website under the WSIS Forum and you can see the full mandate for the IGF.
Now, the unique thing about the IGF at that time that it was fully multistakeholder, all stakeholders would operate on equal footing.  Now, these stakeholders is the Government, Civil Society, technical community, IGOs and private sector, and they would operate under an equal fatting to discuss matters dealing with Public Policy issues dealing with Internet Governance.
And 97 Governments, Heads of State, in Tunis in 2005 approved this mandate, so we had our first mandate and it was for 5 years, and the IGF mandate has been renewed three times:  In 2010 and 2015, and in 2015, it was renewed for 10 years until 2025.
Now, just before I leave this part, I think the most important part there is that the mandate of the IGF is the Forum to discuss Public Policy issues related to key el meant of Internet Governance in order to foster the sustainability, robustness, security, stability and development of the Internet.
The Internet Governance is not just the meeting, it's not just the Forum that happens once a year.  We have intersessional activities and there are intersessional activities which I'll leave our Chair to go through, because the MAG is in charge of the meeting, formulating agenda of the meeting, and also some of the intersessional activities, and there's also the National/Regional initiatives that came up which my colleague Anja Gengo will speak about just now and the Secretary‑General also formed the Multistakeholder Advisory Group.  Now, the Multistakeholder Advisory Group is currently made up of 50 members from all the 5 stakeholder groups, from all the 5 regions and the 5 regions is Africa, Asia, WEOG, that's the Western and Other Group, which includes former Western Europe, Canada, the U.S., New Zealand, and Australia.  The South America and the Caribbean Region, and the Asia Pacific Region is considered as one Region except for Australia and New Zealand, as I have mentioned.
Now, apart from the MAG, we have the Secretariat which is based in Geneva, and the Secretariat reports to the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and that is our home institution.  The Secretary‑General asked the DESA, the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs to provide the institutional home, so they run the trust fund, the contractual space in which the IGF Secretariat runs in.
But I should really underline that the IGF is a bottom‑up, multistakeholder initiative and it was one of the first of its kind.
The IGF has had several meetings.  We ‑‑ this is our 15th IGF.  It's virtual because of the current situation, but we try and go through the various regions, so we first of all we started off in Greece, in Athens and then we went to Brazil in 2007, then India, Egypt, Lithuania, Kenya, Nairobi in 2011, Azerbaijan in 2012, all the way and then last year we had it in Germany, and next year, which was supposed to be this year, but we moved it to next year, we're going to have it in Poland, and the year after that it's going to be in Ethiopia and after that, it is going to be in Japan.
Now, that is with the IGF.  One other thing I would like to mention is that the IGF is extra‑budgetary.  It means we don't get any money whatsoever from the UN budget.  We may get indirect support, as we get indirect support from UNDESA, which does get some money from the UN budget, but everything else that we do is based on donations outside of the UN budget so it is direct donations to the IGF trust fund and the IGF trust fund of course is managed by UNDESA.
Now, some of our donors include, we've got Governments.  I think Government of Finland is our strongest donor, and then we have the Government of the Netherlands, the Swiss Government, the German Government, of course, and those are our top donors as far as the Government is concerned but since we're multistakeholder, we do have donations from other institutions, like from the private Sector we have donations from Verizon, Disney, Amazon, Google is a very strong donor for the IGF, and as far as the technical community is concerned, ISOC, ICANN, the NROs, et cetera, and then for the rest, Civil Society, et cetera, we do get donations that are directed through the IGF SA and the IGF SA, it's the IGF Support Association which was really formed as a way to help the IGF get more money since in the UN we really can't process small donations, like, $20 or $100 or even $500, which are very difficult to donate singly to the United Nations, so the IGF Support Association was formed and people can make small donations to them and they aggregate all those donations.  They give part of it to the IGF trust fund and the rest they support the National and Regional initiatives that we have.
For this meeting, I will think, I will just leave it to Anriette to just give an overview of how this meeting was formed, and also how the main theme, et cetera, was formed and then I'll come back and give an overview of the High‑Level Leader tracks and Parliamentary tracks, so over to you, Anriette.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thank you, Chengetai.  So I'm going to be quick because I actually want to respond to questions so this year the IGF MAGs, the Multistakeholder Advisory Group developed the thematic content of the IGF based on I would say two things broadly.  The first one was reflecting and evaluating the 2019 IGF and in 2019, there were only three thematic tracks and people thought very positive about that.  They felt that the IGF was more focused.  It was easier to follow.  It was easier to decide what to attend.
And the three tracks in 2019 were:  Data, trust, and inclusion.  They weren't called ‑‑ they had slightly longer names but those were the primary topics, but then the MAG as it always does put out a call to anyone.  We refer to this as the IGF Community.  It's not necessarily a cohesive community, but anyone who cares about the IGF, or who's interested in providing input, and it's a completely open process.
So the MAG put out a call for input, and based on that, the MAG received on the one hand validation.  People felt that these themes continue to be relevant, and should be part of the IGF 2020 program.  But we also got some new suggestions, and the one that had the most support was the idea of the environment, or climate change, to look at the Internet policy related challenges around environmental sustainability and climate change and that's how we ended up with this thematic structure based on four themes:  Data, environment, inclusion, and trust.
To find out more about what thinking is behind these themes, I really recommend that you look at a document called the Guide to IGF Themes and Issues, and maybe, Chengetai or Anja, you can post that in the chat.
This Guide, it's a document but it's actually very accessible document, and it will tell you more about, what do we mean by data?  Why is data important?  What did the session organizers, in other words the people who proposed the sessions, what did they have in mind when they proposed workshops that they associated with the theme on data, and so on.
So I won't say very much more about that because I think it's good that you look at the program itself, and also at the Guide.  I guess very broadly, data has to do with this proliferation of data that the Internet gives rise to, and how that can be governed, regulated, to maximize opportunities, but also to protect rights.
Similarly, trust has to do with security, with safety, with trust in what we access on the Internet and how we connect to the Internet.  Inclusion is really about making the Internet accessible to everyone, no matter what their abilities or disabilities are, where they live, and what level of connectivity they have.
And also particularly to make the Internet inclusive of the diversity that there is in the world.
And then environment is new, and you'll see that we are exploring various aspects of the impact of the Internet, the impact of digitization on the environment, but also how we can use the Internet to achieve more resilience in the light of climate change but other MAG members can say more.
So the way that the IGF works is that the MAG decides what the overall themes are, and then they put out an open call for session proposals and this is extremely important.  I know not everyone in this meeting are newcomers and I'm sure there are people in the room who have submitted a proposal to the IGF and who's been rejected, but it's a very challenging task for the MAG.  They get hundreds of session proposals that they have to review, and they apply certain criteria in reviewing these proposals and that criteria is transparent so I think for you as newcomers or anyone who would like to know more about how to participate in the IGF, it can be intimidating but my advice to you really is not to be intimidated, because the most effective way of actually getting a handle on the IGF and grasping what the IGF is about is to use it to organize a session because that's where the real power of the IGF lies.
Once you are inside the process, once you organize a workshop or organize an open Forum, there are different modalities.  You'll find them on the website.  That is when you actually are not just a participant, you actually become someone that shapes the event and that shapes the content that's discussed and that also shapes the outcomes.
So I'm going to stop there and I really would like people to ask questions, and I can say more and we have several MAG members hear who have a much closer sense of those themes than I have, because they are the ones that read all the proposals and reviewed them and actually built the program based on those proposals so let's just pause a little bit before we proceed and see if there are any hands or any questions.  I'll just checking the chat and checking the Q&A.  I don't see any questions.  Does no one have any questions at this point?  You can just tell us that you want to speak in the chat.
No, I don't see anyone.  I think, then, I'll stop there.  Maybe what I'll do though is just to highlight that aside from these themes that the program is built on, the IGF has many ‑‑ there are other opportunities.  There are networking sessions.  There are different types of sessions.  There are workshops.  The workshops are the ones I referred to that are self‑organized.  There are main sessions and usually, and that's the case again this year, there's one main session on each of the four main themes, and the MAG organizes those main sessions.
They usually are bigger.  They tend to have high‑level speakers, and they're a different type of session.  That doesn't mean you can't participate in them but workshops are usually more smaller and more intimate and more dynamic.  They're also different.  There are the open Forums and those are usually when an institution wants to share its work or tell the world more about it.  There will also be book launches and launches of research.  There will be pre‑events such as what we have this week.  So this week is all about pre‑events.  For example the GigaNet, the academic network where you have young scholars and older scholars coming together to present their work and then this is a virtual IGF so it's very different.  You might not have the same opportunity of meeting new people but at a face‑to‑face IGF, you will usually meet people that might become colleagues or collaborators, people that you could share project ideas with.  You might be able to meet somebody from your country that you've never met before, someone from a Government or a business that is actively investing in for example building internet infrastructure in your Region and really ‑‑ Internet infrastructure in your Region and that's where it lies in the unexpected and often unintended connections so I urge you even though this is a virtual IGF to look at who niece the room.  Don't be shy about emailing people.  You can contact them using the interactive schedule, tell them you'd like to chat or you'd like to find out more about what they're doing because that's a very powerful component of the IGF.  Chengetai?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, thank you.  I think we'll now just go to the next item.  I think Anja is going to present what to expect from the two weeks, just a navigational guide to the program.
>> ANJA GENGO:  Thank you, Chengetai and hello to everyone thank you for attending this session.  Welcome to the IGF first week, as Chengetai and Anriette said it can be overwhelming to attend the IGF regardless if it's in person or online first time as this year only because there are over 200 different sessions.  There are different types of sessions in addition to the very complex topics they're covering.  There are multistakeholder compositions and organizers and speakers so it takes some time to devote to study the overall schedule of the IGF and to understand how to navigate yourself through the next over two weeks of intensive discussions that are going over 6, 7 hours a day.
So let me just quickly tell you maybe from the perspective of still my fresh memory as a newcomer but then as a person as well that spent quite some time on all these documents that you're seeing now especially the schedule and other input documents.  What's very important is first of all, on a technical side to understand how to connect to each session, and we do understand that it's not quite straightforward, that it takes a little bit of time.  It takes time to devote to understanding, to go through a couple of steps which is why the IGF Secretariat has produced a very simple and detailed guide, basically a step by step guide:  How do you connect to each session?  How do you access to the Zoom session?
You can find that guide on a couple of locations on our website so there's the IGF website that as you know if you go to the new Section, you go to the Section, you will see basically in the news, the first item you see is how to connect to the IGF to the sessions and I'm pasting that link in the chat.
So it's important to register.  It's important to build your personal schedule.  I think that's the key word of this meeting, personal schedule because when you build your personal schedule that is your personalized space and that is where you get your personalized unique Zoom link to join sessions like this.  In addition to that, it's very important to look at the schedule and to understand the color‑coding of the schedule.
As colleagues said before me, the IGF is basically divided into two phases.  The first phase contains a couple of types of sessions, goes until the end of this week so we have a number of pre‑events there.  Open forums, which are sessions that are reserved for Treaty‑based international organizations and Governments, and we have NRI sessions which I'll come very soon.  Sessions that are organized by the Dynamic Coalitions which is part of our intersessional work.
Types of sessions are also explained at the IGF website but essentially, I think what's important for you to know is that each session is really multistakeholder in its nature and discusses the Internet Governance, different topics within the four thematic tracks.
I mentioned the color coding of the schedule.  Even the first week when you look at the schedule you'll notice basically four key colors.  They correspond to the thematic tracks that Anriette mentioned.  You can filter the schedule per thematic track, per tape of session, of course per day, so depending how much time you have to devote but that's something that helps navigate the schedule.
Next week is probably going to be a little bit even more complex than this one, only because we have a couple of tracks there actually we can say two tracks so in addition to the workshops, there are 85 workshops in our schedule, focused on four thematic tracks.  There's also a number of sessions that are facilitated within the high‑level leaders track.  I believe Chengetai will come to this track so is I won't be speaking about the details of those tracks but I will speak about the logistics.
So of course the high‑level track includes the prominent experts and leadership from all stakeholder groups.  If you go to the IGF 2020 meeting page and I'm going to paste the link now in the chat quickly, that's the page where all information is basically gathered in one place and probably the easiest place to find what you're trying to find regarding the IGF 2020.
If you scroll toward the end of that page, then you can see some of the participants of the high‑level leaders track.  If you'll click on more, you can see almost everyone.  We are still uploading the biographies from the high‑level participants as we receive them but we do expect that will be finalized very, very soon, probably tomorrow but you can see and have a sense about the profiles of speakers that are involved there, and also about the titles of the sessions.
Logistically speaking, that's a very important question that I received today during the networking session for the session organizers, is that the high‑level track sessions and the main sessions will be interpreted to 6 UN languages, and it's quite simple.  You just need to basically choose the channel in Zoom.  I think it's located in the bottom left corner of this display that you have now in front of yourself, and you can choose to listen in or to speak in any of the 6 official UN languages.
Transcripts are available on the IGF website shortly after the sessions are concluded, most definitely the next day.  The same is with the recording of the youth group.  You can also broadcast live, watch the live broadcast of all the sessions.  All sessions including the pre‑events these that we're having today and tomorrow, are streamed live on our YouTube account.  Main sessions and sessions of the high‑level leaders track are also going to be streamed through UN Web TV.
The IGF 2020 meeting page contains a very visible link to the streaming platforms, so you can follow that.  Anriette mentioned to watch the schedule for several networking sessions.  This is a work in progress because the community is submitting requests to host a couple of networking formal social events but I do believe that today we'll have the majority of the program finalized in that regard.  So that's quite a good spaces specially if you're new in this space to network and meet other colleagues.  There will be focused networking sessions which will allow you to meet more closely for example the MAG Chair, the members of the MAG, the IGF Secretariat, to meet and learn more about intersessional work, to meet the teams of people that are standing behind the outputs of the intersessional work such as the Dynamic Coalitions so all in all quite a lot of work for you as users and participants but if you go to the meeting page, I think that's the key really to find your space and especially to build your personal schedule as I said at the beginning.
So I'll stop here, Chengetai, I'm sure I said too much probably.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  No, no, thank you very much.  That was great.  Now very quickly we'll have Luis Bobo.  He is our technical person in the IGF Secretariat and he will just tell us very quickly how to connect to each session, and what to do if you face a technical issue.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Hello, thank you, Chengetai.  I am basically, yeah, I think Anja explained it very well.  There is a guide at the top of the IGF website which says how to connect to the sessions.  It's a very good, very visual guide, and basically the idea as Anja said is that you create your schedule, so you can navigate each session and each session at the top right corner, you can add the session to your schedule, so like that, you are building your participation in the IGF.
Then from any of these session places at all times, you can access your schedule, your own schedule, and then it's there where you can find all the links to access the sessions, okay?  Those are personalized.  You click on the link and you get your own personal link to connect to the sessions, and also your email.
The last point is that you can also in each session download the calendar just to get the remainder for the session, or even in the email you can also get your calendar reminder so as not to forget and I think that's all from my side.  Thank you, Chengetai.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Thank you very much, and Anja has just put into the chat the email address that you can use if you have any technical issues, and we also have a Help Desk function on the IGF website so you can click that and just type, if you have a technical issue.  And we'll respond very, very quickly for your issues.
Now, let me just talk very quickly about the high‑level leaders track.  As Anriette has said, we mostly like questions and discussions on any topic so I'll just go very quickly on the high‑level leaders track.  So this year's High‑Level Leaders track, and we've had these High‑Level Leaders track since I think it was the IGF 2011 in Nairobi so the theme or this year's High‑Level Leaders track is:  Internet Governance in the Age of Uncertainty so we are looking at Internet Governance and good Public Policy and what are the pitfalls and how do you shape good Public Policy in situations such as the COVID‑19 pandemic but not limited to the COVID‑19 pandemic.  It's any emergencies like natural disasters, hurricanes, the whole thing because we do hope that what we're experiencing now is just a singular event and of course will not be repeated but we will find some situations more localized that of course we need to react to and be prepared for.
So the High‑Level Leaders track has got five tracks.  So we're going to be looking at social development implications and things like the digital divide, inclusion, how to get those people who don't have access and those people who may be left behind and severely disadvantaged because they don't have access to Internet and Internet tools.
We're going to look at the health implications, which would range from data, how do people store your data, this tracing, et cetera.
Economic implications.  As you know, as I'm sure you've all experienced now, more and more of the economic interactions have been accelerated by the current situation we're in, and we're talking about e‑Banking, work, e‑Work, telework, et cetera.
Then environmental implications, as I think Anriette mentioned, that this is a new track, and we're going to be looking at environmental implications, everything from green ICTs and also looking at how do we share data among ourselves, how do we share data globally so we can take advantage and look after our planet as well.  And then security implications.
And as Anja already has mentioned, that we have a whole range of speakers, from Civil Society.  We have like Ms. Chatza from ACT.  From the technical community, we hear from ICANN, we hear from the United Nations, of course.  We have the Secretary‑General of UNCTAD.  We have Ms. Inger Andersen, the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Program, and Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, who is the Under‑Secretary‑General for Disarmament.  We have economists like Jeffrey Sachs, I'm sure you know him.  We have Vint Cerf.  We are very glad that he's here, as well, and he's going to be online and interacting with us.  We have a speaker from the Vatican, the Secretary of the Pontifical Council for Culture, so we have a whole range of leaders, Ministers, from all the regions, and so I think it's going to be a very balanced panel.  We have also youth.  We have youth from 15 years old in the opening and we also have youth presented in the closing as well so we have from all Sectors, from all ranges, in the High‑Level Leaders panel.  You don't have to be old and gray‑haired to be a leader.  The other thing I'd like to mention is we have the Parliamentary roundtable which is in cooperation with the interparliamentary Union and the theme or the title of this Parliamentary roundtable is:  Building trust in a time of COVID‑19 response and post‑COVID‑19 recovery.  And that's on the 10th of November, 17:00 to 18:30 hours, so we invite all Parliamentarians, legislators, to please take part in that.
This is a continuation of what we had in Berlin, and after the Berlin we had the Jimmy Schulz Call and with the Parliamentarians they're also going to have an output, a message to other Parliamentarians and that brings me to the, our outputs of I'll just go very, very quickly over the outputs and I think Anriette as well is going to also add because we've worked quite hard with the MAG and also with UNDESA, looking at these outputs, and also trying to respond to what we've had from CSTD, recommendations for improvement, from the Secretary‑General's road map for digital cooperation as well, paragraph 93, and it also lists IGF outputs, so we're going to be having outputs from the sessions, key messages.  I've mentioned the Parliamentary track.
We're going to have also outputs and key messages from the High‑Level Leaders track and a message from the IGF Youth to the youth, and we are going to also try and introduce these voluntary commitments, where people can make a voluntary commitment of some action that they're going to be doing during the course of the 2021 cycle, and these are all voluntary commitments, and you can or you cannot.  It's totally up to you.
There's a Forum on the IGF website, as well, where people can put in these voluntary commitments and you may refer to them again in the 2021 IGF.  It's totally up to you, but we think that it is good to have a really action‑oriented IGF.  The outputs, as well, will have suggestions for next steps, so it's not just going to be, oh, this is what we did in 2021, this is what we did at the IGF in 2020, full stop.  Let's start again next year on something else.  No, we're carrying it on, and we have to carry this on not just next year, but the year after that, and the year after that.
And this also includes with our Youth Program.  We listened very well and very hard to the youth, and last year when we had our open mic session there was a very clear and strong message from the youth that they do want to get more involved in the IGF, and I think this year, we have responded.
Okay, and with that focus on youth, I'll have ‑‑ I'll give the floor back to Anja.
>> ANJA GENGO:  Thank you very much, Chengetai.  Yes, basically what Chengetai said, we are among other matters focusing very much on youth.  There's a Youth Summit where we're having a number of young people from the Youth IGFs from all parts of the world speaking on three important topics that they have set as priority, which relates to the digital divide, virtual education and capacity development and hopefully the Summit will also welcome Senior stakeholders that can have a direct exchange with young people.  Through the flash sessions you can see a number of them in the schedule, we have and we're very grateful for that support from many excellent organizations from Senior stakeholders and leaderships of these where within 30 minutes they will facilitate an open, interactive direct dialogue with young people, and moderated by young people, as well, which also hopefully will give visibility to the good worth the Youth IGFs are doing.
With that, Chengetai, if you agree, there were a couple of questions in the chat.  Perhaps we could quickly go through those.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, please, yes.  I'm all about the questions, yes.
>> ANJA GENGO:  A couple of participants asked, and it's a very good question, about the when the Zoom links will be available given the different time zones and challenges so Luis may correct me but the links are available one day before the scheduled time of the session, but nothing prevents you and we really strongly advise you do that, nothing prevents you to build in advance your personal schedule and just before the session to go to your personal schedule, click on the activation link, and go straight to your session.
For the question on what do we expect from newcomers, Anriette or Chengetai if you want maybe to respond to this question, perhaps it would be better than me.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.  I mean, okay, I'll start first.  You, as a youth, you as a newcomer here, we expect you to engage.  We expect you to find what you're interested in, sessions that you're interested in.  We expect you to ask questions, because people learn from questions that are asked, so it's not just you learning.  We are learning together, as well, with the questions that you ask.
And also to share your experiences in whichever session that you're in, because you have some experiences that are unique to you, or you can look at them from a totally different perspective than other people do, because sometimes ‑‑ and it is very, very important, because some of us have been talking about these issues for the past 15 years, and if somebody comes in Year 1, this is their first year, they've got some insights that we have totally missed, so please, do not feel scared to intervene or to talk.  That's how we learn together.  That's how we make the Internet stronger by the questions, and also by sharing our experiences and best practices and not just best practices, but also practices that didn't work so well.  Thank you.
I don't know if Anriette wants to say something.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Hi, Chengetai.  Actually, I see one of the MAG members, Sylvia Cadena has also posted.  So Sylvia, why don't you add in response to that question?
>> ANJA GENGO:  Sorry, I think the host needs to unmute Sylvia if she will take the floor.  Let me see if I can do that.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  One thing I want to say while we unmute Sylvia is if this really is your first IGF, be prepared to find it overwhelming and commit to attending again.  It's actually part of the experience is to go through that process where it is very overwhelming, it's hard to decide what to follow.  You can either follow randomly and attend sessions that look interesting, or you can be more structured, really study the program but either way, it can be difficult but Sylvia you had some good suggestions in the chat.  Why don't you ask them.
>> Thanks, Anriette.  My suggestions were the same ones Chengetai just said about just engage, ask your questions, say hello when you join the chat.  That might start the conversation and help others to feel comfortable in the sessions that you are.  We make the IGF what we want IGF to be so it's your IGF so make it as interactive and engaging and productive for you as you can possibly do.  And enjoy it.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Your voice is legitimate, and that's the important thing.  The IGF is not just for experts.  It's for everybody and if somebody is using language or terminology or acronyms or jargon that they don't explain, point it out to them.  Just write in the chat, you know:  Please stop using jargon.  And it's very important.  Newcomers have a way of seeing the IGF with fresh eyes, and you notice things that those of us that have been coming for years don't notice.
So speak out, participate, complain, ask questions.  I agree with all of those points.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  I've seen some from Indonesia, there's some technical questions.  I would suggest that you do send an email to the email address that Anja put into the chat.  She's going to put it in again and you'll get a very quick answer.  I mean, I've been monitoring the ‑‑ that mailbox, and the turn‑around time is really quick, so you'll get your answer then.
Thank you.
And I'm just reading to see if there's anything else that...
Yes.
Do we have any other questions?  Or a topic that we've totally missed out?  While we're waiting for a question, and I will ask Anja, please, just point out if a question has come back in.
We did not really explain to you the format, so I'm just going to go through the different type of workshop formats that we have, until we get some questions, and as I said, I trust that Anja is just going to interrupt me.
So we've got 86 workshops, as our Chair Anriette has said.  These workshops come from the stakeholders and they were submitted and the MAG evaluated them and those were chosen and 86 of them were chosen.  We have open forums.  Now, open forums are sessions that are given to Governments or Treaty‑based organizations, and also ICANN and ISOC which aren't really Treaty based organizations but due to their standing in the Internet Community, we do give them open forums and they can showcase or tell the stakeholders activities that they've done during the previous year or things that they're planning in the next year and it could be book launches, could be reports, it could be anything.
National and regional initiatives, I think we've already come across and explained those.  Anja has done a good job explaining those.  Pre‑events.  As we said, pre‑events are events that are very important but may not quite fit into the IGF's formal schedule, and these are things, as Anriette has said, like the GigaNet, the Symposium for academics, and any other things, but of course they have to be related to the subject, the broad subject matter, which is Internet Governance.
We have the main sessions, which are mainly based on the themes, and we've also got a main session on digital cooperation, and also on COVID‑19.
We have the High‑Level Leaders' tracks which I've just explained.  We have Dynamic Coalitions.  Now, these Dynamic Coalitions are groupings of three or more stakeholders that come together to discuss issues of Internet, so it could be somebody from the private Sector, a company, a Civil Society organization and then intergovernmental organization coming together.  These are the Dynamic Coalitions that we have.  Dynamic Coalition on network neutrality.  Sustainability of journalism and new media, so I mean, they're all a wide range.  We do not prescribe them.  They just have to meet certain criteria, which is 3 or more stakeholder groups.
They have to submit a report every single year, a report, and we do have coordination calls that happen periodically, once a month or once every fortnight and as I said, they cover a whole range of topics, as you can see there.
We did mention about the Best Practice Forums, and these are Best Practice Forums and these are charted by approved by the MAG, and they produce a report at the end of the year, and we do assign them a consultant, and it could be Best Practice Forum on gender and access, for instance, and we want to provide a convening of best practices and best practices as I said it's not just good practices but also practices that may not have worked that well and the reasons why those practices have not worked, that as well as just the hope to bootstrap people who may be facing similar situations and may not know which way to go.  They can read the report and get an idea of which direction to set out on.
I don't think we've had an explanation of the social networking breaks.  Anriette, would you want to explain the social networking breaks, if you're still there?
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Actually I think Anja did mention them, so, Anja, I don't know if you wanted me to add but this is an example of how overwhelming it is.  Just look at your agenda, and you'll see there are different types of breaks, and tomorrow, there will be a break, maybe Anja can tell us what time it is, but it will be like a coffee break, where we all go into one room, or tea, depending on your culture, and we break into different breakout rooms according to what language we want to have coffee in and the idea is not really just force everyone to always speak in English, to have some informal discussion with other participants in your language.
And also just to demonstrate how much diversity there is in the IGF, so I'm going to facilitate that.  Please come to that session.  We'll see if it works.  It's an experiment and there will be one next week as well.  But have a look.  There's other Regional, for example there's a European get‑together, there are networking breaks that deal with particular problems or processes.
There's one on Internet Society, for example, so just look in your schedule for the networking sessions and find something that you can participate in.  And they're completely informal, so you can just participate and speak.  You don't have to feel that you are prepared or familiar with the issue.  They're just there for us to interact more with one another.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Thank you very much, Anriette.
>> ANJA GENGO:  Maybe, Chengetai, if you allow just to come in with one actually question that came a few minutes ago but we still didn't address it from one participant asking if all sessions are hosted in this format and can non‑panelists speak?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.  The IGF is about inclusion.  The IGF is about hearing other people's ideas, so, and we do encourage that all sessions do have space for questions.
We have done the webinar format but if you do, in the chat, request the floor, like even now, if you just give us your name and we can elevate you and you can ask your question.
For instance, rate now, I see this question from, sorry if I don't pronounce your name properly, but I see this question from Salve Nilsen, but let's see if we can get him to actually speak his question.
>> Hello.  Can you guys hear me?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, we can.
>> Sweet.  This is a completely introductory question.  I have been at the IGF before in Geneva, but I'm still looking for a definition for what the IGF, you guys, how you define the word "stakeholder" and "multistakeholder," so that I can bring that home to my own group of interested people to say:  This is relevant for us.  We should spend more time here, and get some clarity on this question.
How do you ‑‑ what is the formal definition, if you can, for who is considered a stakeholder and what stakeholder means, and please keep it short.  I don't want to take much time.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Oh, no, no, thank you for your question.  There's no real formal definition of a stakeholder but in the IGF, we group stakeholders into these groups:  Government, private sector, Civil Society, technical community, and intergovernmental organizations.
A stakeholder is anybody who has a stake in something, anybody who has a stake in the Internet, so we are looking at users of the Internet, future users of the Internet.  People who can be affected in any way by use of the Internet, so even people who don't want to use the Internet, they are stakeholders, because it still affects them and they may be ignoring it but it's still there.  We use these groups just for convenience sakes, so that's how we've been using them.  Most people can fit in there.
We have had problems that some people can be in different stakeholder groups as well, but usually they're aligned with some form, so we have the technical community that looks after the infrastructure of the Internet, and also the layers, if you see the 7 layers, but part of the technical community can also be part of the private sector, so you do have those intersections.  That's why I'm saying that they're not separate and distinct.
But part of the value of the IGF is once you come to the IGF those distinctions do not matter as such.  You are here, you are operating as an individual if you so wish.  You can speak for your organization if you wish, as well, and it will not be recorded that, hey, you said this in this Forum, et cetera.
We're here for the discourse and conversation but let me hand it over to Anriette or Anja.  Maybe they'll be a little bit more clear than I have been.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  I think the point is that it's on the one hand there is no ‑‑ it's a process of debate.  And I think the simple answer to your question is that anyone who is affected by the Internet or by not having access to the Internet actually has a stake in Internet policy decision‑making and that's what really matters.
Those groups that Chengetai projected on to the screen, that's one way of looking at stakeholders.  Not everyone agrees with that particular grouping.  It's in the WSIS documents, the World Summit on the Information Society, and I think what is really being recognized by the IGF now is that those groups are very diverse.  Business is not homogenous.  Not all businesses have similar interests in Internet Governance.  Not all Governments agree with one another and so on.
So I think the point is really:  Are you affected by Internet policy, decision‑making, public policies and regulation?  If yes, you are a stakeholder to the Internet Governance process, and then there's different ways of looking at it but I think that's the primary starting point.  Does it affect you?  Does it affect the people you work with?  Then you should be at the IGF.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, mm‑hmm.  Thank you very much, Anriette, exactly, yes.
>> Thank you very much.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Just looking out for other questions.
I don't see any other direct questions, but if we don't have questions, we can ‑‑
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Chengetai, I just looked, in the chat, one of our MAG members, Julianna, from Indonesia, is saying that an advantage of the virtual IGF is that newcomers don't have to run from one room to another.
[ Laughter ]
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  True, yes.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  I was thinking about that, as well.  If you find this online Forum confusing, the face‑to‑face Forum is actually more confusing and people get lost all the time if we are in a big conference venue, so maybe this year, it will be a little bit easier.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, yes.
I can talk.  I mean, that's ‑‑
>> ANJA GENGO:  Apologies, Chengetai.  There's a question in the Q&A from Mr. Saito.  Mr. Saito if you'd like to take the floor I can unmute you.  It's a very good question.  Let me try to unmute you.  Can you try speaking now?
>> Yes.  Can you hear me?
>> ANJA GENGO:  Yes, we can.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, we can.
>> We don't appear with a camera, right?  Just a voice at the moment.
>> ANJA GENGO:  Just the voice, yes.
>> Okay, good, good, because I attended some other meetings with the ECE and often when participants are a small number we tested before the meeting starts, and so I just realized that some of the equipments fail, and I thought it would be nice to have some separate space we can just check the equipment without disturbing the main discussion here.  Would that be possible?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  So if I get you correctly, you would suggest that we have a virtual room that's open that people can go in and out just to test their equipment?
>> Yes, exactly.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  ‑‑ to see if it's working.
>> Yes, if we do this here, then this introductory session is fine but in the main discussion, I don't want to disturb other people so I just want to go to the other place and check and come back here, if that's possible, that's very convenient.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  That's a very good idea.  We'll check with our technical team and see if that is possible.  I mean, it will have to be certain times during the day, maybe morning session and an after nan session so it won't be 8 hours.  It will maybe just be like an hour in the morning and an hour in the afternoon that you can check.
>> Okay.  Thank you very much.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  But I'll see.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  I just want to add to that, I think it's a good idea to have such a space but you know, every room you enter is different, so for example, this morning, I was in many different sessions, and in one session, I just couldn't get audio for some reason.  I just couldn't hear.  I had to reboot my computer.
But it worked well up to that point.  Something else I can suggest is that in the chat, you know how in the chat you can click on who you speak to.  You can address all panelists, if it's a webinar, all attendees, you can look for one of the hosts, particularly where it says vIGF 2020 co‑host or host and you can ask one of those people, you can say can you see me?  So just remember that even in the session while it's taking place, there are people that play a support role and you can ask them for help.
>> Okay, that's wonderful.  Thank you very much.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.  That might actually be a better option because I'm sure at the moment the technical people are tearing out their hair and if I give them another task they may ‑‑ but we'll see what we can do.  We'll talk to them.
>> Maybe it is easier in the beginning that if somebody says if you have any technical problem, please ask this person or something.  During that session.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  That's good.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  That's a very good idea, actually, that moderators, that the organizers can just check, and maybe we can send that to them as a suggestion, that we ask them to check.
And I think Sylvia Cadena, if you can look, she's just posted in the chat that you can test your own Zoom settings on your own, just to check how it looks and if it works, so that's important.
There's someone else who wants to take the floor but, Chengetai, I just wanted to emphasize to everyone, that Zoom Webinar format can be quite intimidating so I really encourage the participants and the organizers to introduce themselves in the chat, and when you use the chat, make sure that you chat not just to participants, that what you type is directed to participants or panelists and attendees, whatever.
So just, it's a bit of an alienating format, the Webinar format, because not everyone can put up their hand and speak but if we use it creatively, it can still be very inclusive.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.  Thank you.  Somebody did ask in the room, Alexey, do you want to say your question out?  I'll just give you a couple of seconds to see if you can connect.  If not, I will just give you the answer.
>> Okay, can you hear me, guys?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, we can.
>> Okay.  Thank you.  I was just wondering if there is an IGF etiquette on when you can speak, when you should not speak?  Can you interrupt?  Is there, you know, times when you can interrupt and when you should stay silent?  What is the proper way of introducing yourself, for example?  Or is it okay to omit your affiliation to an organization that you represent because your views may not represent this organization, that kind of stuff.
Thank you.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, thank you very much.  That is actually a very good question.  We especially for newcomers online, we do have the IGF Code of Conduct, and basically it just basically gives you the bare bones:  Treat all members of the IGF community well, focus discussions on remarks on issues rather than a particular person.  No ad hominem attacks, et cetera, because the IGF is about the issues not about who is perpetuating them but the problem is with the issue, well that's not even the problem but the discussion should be around the issue, not a particular entity or individual.
But ‑‑ and we do have several guides.  We even also have one guide which was produced by the German Government in cooperation with the IGF and EuroDIG, but just to answer your specific questions and we will make them more ‑‑ well, that's the difficulty because there's a lot of things we want to make more prominent but if we make everything prominent then everything is basically the same.
But, yes, for your ‑‑ yes, when you speak, you should introduce yourself.  If you're speaking on ‑‑ if ‑‑ you can introduce yourself with the entity that you represent, if you're representing the entity, and you can also introduce yourself and make it clear that you are speaking in your personal capacity.
As far as when you can ask questions, usually the moderator will say:  Now the floor is open for questions, and then will say your name, and then you can speak, so ‑‑ and we don't really encourage interruption.  You speak when you are called upon.
I think I'll stop there.  We will see how we can make these guides more prominent, maybe put them in a box.  I'm not too sure, but, yes, that's something that we should think upon.
Anja, Anriette, would you have something to add there?
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Just, I mean, just to that question, I think the moderators are supposed to open the floor to people to ask questions.  I think when they don't, you know, okay, I'm going to be very forward here.  I'm going to suggest you give them 30 minutes and if after 30 minutes of speakers, start saying in the chat:  When will we be able to ask questions?  Put a little bit of bottom‑up pressure on them, because part of the IGF's culture is that we do facilitate participation, that it's not just speakers on the panel.
So even if you feel a little bit shy.  Use your instinct, if you think it's time to open the floor then just write something in the chat, put up your hand or say, how long are the speakers going to be speaking before we can ask questions?  So it helps the moderators as well because sometimes they themselves are struggling to get their speakers to keep to the time limits and if you as a member of the audience start asking questions it can actually encourage ‑‑ it reminds people that they need to try and be brief.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, exactly.  We do say that the discussion part of any session is the most important, so it's not about giving speeches.  It's not about PowerPoint presentations.  It's mostly the questions and the discussion which is where the value is.  Anja, would you have any other ‑‑
>> ANJA GENGO:  I can't see any additional questions from the participants, so maybe whale waiting I would like just to invite all participants to pay attention to the IGF Village.  You can if you go to the IGF website, you can see it immediately on the front page.
So for those that are attending the first time the IGF in this online environment, then I am very sorry because the IGF Village is the meeting point at every IGF.  It's where we have different organizations organizing booths where they're displaying their Internet Governance related work and it's a very good place to network so this year the IGF Village is organized in the form of a virtual fair I would say.  If you go to the IGF website you can find descriptions on each booth under separate page and on 6th and 11th of November I believe around 2:00 but please do check in the schedule, we're going to organize joint tour of the IGF Village together with the booth organizers so you can join us.  It's a good opportunity to meet with people one on one to see what they're doing and usually from experience, the IGF Village for many results in some form of cooperation on certain projects and in some good friendships and good new colleagues joining your work areas.
So just wanted to remind of that.  Thank you, Chengetai.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Sorry to interrupt here.  There's a question in the Q&A panel, from Ashwin with technical questions.  So yes they said before there is this email address.  I am happy to answer or maybe if we have time here I would be happy to answer any technical questions, as well.
I can unmute you.  Or, Anja, maybe you can unmute you.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, so sorry.  We have 11 minutes left, so if we don't have any questions then we can answer the ‑‑ Luis, you can answer technical questions.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Yes, yes, yes.  Ashwin, you're unmuted already.
Is he unmuted, Anja?
>> ANJA GENGO:  I don't think so.  Sorry, my Zoom is closed.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Can you please unmute Ashwin?  Or the Host?  Some Host can please unmute Ashwin?
In the list of participants.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  I think I may have now.
>> Yes, hello?
>> LUIS BOBO:  Hello, Ashwin, thank you.  We can hear you now.  Let us know please.
>> In Indonesia we have several technical questions actually.  First of all, we need to get the contact with the volunteers.  Anja has mentioned we have to contact the technical support email, that's number one.
Number two, we want to know whether we can during the 15 minutes of 20 minutes before the time of the open Forum, can we put some videos and so on, videos or something like that?
>> LUIS BOBO:  Sure, okay, you will be panelist and you will be able that you can share content and you can share videos including your audio.  When you share there is a check box to say, also share my audio.  You can share the screen and the audio.  Several sessions it's gone very well.  If you arrive at the webinar earlier you can check that before it starts, yes.
>> All right.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  I'd just be very careful that please do not share any copyrighted material because then especially YouTube will shut the stream down, and we'll have difficulty bringing it back up.
>> Yes, yes.  Chengetai, so sorry, Chengetai, we will put videos about Indonesia using that ‑‑
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Great, yes.
>> It is our own video.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, yes.
>> Thank you to remind me of that.
We would like to know when we get arrange the question and answer, only in the chat.  Or it has to be two things, chat and direct via question?
>> LUIS BOBO:  Yeah, basically there are two things because the question and answer is basically to control the flow of the session, to control what interventions are already answered, which ones are going to be answered live or if one person simply wants to take the floor so you could just write, please give me the floor, okay?
>> Okay.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Basically that's more for social communication because as you don't see directly each other, you can see only out of the session and you can contact with people out of the session in the session description but here in the session like if it were the YouTube chat for example, in which people can comment about the session socially.  That's the idea.
>> Okay.  Yeah, yeah, thank you.  And when will you give us the link?
>> LUIS BOBO:  The link, you get it, it's this guide that Anja has shared at the beginning.  Otherwise I can share it now.  But basically, you add sessions to your schedule and then there is a unique link to go to the ‑‑ to your session, to get the link.  And this is the fast guide.  It's a very visual guide and basically you add any session to your schedule and then you just go to your schedule to find any links at all times.  Okay?  So basically you are making your links available as soon as you are adding sessions to your schedule.
>> Okay.
>> LUIS BOBO:  The second link is your personal schedule.  You have all your links, personal links, to access the sessions there.
>> Okay, so I think that's good and the rest we will send to technical support.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Okay.  That's me also.
>> This is my first time online IGF meeting, IGF meeting so it's a lot of difficult as first time for online meeting.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Thank you, happy to help.
>> Thank you, Anja.
>> Hello.  May I just speak again?  I'd like to chat with some persons in the meeting and I only see the options "all participants" or, what's the, Moderator and ‑‑ "all panelists and attendees," but is it possible to chat with an individual person or two, three people?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Not as it's set up now in the webinar format.  I don't know if Luis is still available.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Yes, thank you.  Thanks, Chengetai.  In webinar format it is not possible but this is the idea of the webinar format, that it's a unique audience so it's basically you can chat with everyone, so basically the chat is public.  You put either your chat someone, just put for example an @ at the beginning.  It's like YouTube chat, a general chat and chat only with the panelists.  In the meeting sessions we have not enabled it because the idea is that anyone should not be directly contacted if they don't want to be contacted.  This is also to avoid any kind of harassment.  It's like the general, but anyone that want to be directly contacted they have enabled that and you can contact any participant in the list at any time with that.
>> So also during a session, I understand.
>> LUIS BOBO:  No, during the session you can send any chat message.  Simply they are transparent and in the public.
>> Yes, I understand.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  I think we should wrap up now.  I will just give my final word before I hand it over to our Chair, Anriette, to give her final words.
My final word is:  Please look around, join sessions, ask questions.  It doesn't matter if you feel that you're a little bit overwhelmed or you don't understand anything, or the acronym soup or the alphabet soup that we use is a bit confusing.  You'll get to know it and ask them to explain and they should.  This is our mandate as well, capacity building so please feel free and if you have any questions please feel free to contact any of us and we will try and respond as quickly as possible.  So thank you and I hand it over to Anriette to close.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thanks, Chengetai.  I have nothing to add actually.  I think it's a learning process.  I think just remember, if you don't take risks, if you don't ask questions, if you don't speak, you're not really going to learn about it so just don't be shy.  Your voices are all legitimate and valid.  In fact that's why the IGF is convened, to bring new people into the process every year so I just want to encourage you all to participate, and thanks very much for coming to this session and thanks to all the MAG members who are present.  I hope you manage to see their names.  You can also find the MAG members' names on the IGF website.
Look for them.  If you see them as speakers, approach them, ask questions.  And even though you cannot send individual chat to somebody in a webinar mode, you can when there's a meeting but you can still send the chat to everyone and say:  Attention, for Anriette, for example so there's still ways of just reaching out to people.
So thanks very much, everyone, and I really wish you a productive IGF.
Goodbye.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Goodbye, and thank you.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Thank you all, bye.
>> ANJA GENGO:  Bye, thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-1-%E2%80%93-pre-event-igf-2020-introduction-and-orientation-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  Welcome, everyone, once again.  My duty as your host is to ensure that you have signed with the platform and to introduce you briefly, we will be using most of the time the Q&A for questions and answer as well as the chat window in case we have any issues to address.  I wish you have a fruitful discussion this morning or this after nan.  Thank you.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Thank you very much.
We'll just wait a couple more minutes.  Usually when we host meetings, we start at 2 minutes past the hour just to give people a chance to log on.  Sometimes the software is a bit slow, so we'll start at 2 minutes past. 
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Can somebody please make Anja Gengo a panelist?
>> Please, who?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Gengo.  I'll type it into the chat.
>> Okay, please do.  Anything. 
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  I think it has been added already.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  No, I don't see her.  I don't see her there.  She's in the attendees list, AG.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  Gengo?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  GENGO?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  Okay.
Anja.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  Okay, done.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  All right.  Thank you very much.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  You're welcome. 
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Sorry, not yet.
>> ELEANOR AFFUL:  Oh, okay.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Luis, if you could help.
Okay, great, then.
And it is 2 minutes past and I think the numbers are quite steady now, so I think we will start.
And, well, thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen, for joining our orientation, and newcomers session.  My name is Chengetai Masango, and I'm in charge of the IGF Secretariat, and with me I have our Chair, Anriette Esterhuysen, and Anja Gengo as well, who is our focal point for National, Regional and youth initiatives at the Secretariat.
Before I start, according to the agenda, it's a welcome so I think I'll just say a very brief welcome so I'll hand it over to Anriette.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thanks very much, Chengetai.  I'm trying to use the IGF virtual background but it looks like it's not really working, but welcome, everyone.  If this really is your first IGF, please prepare yourself for a great adventure.  The IGF is not an easy forum to feel part of, but once you do feel part of it, it's something that you look forward to every year, and you'll find yourself wanting to participate in some of the National/Regional initiatives, Youth IGF initiatives and so on.  So my name is Anriette Esterhuysen, for those of you that don't know me.
I am the, I'll switch on my video even though it's a bit scrambled, and I'm currently the Chair of the Internet governance Forum's Multistakeholder Advisory Group, and I think, Chengetai, we'll probably come to that in the agenda.  We'll tell you a bit more about the MAG, about how the IGF works and who organized the IGF but most of all I really would like everyone to ask questions.  There's no better way of us making this orientation session relevant to you than for us to be able to respond to your specific questions.
And, Chengetai, is it possible for you to share the agenda even if it's just in the chat?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, I'll copy and paste it in the chat.  Oops.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  While Chengetai does that everyone, and you can ‑‑ you have different ways of asking questions.  You can type a question in the chat, or you could type a question in the Q&A.  And by just clicking on those at the bottom of your screen, and I dearly would also like you to speak should you need to speak.  I see actually there's some old timers here, aside from myself and Chengetai and his team we have several members of the MAG, the Multistakeholder Advisory Group, who are also able to address your questions.  So, Chengetai, back to you for the brief historical overview.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Okay.  Thank you very much, Anriette.  So I'll be very brief, because I do assume that most of you do know about the IGF, and if you have any questions, please feel free to ask at the IGF.  We do prefer people to ask questions, and then we can expand on that instead of just telling you a whole lot of stuff that you may or may not be interested in.
But very briefly, the IGF is one of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society, and the world submit on the Information Society was in two phases.  There was the Geneva phase in 2003 and the Tunis phase in 2005.  So during the Geneva phase in 2003, there was a whole lot of discussion about Internet Governance and while they were discussing Internet Governance, they didn't really have a definition of what Internet Governance is or what Internet Governance should be so as the UN and the UN always does is that it formed a Working Group so this was the Working Group on Internet Governance, which was to operate between the Geneva and Tunis Summit and submit a report in the Tunis Summit on the definition of what Internet Governance was.
So they did come up with a definition, and it was really a multistakeholder effort, and the definition that they came up was that Internet Governance is the development and application of shared principles, norms, rules, and decision‑making processes and programs that shape the evolution and use of the Internet.  So that's just the short version of the definition of Internet Governance.  
And also with the WGIG report, Working Group on Internet Governance, they produced some models of how to go forth, and that model and one of those models, the model that was chosen of course, was they asked the Secretary‑General to, as you can see here, in paragraph 72 of the Tunis Agenda, we asked the United Nations Secretary‑General in an open and inclusive process, to convene, by the second quarter of 2006, a meeting of the new Forum for multistakeholder policy dialogue called the Internet Governance Forum, so the Internet Governance Forum was born then, and this is just a whole brief of the IGF mandate in Paragraph 72.  Interface with appropriate intergovernmental organizations and other institutions on matters under their purview.  Facilitate the exchange of information and best practices in this regard to make full use of the expertise from the academic, scientific and technical communities.
So you can read it on the IGF website underneath the "about," or go to the ITU website under the WSIS Forum and you can see the full mandate for the IGF.
Now, the unique thing about the IGF at that time that it was fully multistakeholder, all stakeholders would operate on equal footing.  Now, these stakeholders is the Government, Civil Society, technical community, IGOs and private sector, and they would operate under an equal fatting to discuss matters dealing with Public Policy issues dealing with Internet Governance.
And 97 Governments, Heads of State, in Tunis in 2005 approved this mandate, so we had our first mandate and it was for 5 years, and the IGF mandate has been renewed three times:  In 2010 and 2015, and in 2015, it was renewed for 10 years until 2025.
Now, just before I leave this part, I think the most important part there is that the mandate of the IGF is the Forum to discuss Public Policy issues related to key el meant of Internet Governance in order to foster the sustainability, robustness, security, stability and development of the Internet.
The Internet Governance is not just the meeting, it's not just the Forum that happens once a year.  We have intersessional activities and there are intersessional activities which I'll leave our Chair to go through, because the MAG is in charge of the meeting, formulating agenda of the meeting, and also some of the intersessional activities, and there's also the National/Regional initiatives that came up which my colleague Anja Gengo will speak about just now and the Secretary‑General also formed the Multistakeholder Advisory Group.  Now, the Multistakeholder Advisory Group is currently made up of 50 members from all the 5 stakeholder groups, from all the 5 regions and the 5 regions is Africa, Asia, WEOG, that's the Western and Other Group, which includes former Western Europe, Canada, the U.S., New Zealand, and Australia.  The South America and the Caribbean Region, and the Asia Pacific Region is considered as one Region except for Australia and New Zealand, as I have mentioned.
Now, apart from the MAG, we have the Secretariat which is based in Geneva, and the Secretariat reports to the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and that is our home institution.  The Secretary‑General asked the DESA, the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs to provide the institutional home, so they run the trust fund, the contractual space in which the IGF Secretariat runs in.
But I should really underline that the IGF is a bottom‑up, multistakeholder initiative and it was one of the first of its kind.
The IGF has had several meetings.  We ‑‑ this is our 15th IGF.  It's virtual because of the current situation, but we try and go through the various regions, so we first of all we started off in Greece, in Athens and then we went to Brazil in 2007, then India, Egypt, Lithuania, Kenya, Nairobi in 2011, Azerbaijan in 2012, all the way and then last year we had it in Germany, and next year, which was supposed to be this year, but we moved it to next year, we're going to have it in Poland, and the year after that it's going to be in Ethiopia and after that, it is going to be in Japan.
Now, that is with the IGF.  One other thing I would like to mention is that the IGF is extra‑budgetary.  It means we don't get any money whatsoever from the UN budget.  We may get indirect support, as we get indirect support from UNDESA, which does get some money from the UN budget, but everything else that we do is based on donations outside of the UN budget so it is direct donations to the IGF trust fund and the IGF trust fund of course is managed by UNDESA.
Now, some of our donors include, we've got Governments.  I think Government of Finland is our strongest donor, and then we have the Government of the Netherlands, the Swiss Government, the German Government, of course, and those are our top donors as far as the Government is concerned but since we're multistakeholder, we do have donations from other institutions, like from the private Sector we have donations from Verizon, Disney, Amazon, Google is a very strong donor for the IGF, and as far as the technical community is concerned, ISOC, ICANN, the NROs, et cetera, and then for the rest, Civil Society, et cetera, we do get donations that are directed through the IGF SA and the IGF SA, it's the IGF Support Association which was really formed as a way to help the IGF get more money since in the UN we really can't process small donations, like, $20 or $100 or even $500, which are very difficult to donate singly to the United Nations, so the IGF Support Association was formed and people can make small donations to them and they aggregate all those donations.  They give part of it to the IGF trust fund and the rest they support the National and Regional initiatives that we have.
For this meeting, I will think, I will just leave it to Anriette to just give an overview of how this meeting was formed, and also how the main theme, et cetera, was formed and then I'll come back and give an overview of the High‑Level Leader tracks and Parliamentary tracks, so over to you, Anriette.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thank you, Chengetai.  So I'm going to be quick because I actually want to respond to questions so this year the IGF MAGs, the Multistakeholder Advisory Group developed the thematic content of the IGF based on I would say two things broadly.  The first one was reflecting and evaluating the 2019 IGF and in 2019, there were only three thematic tracks and people thought very positive about that.  They felt that the IGF was more focused.  It was easier to follow.  It was easier to decide what to attend.
And the three tracks in 2019 were:  Data, trust, and inclusion.  They weren't called ‑‑ they had slightly longer names but those were the primary topics, but then the MAG as it always does put out a call to anyone.  We refer to this as the IGF Community.  It's not necessarily a cohesive community, but anyone who cares about the IGF, or who's interested in providing input, and it's a completely open process.
So the MAG put out a call for input, and based on that, the MAG received on the one hand validation.  People felt that these themes continue to be relevant, and should be part of the IGF 2020 program.  But we also got some new suggestions, and the one that had the most support was the idea of the environment, or climate change, to look at the Internet policy related challenges around environmental sustainability and climate change and that's how we ended up with this thematic structure based on four themes:  Data, environment, inclusion, and trust.
To find out more about what thinking is behind these themes, I really recommend that you look at a document called the Guide to IGF Themes and Issues, and maybe, Chengetai or Anja, you can post that in the chat.
This Guide, it's a document but it's actually very accessible document, and it will tell you more about, what do we mean by data?  Why is data important?  What did the session organizers, in other words the people who proposed the sessions, what did they have in mind when they proposed workshops that they associated with the theme on data, and so on.
So I won't say very much more about that because I think it's good that you look at the program itself, and also at the Guide.  I guess very broadly, data has to do with this proliferation of data that the Internet gives rise to, and how that can be governed, regulated, to maximize opportunities, but also to protect rights.
Similarly, trust has to do with security, with safety, with trust in what we access on the Internet and how we connect to the Internet.  Inclusion is really about making the Internet accessible to everyone, no matter what their abilities or disabilities are, where they live, and what level of connectivity they have.
And also particularly to make the Internet inclusive of the diversity that there is in the world.
And then environment is new, and you'll see that we are exploring various aspects of the impact of the Internet, the impact of digitization on the environment, but also how we can use the Internet to achieve more resilience in the light of climate change but other MAG members can say more.
So the way that the IGF works is that the MAG decides what the overall themes are, and then they put out an open call for session proposals and this is extremely important.  I know not everyone in this meeting are newcomers and I'm sure there are people in the room who have submitted a proposal to the IGF and who's been rejected, but it's a very challenging task for the MAG.  They get hundreds of session proposals that they have to review, and they apply certain criteria in reviewing these proposals and that criteria is transparent so I think for you as newcomers or anyone who would like to know more about how to participate in the IGF, it can be intimidating but my advice to you really is not to be intimidated, because the most effective way of actually getting a handle on the IGF and grasping what the IGF is about is to use it to organize a session because that's where the real power of the IGF lies.
Once you are inside the process, once you organize a workshop or organize an open Forum, there are different modalities.  You'll find them on the website.  That is when you actually are not just a participant, you actually become someone that shapes the event and that shapes the content that's discussed and that also shapes the outcomes.
So I'm going to stop there and I really would like people to ask questions, and I can say more and we have several MAG members hear who have a much closer sense of those themes than I have, because they are the ones that read all the proposals and reviewed them and actually built the program based on those proposals so let's just pause a little bit before we proceed and see if there are any hands or any questions.  I'll just checking the chat and checking the Q&A.  I don't see any questions.  Does no one have any questions at this point?  You can just tell us that you want to speak in the chat.
No, I don't see anyone.  I think, then, I'll stop there.  Maybe what I'll do though is just to highlight that aside from these themes that the program is built on, the IGF has many ‑‑ there are other opportunities.  There are networking sessions.  There are different types of sessions.  There are workshops.  The workshops are the ones I referred to that are self‑organized.  There are main sessions and usually, and that's the case again this year, there's one main session on each of the four main themes, and the MAG organizes those main sessions.
They usually are bigger.  They tend to have high‑level speakers, and they're a different type of session.  That doesn't mean you can't participate in them but workshops are usually more smaller and more intimate and more dynamic.  They're also different.  There are the open Forums and those are usually when an institution wants to share its work or tell the world more about it.  There will also be book launches and launches of research.  There will be pre‑events such as what we have this week.  So this week is all about pre‑events.  For example the GigaNet, the academic network where you have young scholars and older scholars coming together to present their work and then this is a virtual IGF so it's very different.  You might not have the same opportunity of meeting new people but at a face‑to‑face IGF, you will usually meet people that might become colleagues or collaborators, people that you could share project ideas with.  You might be able to meet somebody from your country that you've never met before, someone from a Government or a business that is actively investing in for example building internet infrastructure in your Region and really ‑‑ Internet infrastructure in your Region and that's where it lies in the unexpected and often unintended connections so I urge you even though this is a virtual IGF to look at who niece the room.  Don't be shy about emailing people.  You can contact them using the interactive schedule, tell them you'd like to chat or you'd like to find out more about what they're doing because that's a very powerful component of the IGF.  Chengetai?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, thank you.  I think we'll now just go to the next item.  I think Anja is going to present what to expect from the two weeks, just a navigational guide to the program.
>> ANJA GENGO:  Thank you, Chengetai and hello to everyone thank you for attending this session.  Welcome to the IGF first week, as Chengetai and Anriette said it can be overwhelming to attend the IGF regardless if it's in person or online first time as this year only because there are over 200 different sessions.  There are different types of sessions in addition to the very complex topics they're covering.  There are multistakeholder compositions and organizers and speakers so it takes some time to devote to study the overall schedule of the IGF and to understand how to navigate yourself through the next over two weeks of intensive discussions that are going over 6, 7 hours a day.
So let me just quickly tell you maybe from the perspective of still my fresh memory as a newcomer but then as a person as well that spent quite some time on all these documents that you're seeing now especially the schedule and other input documents.  What's very important is first of all, on a technical side to understand how to connect to each session, and we do understand that it's not quite straightforward, that it takes a little bit of time.  It takes time to devote to understanding, to go through a couple of steps which is why the IGF Secretariat has produced a very simple and detailed guide, basically a step by step guide:  How do you connect to each session?  How do you access to the Zoom session?
You can find that guide on a couple of locations on our website so there's the IGF website that as you know if you go to the new Section, you go to the Section, you will see basically in the news, the first item you see is how to connect to the IGF to the sessions and I'm pasting that link in the chat.
So it's important to register.  It's important to build your personal schedule.  I think that's the key word of this meeting, personal schedule because when you build your personal schedule that is your personalized space and that is where you get your personalized unique Zoom link to join sessions like this.  In addition to that, it's very important to look at the schedule and to understand the color‑coding of the schedule.
As colleagues said before me, the IGF is basically divided into two phases.  The first phase contains a couple of types of sessions, goes until the end of this week so we have a number of pre‑events there.  Open forums, which are sessions that are reserved for Treaty‑based international organizations and Governments, and we have NRI sessions which I'll come very soon.  Sessions that are organized by the Dynamic Coalitions which is part of our intersessional work.
Types of sessions are also explained at the IGF website but essentially, I think what's important for you to know is that each session is really multistakeholder in its nature and discusses the Internet Governance, different topics within the four thematic tracks.
I mentioned the color coding of the schedule.  Even the first week when you look at the schedule you'll notice basically four key colors.  They correspond to the thematic tracks that Anriette mentioned.  You can filter the schedule per thematic track, per tape of session, of course per day, so depending how much time you have to devote but that's something that helps navigate the schedule.
Next week is probably going to be a little bit even more complex than this one, only because we have a couple of tracks there actually we can say two tracks so in addition to the workshops, there are 85 workshops in our schedule, focused on four thematic tracks.  There's also a number of sessions that are facilitated within the high‑level leaders track.  I believe Chengetai will come to this track so is I won't be speaking about the details of those tracks but I will speak about the logistics.
So of course the high‑level track includes the prominent experts and leadership from all stakeholder groups.  If you go to the IGF 2020 meeting page and I'm going to paste the link now in the chat quickly, that's the page where all information is basically gathered in one place and probably the easiest place to find what you're trying to find regarding the IGF 2020.
If you scroll toward the end of that page, then you can see some of the participants of the high‑level leaders track.  If you'll click on more, you can see almost everyone.  We are still uploading the biographies from the high‑level participants as we receive them but we do expect that will be finalized very, very soon, probably tomorrow but you can see and have a sense about the profiles of speakers that are involved there, and also about the titles of the sessions.
Logistically speaking, that's a very important question that I received today during the networking session for the session organizers, is that the high‑level track sessions and the main sessions will be interpreted to 6 UN languages, and it's quite simple.  You just need to basically choose the channel in Zoom.  I think it's located in the bottom left corner of this display that you have now in front of yourself, and you can choose to listen in or to speak in any of the 6 official UN languages.
Transcripts are available on the IGF website shortly after the sessions are concluded, most definitely the next day.  The same is with the recording of the youth group.  You can also broadcast live, watch the live broadcast of all the sessions.  All sessions including the pre‑events these that we're having today and tomorrow, are streamed live on our YouTube account.  Main sessions and sessions of the high‑level leaders track are also going to be streamed through UN Web TV.
The IGF 2020 meeting page contains a very visible link to the streaming platforms, so you can follow that.  Anriette mentioned to watch the schedule for several networking sessions.  This is a work in progress because the community is submitting requests to host a couple of networking formal social events but I do believe that today we'll have the majority of the program finalized in that regard.  So that's quite a good spaces specially if you're new in this space to network and meet other colleagues.  There will be focused networking sessions which will allow you to meet more closely for example the MAG Chair, the members of the MAG, the IGF Secretariat, to meet and learn more about intersessional work, to meet the teams of people that are standing behind the outputs of the intersessional work such as the Dynamic Coalitions so all in all quite a lot of work for you as users and participants but if you go to the meeting page, I think that's the key really to find your space and especially to build your personal schedule as I said at the beginning.
So I'll stop here, Chengetai, I'm sure I said too much probably.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  No, no, thank you very much.  That was great.  Now very quickly we'll have Luis Bobo.  He is our technical person in the IGF Secretariat and he will just tell us very quickly how to connect to each session, and what to do if you face a technical issue.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Hello, thank you, Chengetai.  I am basically, yeah, I think Anja explained it very well.  There is a guide at the top of the IGF website which says how to connect to the sessions.  It's a very good, very visual guide, and basically the idea as Anja said is that you create your schedule, so you can navigate each session and each session at the top right corner, you can add the session to your schedule, so like that, you are building your participation in the IGF.
Then from any of these session places at all times, you can access your schedule, your own schedule, and then it's there where you can find all the links to access the sessions, okay?  Those are personalized.  You click on the link and you get your own personal link to connect to the sessions, and also your email.
The last point is that you can also in each session download the calendar just to get the remainder for the session, or even in the email you can also get your calendar reminder so as not to forget and I think that's all from my side.  Thank you, Chengetai.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Thank you very much, and Anja has just put into the chat the email address that you can use if you have any technical issues, and we also have a Help Desk function on the IGF website so you can click that and just type, if you have a technical issue.  And we'll respond very, very quickly for your issues.
Now, let me just talk very quickly about the high‑level leaders track.  As Anriette has said, we mostly like questions and discussions on any topic so I'll just go very quickly on the high‑level leaders track.  So this year's High‑Level Leaders track, and we've had these High‑Level Leaders track since I think it was the IGF 2011 in Nairobi so the theme or this year's High‑Level Leaders track is:  Internet Governance in the Age of Uncertainty so we are looking at Internet Governance and good Public Policy and what are the pitfalls and how do you shape good Public Policy in situations such as the COVID‑19 pandemic but not limited to the COVID‑19 pandemic.  It's any emergencies like natural disasters, hurricanes, the whole thing because we do hope that what we're experiencing now is just a singular event and of course will not be repeated but we will find some situations more localized that of course we need to react to and be prepared for.
So the High‑Level Leaders track has got five tracks.  So we're going to be looking at social development implications and things like the digital divide, inclusion, how to get those people who don't have access and those people who may be left behind and severely disadvantaged because they don't have access to Internet and Internet tools.
We're going to look at the health implications, which would range from data, how do people store your data, this tracing, et cetera.
Economic implications.  As you know, as I'm sure you've all experienced now, more and more of the economic interactions have been accelerated by the current situation we're in, and we're talking about e‑Banking, work, e‑Work, telework, et cetera.
Then environmental implications, as I think Anriette mentioned, that this is a new track, and we're going to be looking at environmental implications, everything from green ICTs and also looking at how do we share data among ourselves, how do we share data globally so we can take advantage and look after our planet as well.  And then security implications.
And as Anja already has mentioned, that we have a whole range of speakers, from Civil Society.  We have like Ms. Chatza from ACT.  From the technical community, we hear from ICANN, we hear from the United Nations, of course.  We have the Secretary‑General of UNCTAD.  We have Ms. Inger Andersen, the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Program, and Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, who is the Under‑Secretary‑General for Disarmament.  We have economists like Jeffrey Sachs, I'm sure you know him.  We have Vint Cerf.  We are very glad that he's here, as well, and he's going to be online and interacting with us.  We have a speaker from the Vatican, the Secretary of the Pontifical Council for Culture, so we have a whole range of leaders, Ministers, from all the regions, and so I think it's going to be a very balanced panel.  We have also youth.  We have youth from 15 years old in the opening and we also have youth presented in the closing as well so we have from all Sectors, from all ranges, in the High‑Level Leaders panel.  You don't have to be old and gray‑haired to be a leader.  The other thing I'd like to mention is we have the Parliamentary roundtable which is in cooperation with the interparliamentary Union and the theme or the title of this Parliamentary roundtable is:  Building trust in a time of COVID‑19 response and post‑COVID‑19 recovery.  And that's on the 10th of November, 17:00 to 18:30 hours, so we invite all Parliamentarians, legislators, to please take part in that.
This is a continuation of what we had in Berlin, and after the Berlin we had the Jimmy Schulz Call and with the Parliamentarians they're also going to have an output, a message to other Parliamentarians and that brings me to the, our outputs of I'll just go very, very quickly over the outputs and I think Anriette as well is going to also add because we've worked quite hard with the MAG and also with UNDESA, looking at these outputs, and also trying to respond to what we've had from CSTD, recommendations for improvement, from the Secretary‑General's road map for digital cooperation as well, paragraph 93, and it also lists IGF outputs, so we're going to be having outputs from the sessions, key messages.  I've mentioned the Parliamentary track.
We're going to have also outputs and key messages from the High‑Level Leaders track and a message from the IGF Youth to the youth, and we are going to also try and introduce these voluntary commitments, where people can make a voluntary commitment of some action that they're going to be doing during the course of the 2021 cycle, and these are all voluntary commitments, and you can or you cannot.  It's totally up to you.
There's a Forum on the IGF website, as well, where people can put in these voluntary commitments and you may refer to them again in the 2021 IGF.  It's totally up to you, but we think that it is good to have a really action‑oriented IGF.  The outputs, as well, will have suggestions for next steps, so it's not just going to be, oh, this is what we did in 2021, this is what we did at the IGF in 2020, full stop.  Let's start again next year on something else.  No, we're carrying it on, and we have to carry this on not just next year, but the year after that, and the year after that.
And this also includes with our Youth Program.  We listened very well and very hard to the youth, and last year when we had our open mic session there was a very clear and strong message from the youth that they do want to get more involved in the IGF, and I think this year, we have responded.
Okay, and with that focus on youth, I'll have ‑‑ I'll give the floor back to Anja.
>> ANJA GENGO:  Thank you very much, Chengetai.  Yes, basically what Chengetai said, we are among other matters focusing very much on youth.  There's a Youth Summit where we're having a number of young people from the Youth IGFs from all parts of the world speaking on three important topics that they have set as priority, which relates to the digital divide, virtual education and capacity development and hopefully the Summit will also welcome Senior stakeholders that can have a direct exchange with young people.  Through the flash sessions you can see a number of them in the schedule, we have and we're very grateful for that support from many excellent organizations from Senior stakeholders and leaderships of these where within 30 minutes they will facilitate an open, interactive direct dialogue with young people, and moderated by young people, as well, which also hopefully will give visibility to the good worth the Youth IGFs are doing.
With that, Chengetai, if you agree, there were a couple of questions in the chat.  Perhaps we could quickly go through those.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, please, yes.  I'm all about the questions, yes.
>> ANJA GENGO:  A couple of participants asked, and it's a very good question, about the when the Zoom links will be available given the different time zones and challenges so Luis may correct me but the links are available one day before the scheduled time of the session, but nothing prevents you and we really strongly advise you do that, nothing prevents you to build in advance your personal schedule and just before the session to go to your personal schedule, click on the activation link, and go straight to your session.
For the question on what do we expect from newcomers, Anriette or Chengetai if you want maybe to respond to this question, perhaps it would be better than me.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.  I mean, okay, I'll start first.  You, as a youth, you as a newcomer here, we expect you to engage.  We expect you to find what you're interested in, sessions that you're interested in.  We expect you to ask questions, because people learn from questions that are asked, so it's not just you learning.  We are learning together, as well, with the questions that you ask.
And also to share your experiences in whichever session that you're in, because you have some experiences that are unique to you, or you can look at them from a totally different perspective than other people do, because sometimes ‑‑ and it is very, very important, because some of us have been talking about these issues for the past 15 years, and if somebody comes in Year 1, this is their first year, they've got some insights that we have totally missed, so please, do not feel scared to intervene or to talk.  That's how we learn together.  That's how we make the Internet stronger by the questions, and also by sharing our experiences and best practices and not just best practices, but also practices that didn't work so well.  Thank you.
I don't know if Anriette wants to say something.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Hi, Chengetai.  Actually, I see one of the MAG members, Sylvia Cadena has also posted.  So Sylvia, why don't you add in response to that question?
>> ANJA GENGO:  Sorry, I think the host needs to unmute Sylvia if she will take the floor.  Let me see if I can do that.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  One thing I want to say while we unmute Sylvia is if this really is your first IGF, be prepared to find it overwhelming and commit to attending again.  It's actually part of the experience is to go through that process where it is very overwhelming, it's hard to decide what to follow.  You can either follow randomly and attend sessions that look interesting, or you can be more structured, really study the program but either way, it can be difficult but Sylvia you had some good suggestions in the chat.  Why don't you ask them.
>> Thanks, Anriette.  My suggestions were the same ones Chengetai just said about just engage, ask your questions, say hello when you join the chat.  That might start the conversation and help others to feel comfortable in the sessions that you are.  We make the IGF what we want IGF to be so it's your IGF so make it as interactive and engaging and productive for you as you can possibly do.  And enjoy it.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Your voice is legitimate, and that's the important thing.  The IGF is not just for experts.  It's for everybody and if somebody is using language or terminology or acronyms or jargon that they don't explain, point it out to them.  Just write in the chat, you know:  Please stop using jargon.  And it's very important.  Newcomers have a way of seeing the IGF with fresh eyes, and you notice things that those of us that have been coming for years don't notice.
So speak out, participate, complain, ask questions.  I agree with all of those points.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  I've seen some from Indonesia, there's some technical questions.  I would suggest that you do send an email to the email address that Anja put into the chat.  She's going to put it in again and you'll get a very quick answer.  I mean, I've been monitoring the ‑‑ that mailbox, and the turn‑around time is really quick, so you'll get your answer then.
Thank you.
And I'm just reading to see if there's anything else that...
Yes.
Do we have any other questions?  Or a topic that we've totally missed out?  While we're waiting for a question, and I will ask Anja, please, just point out if a question has come back in.
We did not really explain to you the format, so I'm just going to go through the different type of workshop formats that we have, until we get some questions, and as I said, I trust that Anja is just going to interrupt me.
So we've got 86 workshops, as our Chair Anriette has said.  These workshops come from the stakeholders and they were submitted and the MAG evaluated them and those were chosen and 86 of them were chosen.  We have open forums.  Now, open forums are sessions that are given to Governments or Treaty‑based organizations, and also ICANN and ISOC which aren't really Treaty based organizations but due to their standing in the Internet Community, we do give them open forums and they can showcase or tell the stakeholders activities that they've done during the previous year or things that they're planning in the next year and it could be book launches, could be reports, it could be anything.
National and regional initiatives, I think we've already come across and explained those.  Anja has done a good job explaining those.  Pre‑events.  As we said, pre‑events are events that are very important but may not quite fit into the IGF's formal schedule, and these are things, as Anriette has said, like the GigaNet, the Symposium for academics, and any other things, but of course they have to be related to the subject, the broad subject matter, which is Internet Governance.
We have the main sessions, which are mainly based on the themes, and we've also got a main session on digital cooperation, and also on COVID‑19.
We have the High‑Level Leaders' tracks which I've just explained.  We have Dynamic Coalitions.  Now, these Dynamic Coalitions are groupings of three or more stakeholders that come together to discuss issues of Internet, so it could be somebody from the private Sector, a company, a Civil Society organization and then intergovernmental organization coming together.  These are the Dynamic Coalitions that we have.  Dynamic Coalition on network neutrality.  Sustainability of journalism and new media, so I mean, they're all a wide range.  We do not prescribe them.  They just have to meet certain criteria, which is 3 or more stakeholder groups.
They have to submit a report every single year, a report, and we do have coordination calls that happen periodically, once a month or once every fortnight and as I said, they cover a whole range of topics, as you can see there.
We did mention about the Best Practice Forums, and these are Best Practice Forums and these are charted by approved by the MAG, and they produce a report at the end of the year, and we do assign them a consultant, and it could be Best Practice Forum on gender and access, for instance, and we want to provide a convening of best practices and best practices as I said it's not just good practices but also practices that may not have worked that well and the reasons why those practices have not worked, that as well as just the hope to bootstrap people who may be facing similar situations and may not know which way to go.  They can read the report and get an idea of which direction to set out on.
I don't think we've had an explanation of the social networking breaks.  Anriette, would you want to explain the social networking breaks, if you're still there?
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Actually I think Anja did mention them, so, Anja, I don't know if you wanted me to add but this is an example of how overwhelming it is.  Just look at your agenda, and you'll see there are different types of breaks, and tomorrow, there will be a break, maybe Anja can tell us what time it is, but it will be like a coffee break, where we all go into one room, or tea, depending on your culture, and we break into different breakout rooms according to what language we want to have coffee in and the idea is not really just force everyone to always speak in English, to have some informal discussion with other participants in your language.
And also just to demonstrate how much diversity there is in the IGF, so I'm going to facilitate that.  Please come to that session.  We'll see if it works.  It's an experiment and there will be one next week as well.  But have a look.  There's other Regional, for example there's a European get‑together, there are networking breaks that deal with particular problems or processes.
There's one on Internet Society, for example, so just look in your schedule for the networking sessions and find something that you can participate in.  And they're completely informal, so you can just participate and speak.  You don't have to feel that you are prepared or familiar with the issue.  They're just there for us to interact more with one another.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Thank you very much, Anriette.
>> ANJA GENGO:  Maybe, Chengetai, if you allow just to come in with one actually question that came a few minutes ago but we still didn't address it from one participant asking if all sessions are hosted in this format and can non‑panelists speak?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.  The IGF is about inclusion.  The IGF is about hearing other people's ideas, so, and we do encourage that all sessions do have space for questions.
We have done the webinar format but if you do, in the chat, request the floor, like even now, if you just give us your name and we can elevate you and you can ask your question.
For instance, rate now, I see this question from, sorry if I don't pronounce your name properly, but I see this question from Salve Nilsen, but let's see if we can get him to actually speak his question.
>> Hello.  Can you guys hear me?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, we can.
>> Sweet.  This is a completely introductory question.  I have been at the IGF before in Geneva, but I'm still looking for a definition for what the IGF, you guys, how you define the word "stakeholder" and "multistakeholder," so that I can bring that home to my own group of interested people to say:  This is relevant for us.  We should spend more time here, and get some clarity on this question.
How do you ‑‑ what is the formal definition, if you can, for who is considered a stakeholder and what stakeholder means, and please keep it short.  I don't want to take much time.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Oh, no, no, thank you for your question.  There's no real formal definition of a stakeholder but in the IGF, we group stakeholders into these groups:  Government, private sector, Civil Society, technical community, and intergovernmental organizations.
A stakeholder is anybody who has a stake in something, anybody who has a stake in the Internet, so we are looking at users of the Internet, future users of the Internet.  People who can be affected in any way by use of the Internet, so even people who don't want to use the Internet, they are stakeholders, because it still affects them and they may be ignoring it but it's still there.  We use these groups just for convenience sakes, so that's how we've been using them.  Most people can fit in there.
We have had problems that some people can be in different stakeholder groups as well, but usually they're aligned with some form, so we have the technical community that looks after the infrastructure of the Internet, and also the layers, if you see the 7 layers, but part of the technical community can also be part of the private sector, so you do have those intersections.  That's why I'm saying that they're not separate and distinct.
But part of the value of the IGF is once you come to the IGF those distinctions do not matter as such.  You are here, you are operating as an individual if you so wish.  You can speak for your organization if you wish, as well, and it will not be recorded that, hey, you said this in this Forum, et cetera.
We're here for the discourse and conversation but let me hand it over to Anriette or Anja.  Maybe they'll be a little bit more clear than I have been.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  I think the point is that it's on the one hand there is no ‑‑ it's a process of debate.  And I think the simple answer to your question is that anyone who is affected by the Internet or by not having access to the Internet actually has a stake in Internet policy decision‑making and that's what really matters.
Those groups that Chengetai projected on to the screen, that's one way of looking at stakeholders.  Not everyone agrees with that particular grouping.  It's in the WSIS documents, the World Summit on the Information Society, and I think what is really being recognized by the IGF now is that those groups are very diverse.  Business is not homogenous.  Not all businesses have similar interests in Internet Governance.  Not all Governments agree with one another and so on.
So I think the point is really:  Are you affected by Internet policy, decision‑making, public policies and regulation?  If yes, you are a stakeholder to the Internet Governance process, and then there's different ways of looking at it but I think that's the primary starting point.  Does it affect you?  Does it affect the people you work with?  Then you should be at the IGF.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, mm‑hmm.  Thank you very much, Anriette, exactly, yes.
>> Thank you very much.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Just looking out for other questions.
I don't see any other direct questions, but if we don't have questions, we can ‑‑
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Chengetai, I just looked, in the chat, one of our MAG members, Julianna, from Indonesia, is saying that an advantage of the virtual IGF is that newcomers don't have to run from one room to another.
[ Laughter ]
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  True, yes.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  I was thinking about that, as well.  If you find this online Forum confusing, the face‑to‑face Forum is actually more confusing and people get lost all the time if we are in a big conference venue, so maybe this year, it will be a little bit easier.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, yes.
I can talk.  I mean, that's ‑‑
>> ANJA GENGO:  Apologies, Chengetai.  There's a question in the Q&A from Mr. Saito.  Mr. Saito if you'd like to take the floor I can unmute you.  It's a very good question.  Let me try to unmute you.  Can you try speaking now?
>> Yes.  Can you hear me?
>> ANJA GENGO:  Yes, we can.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, we can.
>> We don't appear with a camera, right?  Just a voice at the moment.
>> ANJA GENGO:  Just the voice, yes.
>> Okay, good, good, because I attended some other meetings with the ECE and often when participants are a small number we tested before the meeting starts, and so I just realized that some of the equipments fail, and I thought it would be nice to have some separate space we can just check the equipment without disturbing the main discussion here.  Would that be possible?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  So if I get you correctly, you would suggest that we have a virtual room that's open that people can go in and out just to test their equipment?
>> Yes, exactly.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  ‑‑ to see if it's working.
>> Yes, if we do this here, then this introductory session is fine but in the main discussion, I don't want to disturb other people so I just want to go to the other place and check and come back here, if that's possible, that's very convenient.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  That's a very good idea.  We'll check with our technical team and see if that is possible.  I mean, it will have to be certain times during the day, maybe morning session and an after nan session so it won't be 8 hours.  It will maybe just be like an hour in the morning and an hour in the afternoon that you can check.
>> Okay.  Thank you very much.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  But I'll see.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  I just want to add to that, I think it's a good idea to have such a space but you know, every room you enter is different, so for example, this morning, I was in many different sessions, and in one session, I just couldn't get audio for some reason.  I just couldn't hear.  I had to reboot my computer.
But it worked well up to that point.  Something else I can suggest is that in the chat, you know how in the chat you can click on who you speak to.  You can address all panelists, if it's a webinar, all attendees, you can look for one of the hosts, particularly where it says vIGF 2020 co‑host or host and you can ask one of those people, you can say can you see me?  So just remember that even in the session while it's taking place, there are people that play a support role and you can ask them for help.
>> Okay, that's wonderful.  Thank you very much.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.  That might actually be a better option because I'm sure at the moment the technical people are tearing out their hair and if I give them another task they may ‑‑ but we'll see what we can do.  We'll talk to them.
>> Maybe it is easier in the beginning that if somebody says if you have any technical problem, please ask this person or something.  During that session.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  That's good.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  That's a very good idea, actually, that moderators, that the organizers can just check, and maybe we can send that to them as a suggestion, that we ask them to check.
And I think Sylvia Cadena, if you can look, she's just posted in the chat that you can test your own Zoom settings on your own, just to check how it looks and if it works, so that's important.
There's someone else who wants to take the floor but, Chengetai, I just wanted to emphasize to everyone, that Zoom Webinar format can be quite intimidating so I really encourage the participants and the organizers to introduce themselves in the chat, and when you use the chat, make sure that you chat not just to participants, that what you type is directed to participants or panelists and attendees, whatever.
So just, it's a bit of an alienating format, the Webinar format, because not everyone can put up their hand and speak but if we use it creatively, it can still be very inclusive.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes.  Thank you.  Somebody did ask in the room, Alexey, do you want to say your question out?  I'll just give you a couple of seconds to see if you can connect.  If not, I will just give you the answer.
>> Okay, can you hear me, guys?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, we can.
>> Okay.  Thank you.  I was just wondering if there is an IGF etiquette on when you can speak, when you should not speak?  Can you interrupt?  Is there, you know, times when you can interrupt and when you should stay silent?  What is the proper way of introducing yourself, for example?  Or is it okay to omit your affiliation to an organization that you represent because your views may not represent this organization, that kind of stuff.
Thank you.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, thank you very much.  That is actually a very good question.  We especially for newcomers online, we do have the IGF Code of Conduct, and basically it just basically gives you the bare bones:  Treat all members of the IGF community well, focus discussions on remarks on issues rather than a particular person.  No ad hominem attacks, et cetera, because the IGF is about the issues not about who is perpetuating them but the problem is with the issue, well that's not even the problem but the discussion should be around the issue, not a particular entity or individual.
But ‑‑ and we do have several guides.  We even also have one guide which was produced by the German Government in cooperation with the IGF and EuroDIG, but just to answer your specific questions and we will make them more ‑‑ well, that's the difficulty because there's a lot of things we want to make more prominent but if we make everything prominent then everything is basically the same.
But, yes, for your ‑‑ yes, when you speak, you should introduce yourself.  If you're speaking on ‑‑ if ‑‑ you can introduce yourself with the entity that you represent, if you're representing the entity, and you can also introduce yourself and make it clear that you are speaking in your personal capacity.
As far as when you can ask questions, usually the moderator will say:  Now the floor is open for questions, and then will say your name, and then you can speak, so ‑‑ and we don't really encourage interruption.  You speak when you are called upon.
I think I'll stop there.  We will see how we can make these guides more prominent, maybe put them in a box.  I'm not too sure, but, yes, that's something that we should think upon.
Anja, Anriette, would you have something to add there?
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Just, I mean, just to that question, I think the moderators are supposed to open the floor to people to ask questions.  I think when they don't, you know, okay, I'm going to be very forward here.  I'm going to suggest you give them 30 minutes and if after 30 minutes of speakers, start saying in the chat:  When will we be able to ask questions?  Put a little bit of bottom‑up pressure on them, because part of the IGF's culture is that we do facilitate participation, that it's not just speakers on the panel.
So even if you feel a little bit shy.  Use your instinct, if you think it's time to open the floor then just write something in the chat, put up your hand or say, how long are the speakers going to be speaking before we can ask questions?  So it helps the moderators as well because sometimes they themselves are struggling to get their speakers to keep to the time limits and if you as a member of the audience start asking questions it can actually encourage ‑‑ it reminds people that they need to try and be brief.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, exactly.  We do say that the discussion part of any session is the most important, so it's not about giving speeches.  It's not about PowerPoint presentations.  It's mostly the questions and the discussion which is where the value is.  Anja, would you have any other ‑‑
>> ANJA GENGO:  I can't see any additional questions from the participants, so maybe whale waiting I would like just to invite all participants to pay attention to the IGF Village.  You can if you go to the IGF website, you can see it immediately on the front page.
So for those that are attending the first time the IGF in this online environment, then I am very sorry because the IGF Village is the meeting point at every IGF.  It's where we have different organizations organizing booths where they're displaying their Internet Governance related work and it's a very good place to network so this year the IGF Village is organized in the form of a virtual fair I would say.  If you go to the IGF website you can find descriptions on each booth under separate page and on 6th and 11th of November I believe around 2:00 but please do check in the schedule, we're going to organize joint tour of the IGF Village together with the booth organizers so you can join us.  It's a good opportunity to meet with people one on one to see what they're doing and usually from experience, the IGF Village for many results in some form of cooperation on certain projects and in some good friendships and good new colleagues joining your work areas.
So just wanted to remind of that.  Thank you, Chengetai.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Sorry to interrupt here.  There's a question in the Q&A panel, from Ashwin with technical questions.  So yes they said before there is this email address.  I am happy to answer or maybe if we have time here I would be happy to answer any technical questions, as well.
I can unmute you.  Or, Anja, maybe you can unmute you.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, so sorry.  We have 11 minutes left, so if we don't have any questions then we can answer the ‑‑ Luis, you can answer technical questions.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Yes, yes, yes.  Ashwin, you're unmuted already.
Is he unmuted, Anja?
>> ANJA GENGO:  I don't think so.  Sorry, my Zoom is closed.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Can you please unmute Ashwin?  Or the Host?  Some Host can please unmute Ashwin?
In the list of participants.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  I think I may have now.
>> Yes, hello?
>> LUIS BOBO:  Hello, Ashwin, thank you.  We can hear you now.  Let us know please.
>> In Indonesia we have several technical questions actually.  First of all, we need to get the contact with the volunteers.  Anja has mentioned we have to contact the technical support email, that's number one.
Number two, we want to know whether we can during the 15 minutes of 20 minutes before the time of the open Forum, can we put some videos and so on, videos or something like that?
>> LUIS BOBO:  Sure, okay, you will be panelist and you will be able that you can share content and you can share videos including your audio.  When you share there is a check box to say, also share my audio.  You can share the screen and the audio.  Several sessions it's gone very well.  If you arrive at the webinar earlier you can check that before it starts, yes.
>> All right.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  I'd just be very careful that please do not share any copyrighted material because then especially YouTube will shut the stream down, and we'll have difficulty bringing it back up.
>> Yes, yes.  Chengetai, so sorry, Chengetai, we will put videos about Indonesia using that ‑‑
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Great, yes.
>> It is our own video.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Yes, yes.
>> Thank you to remind me of that.
We would like to know when we get arrange the question and answer, only in the chat.  Or it has to be two things, chat and direct via question?
>> LUIS BOBO:  Yeah, basically there are two things because the question and answer is basically to control the flow of the session, to control what interventions are already answered, which ones are going to be answered live or if one person simply wants to take the floor so you could just write, please give me the floor, okay?
>> Okay.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Basically that's more for social communication because as you don't see directly each other, you can see only out of the session and you can contact with people out of the session in the session description but here in the session like if it were the YouTube chat for example, in which people can comment about the session socially.  That's the idea.
>> Okay.  Yeah, yeah, thank you.  And when will you give us the link?
>> LUIS BOBO:  The link, you get it, it's this guide that Anja has shared at the beginning.  Otherwise I can share it now.  But basically, you add sessions to your schedule and then there is a unique link to go to the ‑‑ to your session, to get the link.  And this is the fast guide.  It's a very visual guide and basically you add any session to your schedule and then you just go to your schedule to find any links at all times.  Okay?  So basically you are making your links available as soon as you are adding sessions to your schedule.
>> Okay.
>> LUIS BOBO:  The second link is your personal schedule.  You have all your links, personal links, to access the sessions there.
>> Okay, so I think that's good and the rest we will send to technical support.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Okay.  That's me also.
>> This is my first time online IGF meeting, IGF meeting so it's a lot of difficult as first time for online meeting.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Thank you, happy to help.
>> Thank you, Anja.
>> Hello.  May I just speak again?  I'd like to chat with some persons in the meeting and I only see the options "all participants" or, what's the, Moderator and ‑‑ "all panelists and attendees," but is it possible to chat with an individual person or two, three people?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Not as it's set up now in the webinar format.  I don't know if Luis is still available.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Yes, thank you.  Thanks, Chengetai.  In webinar format it is not possible but this is the idea of the webinar format, that it's a unique audience so it's basically you can chat with everyone, so basically the chat is public.  You put either your chat someone, just put for example an @ at the beginning.  It's like YouTube chat, a general chat and chat only with the panelists.  In the meeting sessions we have not enabled it because the idea is that anyone should not be directly contacted if they don't want to be contacted.  This is also to avoid any kind of harassment.  It's like the general, but anyone that want to be directly contacted they have enabled that and you can contact any participant in the list at any time with that.
>> So also during a session, I understand.
>> LUIS BOBO:  No, during the session you can send any chat message.  Simply they are transparent and in the public.
>> Yes, I understand.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  I think we should wrap up now.  I will just give my final word before I hand it over to our Chair, Anriette, to give her final words.
My final word is:  Please look around, join sessions, ask questions.  It doesn't matter if you feel that you're a little bit overwhelmed or you don't understand anything, or the acronym soup or the alphabet soup that we use is a bit confusing.  You'll get to know it and ask them to explain and they should.  This is our mandate as well, capacity building so please feel free and if you have any questions please feel free to contact any of us and we will try and respond as quickly as possible.  So thank you and I hand it over to Anriette to close.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thanks, Chengetai.  I have nothing to add actually.  I think it's a learning process.  I think just remember, if you don't take risks, if you don't ask questions, if you don't speak, you're not really going to learn about it so just don't be shy.  Your voices are all legitimate and valid.  In fact that's why the IGF is convened, to bring new people into the process every year so I just want to encourage you all to participate, and thanks very much for coming to this session and thanks to all the MAG members who are present.  I hope you manage to see their names.  You can also find the MAG members' names on the IGF website.
Look for them.  If you see them as speakers, approach them, ask questions.  And even though you cannot send individual chat to somebody in a webinar mode, you can when there's a meeting but you can still send the chat to everyone and say:  Attention, for Anriette, for example so there's still ways of just reaching out to people.
So thanks very much, everyone, and I really wish you a productive IGF.
Goodbye.
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  Goodbye, and thank you.
>> LUIS BOBO:  Thank you all, bye.
>> ANJA GENGO:  Bye, thank you.
[ End of session ]
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-ws260%E2%80%8Ecovid-19%E2%80%8E%E2%80%9Cdis-infodemic%E2%80%9D%E2%80%8Echallenges%E2%80%8Elessons-opportunities-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
 
>> GUY BERGER: Good afternoon.  Thank you very much.  If you're not speaking, please mute your mic so we can time to have the best audio possible. 
You will find that this is very timely of a topic.
A quick introduction and we'll post three ideas on what this session is all about.
I'm Guy Berger, I work at UNESCO, I'm very much involved in the communication internet sector, with the type of work that we're doing to look at the free flow of information (WEONG) it is part of the constitution there and we have become very super conscience of dis‑infodemic during this COVID period and we hope that COVID‑19 pandemic will become history, it is raging and the effect willing long lasting and this information, it is not only in the COVID space.  Here we'll particularly look at what it means to understand and deal with this question of COVID dis‑infodemic.  In particular, I have been involved in a report called balancing act and I'll post the link in the chat there.  This balancing act, it was done for an institutional Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development, and the Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development, it was started in the UN system and it had a lot of commissioners that are linked to various NGOs, companies, regulators, ministry, so on.  We have two questions with us today.  I'll introduce them later.
This Broadband Commission decided to commission a Working Group to look at the information.  This was even before this period.  Looking at this information in context of freedom of expression, how you balance the two, so after about a year's worth of work led by Julie Posetti and others, they produced a report that was almost 300 Pages long.  What's unique about this report, it looks at the responses to dis‑infodemic.  Not the debate on the information and what touches on that, but how people are responding, how they're responding across the supply of the dis‑infodemic, the transmission of the dis‑infodemic and the receipt of the dis‑infodemic.  It is of course very important with this idea that we look at this, it is about the big internet companies that have involved in this.
Really what, we find, it is that dis‑infodemic and COVID is condensing a lot of issues around internet governance and in fact, these, of course, impact not only the distribution but they have relevance of the supply and at the receipt and the study, it is a balancing act, it is a very big rich study, while we were doing that, we decided to do policy briefs focused specifically on the question of dis‑infodemic, particularly during the COVID period and there is a quiz that's come out of this and we're working on more tools that we will coming up with and it says we'll have toolkits, so on.
In the meantime, we have to look at what are the issues that arised out of the study and what it means for our understanding of COVID dis‑infodemic.  To start with, we have the author of the study, the director of research for the international center of journalists and also a senior researcher at the center for freedom of the media in the U.K. and a research associate at the University of Oxford in the U.K. 
Please, give us the quick overview of this research, and then we'll jump into our discussions.  Over to you. 
>> JULIE POSETTI: Bear with me as I get the slide show ready here.
As Guy said, I'm a researcher and a journalist and I come at these issues from those perspectives.  As we all know, COVID‑19 has led to a parallel crisis, a pandemic of disinformation that's directly impacted on all of us really, on our health and ability to access reliable information.  One of the reasons we pivoted as Guy said during the work on the big study to produce to small ‑‑ two smaller policy briefs on the dis‑infodemic, we were seeing ways in which COVID‑19 related disinformation were potentially elements that were potentially deadly and so in confusion on policy choices and the personal safety choices we were making.
Within these three pieces of work we're addressing all of the Spectrums of the disinformation Spectrum rain what's original, we're looking at the targets of the intervention rather than the individual actors, if you like, at assessing responses as well, importantly in terms of freedom of expression and implications and we have seen a range of risks associated with prebomb of expression erosion as a result of the extreme responses to disinformation during the COVID period.
It is also a body of work underpinning the studies geographically diverse, very much hard work was trying to be put into representing voices from the Global South in particular and particularly with the dis‑infodemic briefs, our objective, it was we would try to flatten the curve of COVID‑19 disinformation.  Let me take you through over key points here.  I'll fiddle with my screen a bit to see what I'm doing as well.
Important distinction to make, we're calling this a dis‑infodemic, not an infodemic per se.  The reason for that, because the infodemic as expressed originally by the World Health Organization refers to this tsunami of information both information, incredible content and false information.  Disinformation so, we have coined this term dis‑infodemic to show the disinformation and the misinformation.  The reason why we're using disinformation quite generally as an umbrella for disinformation and misinformation, because misinformation is often seeded when it goes viral by acts of disinformation.  The other point so note, influencing that decision to use disinformation generically was the reality that much of the false and misleading information we're seeing in connection with COVID‑19 is extremely damaging potentially and possibly deadly.
The effects of the disinformation of false, misleading content likely to be the same regardless of whatever the intent was behind the creation and distribution of it.
With the disinformation briefs, we identified nine key themes that were associated with the dis‑infodemic and we developed this tie apology of things on the basis of an examination of databases that were being kicked by the international fact checking network and also we were influenced by the work of our first draft and Claire Wardle is on this panel discussion and will provide additional insights based on their own analysis.  You can see on the screen there nine different types, the idea of the origins, the spread of coronavirus, they manipulated often for political reasons, statistical manipulation, deacon textualization, much false and misleading content connected to economic impacts, and one really dangerous situation has evolved with regard to the targeting of journalists in the context of disinformation campaigns, which have escalated, in the context of COVID‑19.  Medical and scientific related misinformation going to the very nature of the disease and how it man fasts, it impacts society and the environment and the one that will pay more attention politicalization, which is also connected to the attacks on journalists we mentioned earlier, so as much as there is an acceptance by many stays and political actors, of COVID‑19 factual basis and the responses to it, they're in accordance with that, there has been a real attempt to politicalize using the tools of disinformation and content driven by fraudulent financial gains along with W. celebrity‑focused disinformation.
We also identify four key formats of disinformation, the ways in which the content was distributed, emotional narrative constructs and memes, fabricated websites, authoritative identity, trying to mislead people by creating false authorities and false websites, including websites pro porting to be news sites along with decontectualized images and videos that sometimes are altered or fabricated and those actors looking to infiltrate networks, seed orchestrated campaigns, those were the four main formats.  Beyond that, we developed a typology of COVID‑19 disinformation responses and and that follows the identification and the monitor of the disinformation, it looks at the producers and the distributors of the disinformation along with the production and distribution mechanisms and support offered to audience, the targets of disinformation we had in context of the COVID‑19 dis‑infodemic and then we looked at 10 types of responses which we extended to 11 different types in the context of the broadband and UNESCO ‑‑ the Broadband commission and UNESCO report balancing act, the reason for that, it was that we added to that an element under the category of responses aimed at producers and distributors that emphasized electoral responses and of course we're in a situation now where we have a great need to emphasize electoral responses in the context of the U.S. election and interestingly taking it to 11 subcategories of responses, these are often designed to detect and track and counter disinformation that's spread during elections.  The separate category was designed in recognition of the threats to democracy and electoral processes and citizens' rights associated with disinformation.
Based on that, it is important to think about the distinctions and the intersections or overlaps between COVID‑19 disinformation and political disinformation.  As you can see there, we have the situation that COVID is genuinely global and political information is specific to individual states or regions although we're seeing trends towards global issues related to sort of polarizeation based on populous politics, COVID‑19 disinformation is massive in scale and jumps across internet services or sites or apps resulting in swifter, decisive responses from internet communication companies and this is raised as issues around challenges to freedom of expression and potential erosion of international Rights of freedom of expression and privacy and so on, this is continuing to be politicalized which undermines to an extent the cross‑party agreement that we saw earlier on in the crisis in reference to managing and responding to COVID‑19.
A data point from a recent study that I ran with Emily bell and Pete brown from Colombia University, which I think adds textures to this, we surveyed 1400 English speaking journalists infrom a diverse geographic locations and we found substantial evidence of political leaders and elected officials being identified as the main sources of disinformation which correlates with other research being done in reference to audiences.  We see that I think as a feature that should feed into responses and recommendations.
Just to highlight a few of the recommendations now that we made being both within the Broadband Commission balancing act ‑‑
>> GUY BERGER: I have to interrupt, Julie.
If you could just stop it there and wrap it up.
>> JULIE POSETTI: Hard to time keep with a Zoom with no clock.
It is probably the point to highlight, it is that there is a 23‑step freedom of expression tool to assess responses to disinformation in the Broadband Commission book which we encourage people to delve into and apply, it is a practical response and I think the recommendation to states to political actors of all sorts, to avoid engaging in political disinformation tactics which is an ongoing problem, we have to address the source of this problem along with a couple of recommendations aimed at the internet communications companies, number one being to apply fact checking to all political content and to ensure transparency and independence with regard to their intervention, particularly with regard to funding.
I'll leave it there, that all of these recommendations, it is something like 85 of them I think available in the documents that's been shared by Guy.
Thank you.
>> GUY BERGER: Thank you so much, Julie.
I think that gives a nice perspective of the key insights at the top of the recommendations and also shows you the overlap between COVID disinformation, political disinformation, how what we learn from one space could move to the other space.  Especially when the issues are being combined.
Let's move on to the speakers now and our first speak, Tina, Tina Purnat, in digital health technologies in the World Health Organization.  Of course, she and her colleagues have been right at the forefront of this issue carrying the brunt of the infodemic, it drives what people do on the ground, their behavior.  Let's ask Tina about one, two, maybe three of the major efforts made by World Health Organization to counter disinformation and misinformation with COVID‑19.
>> Tina Purnat: Thank you, Guy, very much for this opportunity.
Yes.  As both Julie and you have pointed out, in public health space when we're looking at the infodemic we're concerns with either too much information and also false or misleading information both in the digital and physical environment because what we experienced during public health emergencies is that all of this leads to confusion or risk taking and behaviors that can harm health.  That of course leads ‑‑ can potentially lead to mistrust and public authorities and public health response.  What you're seeing, increasingly misinformation and disinformation with the pandemics, and nids, they intensify or lengthen outbreaks if enough people change their behavior based on misinformation or lack of trust.  We recognized early on in the pandemic that we need to really think through, consult across all of society, already in April, how we can step together in order to respond to the infodemic and the results of that April consultation actually resulted in a framework for managing infodemics and 50 actions of all parts of society can do to help respond to that infodemic.  What we really feel is that infodemic response requires a whole society response and this includes health authorities, fact checker, Civil Society organization, academia, social media, tech sector, media, journalist, a couple of examples,, so one is definitely partnership with social media and the tech sector to promote placements of high‑quality content, health information online, including building of chatbots and other tools, and we also partnered up with the UN Secretary‑General's office to support the verify campaign, for example, which was designed to build awareness among the public on the circulating health and misinformation and promoting citizen skills to take pause before they share information and we have identified with several others on media and journalism trainings and the use of the science for better monitoring and evaluation on infodemic response, reaching communities through a variety of channels.
In the spirit of whole society response, really what we have seen, it is needed for response, now in the next step, it is operationalizing the response.  For example, in the African continent, WHO regional office for Africa stepped together with a variety of partners, UN organizations, fact checkers and other operational partners to really put together an infrastructure and collaboration allowing a more nimble response to misinformation.  This is something that's not been done before and we're building the ship as we're flying it and it is really significant response, a whole‑society response.  What we recognize is that we need to build a workforce, we need to build up skills for infodemic response across all of society but also in the health sectors because we're just running an infodemic manager training that's extremely multidisciplinary in nature looking at what's the evidence and what kind of interventions grounded in communities looking at people, human‑centered to help us build resilience to misinformation.  Of course, you know, recognizing this, coming up in December, we're taking stock at the next whole society conference on infodemic management where we need toe chart out next steps in the response going into 2021 and really how to promote health behaviors and then also build resilience to misinformation and I'm pleased that all of the talks that are following this one, because all of us have a role to play and all of our perspectives can come together.
Thank you.
>> GUY BERGER: Thank you.
A quick follow‑up, I understand that you have got the perspective of the infodemic and what you want to do, it is to increase the supply of quality content and the visibility, verified content, and combat the disinformation and the misinformation, so you at the World Health Organization, you are creating a kind of research field, nid‑eology, you have had one conference, another in December, what can you tell us about how it actually works on the ground?  People are involved in exposure to some content and some is good, some of it is damaging, how are people actually reconciling that?  What are you finding for the evidence?  That affects how we're going to respond.
>> Tina Purnat: Yes.  One major consideration when we're thinking about how does health misinformation effect people's behavior, there are actually ‑‑ there's no comprehensive review or evidence informing this, there is still a lot to learn about what actually ‑‑ what is the connection between people receiving information, having an intent to act and then acting in a certain way.  This is one of the reasons why we feel that ‑‑ we have brought together a variety of scientific disciplines over the summer to develop public health research agenda for the infodemic management.
We cannot assume that by merely providing information to people that that will result in health behaviors.  There's such a variety of factors that effect people's decision to act or to share misinformation that we really need to understand what affects this and any interventions, building resilience, it really needs to lap at the individual and community level.  This is something that's very challenging.  We all experience infodemicies locally in our community lives, our personal lives, but this require as retool, a rethinking of how we respond and at the same time feedback that from what we learn, both offline online, operational research, but then it feeds immediately into response by health authorities, fact checkers, media partners to promote information to respond debunking, for example, other interventions that responds to the infodemic.  A lot of things need to be learned but what's really clear is that we need to really put people at the center, communities at the center, ensure participatory cooperation, both of understanding interventions and also for the design of what actually is important for the people in the communities to inform then how we respond to locally to the infodemics.
Thank you.
>> GUY BERGER: Indeed, Tina.
It is something that's been underlined by Clare, the information, it is the tip of the iceberg, you have the emotion under that, you have the community norms, you have the family relationships, so to tackle this at the informational level, it is really important but not the only part of the equation.  For researcher, they're pointing out that in the future.
Let's move on to the next speaker.  Beeban Kidron, a film maker and also the Chair of the foundation and a commissioner on the Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development and was in the Working Group that oversaw this UNESCO study that was was introduced.  Thank you for being here.
>> BEEBAN KIDRON: A pleasure.
>> GUY BERGER: I know that you see there is a gap in the study, a children's point of view on disinformation and how this disinformation can impact young people, especially relationally.  What's your comments on this?  How do we understand COVID disinformation not only as an adult but the impact on young children, young people?
>> BEEBAN KIDRON: Thank you, Guy.  Thank you very much.
At 300 pages, this is a rich study and there is much to get your arms around so my concern and my concern throughout the pandemic really has been about the way that children are largely forgotten in the disinformation debate.  You know, they're a demographic most likely to get information online and they don't have a habit of traditional news media, in fact, doing my own personal study and I spend an awful lot of time with teenagers and I always ask do you read the newspaper and they look at me blankly.  You know, they don't have money to get behind pay wall, some of the information, some of the good information is not accessible to them.
On the whole ‑‑ not whole, I think, I know, but we're finding out that on the whole, they have quite a poor information diet and it is something that they're very anxious about and I think that when you see this play out in the pandemic, there was a wonderful moment in I think it was about April where there was one report from the center of disease role, you know, the intersection of the two report, they say those who see most health conspiracy, they're less likely to social distance and wash hands, if you map that against children and young people media habits, here they are in this intersection and they were also sent a false message of a kind, a grain of truth message that it doesn't effect them.
So we have this other piece of information and then they then, you know, are in this sort of toxic place where they believe things they shouldn't believe, think that they are immune, don't do the necessary and take that disease home and think about responsibility of that and the problems of that..
Moreover, this is not our last health crisis, is it?  What we're teaching, a whole generation not to believe.  Whatever lives it is costing now, there is a long tail of this not sitting in a vacuum and one of the things that preCOVID I was at pains to point out, it is who are the real victims of the anti vac movement?  Children.  Yeah.  Even that is not played out from their perspective.
  You know, an informed society may not translate to a healthy society, I believe it is the best chance that we have and I think if we sacrifice the plurality of verified and all of that information, that that sort of confusion, doubt, that I'm referring to, it is the result.  I do want to do a shoutout to Julie and colleagues because I thought that it was very, very strong of a report on the roll of journalists and I think we have to look at the decimation of that community, of the news community as one part of her picture.
At some sense, the free speech justification to avoid responsibility for responding sift swiftly, decisively to disinformation has undermined the freedom of the press and and the usefulness of the press to all of us and I just want to perhaps say one very brief thing, brief observation and I was really ‑‑ I really hear loud and clear from Tina, the whole society approach and clearly that's true with most problems of this scale, it must be true, we all have a part to play, and that's also sort of reflected in the recommendations of the report.
While we must defend any single person, freedom to speak, I don't think we can quite say that about the right to package up and sell and spread particularly when packaged as entertainment bad information.  I think there is separation between the spread and the host of information and the creation of the information, it is something that we could perhaps spend more of our time worrying about. 
>> GUY BERGER: The first one, what to do about it, a lot of people say, everybody just needs more digital literacy, whatever that may mean.
So to educate, particularly young people, those that are dealing with the complicated communication environment, what are the top competencies that you think that young people need.
>> BEEBAN KIDRON: You're right, it is something that people can grab off the shelf, it is not working, let's educate them to be clever about it.  It is an important principle but we don't create a system that's toxic, making the solution it that prepubescent kids need to make nuanced decisioned beyond their capability, that's a no‑no.  We have to move to a place, having said that, that's actually about a data literacy, a systems literacy, a literacy about automated systems, algorithmic, human bias, paid for content, visual literacy, checking authorship, checking sources and very importantly, checking who paid for information.  I would like to see that as a marker on the spread of information.  Who paid for it?  There are things that can be learned and in my role, I spend a lot of time with young children doing data literacy workshops and they become very, very sophisticated about understanding all sorts of problems.  I absolutely insist that's not a solution, that's something we need in the 21st Century alongside masks, language, numeracy skills.
>> GUY BERGER: I have to ask you one last question.
When one is growing up, you are still forming your identity, emotions are really being developed, you don't necessarily know who you are yet, you are vulnerable to all kinds of measures, ideas, what is fashionable, what's beautiful.  This information content, this aspect, it reinforces the racism, it reinforces sexism, so help to us unpack in terms of the harmful ‑‑ potentially harmful cop tent that young people are exposed to, what is the disinformation component as opposed to this emotional identity component.  Does it have an effect ‑‑ for example, you gave the COVID thing.  How does that case get the surrounding perspective like Tina was saying the epidemiology perspective.
>> BEEBAN KIDRON: I'm not sure I can do as good of a job as Tina did.
Let me quote the report back.
It makes a really very important point towards the end and it talks about that you can't absolutely separate out heath disinformation from the political disinformation, from the climate change disinformation and so on, what it starts to do, hang on, there is people and planet as well as profit and it doesn't put it like that, those are my ‑‑ that's my language, you know, it does make that point in a cool way.  You have to look at that, about the industrial levels of self‑harm, pro ana stuff, incitements to suicide, the violence in the hands of 8 years olds, why are these not a health crisis?  I think saying that's a health crisis for a number of years ‑‑ I have been ‑‑ and in the context of childhood, I think some of it is disinformation and I am a very, very keen advocate for free speech and I'm not saying we should block and ban stuff like that, those where you want, don't put it in the hands of kids without them even inviting it and so I sort of make my same point again saying the pandemic, it has been a miserable time but we must learn let sons and they're profound, if we follow the pattern of health misinformation, some of the solutions that we find for that are solutions for these broader issues around what is disinformation in childhood. 
>> GUY BERGER: Let's move on to our next speaker that I'm sure will be equally interesting.  Piotr Dmochowski‑Lipski, Executive Director of the intergovernmental organization and a member of the Working Group that oversaw this piece of work.
A point that we have heard, a warning that you shouldn't offload the problems to the victims, as it were, and ‑‑ it was indicate that had we need some effective measures without violation from that intraspeks.  You deal with policy issues and not immediate but how do you see the role of policy and regulation in looking at this information and question, particularly around COVID and building public trust.
>> PIOTR DMOCHOWSKI-LIPSKI: You just said the word, it is trust.  Actually it is saying I understand the main theme of this particular module of the IGF.
We're dealing with issues pertaining to public policy and public policy ‑‑ just my opinion ‑‑ cannot focus on just one crisis which we have right now.  Right.
We have to understand that there will be life after that, people have said that, Beeban, before that, it shaped our culture, legal systems, so on..
If the societies and the plethora of different culture, different societies, they create networks of responses to this particular crisis and have to remember that whatever we put in the law, whatever is in the regulations, it is in the law, for good or for bad.  The typology that the researchers put together in this report to endorse, policy responses, it is mostly focused on the responses aimed at protection, distribution of the disinformation, it is the truth but it is more broader than that.
States or entities that regulate our lives, governments, regulatory environment, law, enforcement and all that ancient Romans wall imperial, right now in my opinion, they're crossroads.  We're ‑‑ we run a risk of creating the system that may not help this particular and this information and pandemic in the time before hopefully the vaccine is done but creating a lot of harm for the future.
This is recognized in the report, this broadly speaking, everything pertaining to freedom of speech, Freedom of Information.  All the responses aimed at producers and distributors could basically be divided into two major methods, methodology.
One, it is negative, basically prohibiting somebody from spreading the disinformation, effecting the platforms and the certain panel way, using panel codes, so on, and then there is positive ways.  For example, using state funds to promote fact checking, to promote general awareness and so on.  I think that just to finish this first intervention, the principle question from somebody that's been involved in setting governmental policies is to recognize the possible effects for the future as much as we're focused on actual fighting with the crisis at hand.  We in the report, we say that it is better to organize and promote certain positive stimulus and positive ways of behavior rather than focused only on regulating and enforcing new laws which may be too hasty and enacted, enacted too soon.
I will stop there unless there are questions.
>> GUY BERGER: Normally, we think of regulation and it is enabling the damage.
I know that another issue that is of interest to, it is this question of culture and dealing with disinformation so, we have spoken a bit already about how information is part of a bigger human condition which includes norms, communities, emotion, fear, aspirations, identities and culture, it is not something that this report was really made for, but previous to why we think that we need to understand culture in the face of responses to disinformation, especially around COVID.
>> PIOTR DMOCHOWSKI-LIPSKI: I'm adding something to the report as ‑‑ I actually hope and recommend to everybody listening to actually read the report, which is very good and could be useful also.
Let me start with this, bar I jump to the culture thing.  This is actually which is in the report.
There are certain constraints of public policy response to this crisis and taking into account possible ramifications in the future.
First constraint, it is very technical, it is that the pace of technology is faster than whatever the states and lawmakers and regulators can ‑‑ second, the international dimension and the international dimension, it brings me to the cultural aspect.
You can have in one society an approach to the regulations, just completely different from another and the definitions of disinformation, it is different.  The approach, for example, whether to penalize or criminalize this information or not, it is different.
Leaving COVID aside, let's say disinformation about head of state, in one country, it is a right, a Constitutional right, the other is criminalized and only punished with a slap on the wrist or a $100 fine and the other carries a death penalty.
How in the global sense can we create the right legislative or regulatory approach to spreading false news, even if following on the previous speakers, even if we can define what is false or what is not, which is a task in itself.
The answer to the question, I ask myself, it is that we cannot ‑‑ this is exactly what I would call the cultural dimension or the cultural environment and it depends on our set of beliefs.
I grew up in a country that for many, many years was governed by an oppressive communist system and all of the free speech could be and was on many occasions penalized not as disinformation, but basically ‑‑ not as political ‑‑ excuse me for ‑‑ as political free speech but disinformation.  Culture, it is very important because law itself, and we're talking about law, yeah, mostly, public policy law, and both in terms of creating it and then enforcing it, it all stems from culture and vice versa.
Just to finish and to conclude, I myself find myself in a strange situation because I very much believe in public policy, I think we should do ‑‑ those of us that have something to do with public policy, we should do everything possible to solve this crisis and not to create too much harm, but eventually be cultural changes that we actually witnessed in Europe and other countries, most recently in ‑‑ you know, United Arab Emirates, for example, other places, my native country, eventually, those culture changes will define public policy with regard to disinformation.
In the meantime, we have highly skilled technical people who are working day in and day out to make this job even more difficult for public policy creators.
>> GUY BERGER: I hope you can hear me.  My mic is not working well.
I think we'll certainly hear from Steven about the issues for the case of technology communications company dealing with the different regimes and trying to have some respect for international standards and dealing with the culture.
Let's move on before we come to Stephen to be clear, so Clare is many things, among other things, she's an expert advisor on the study.  Thank you for all of the time you have put into giving advice to the researchers.
She was, of course, very well‑known as one of the founders of first draft new, which leads to strategy and research and so a first draft, it is ‑‑ you know, it is a leading research agency looking at the whole phenomena and how it is changing, and particularly has worked to service the media in terms of how media can really play a better role in terms of covering disinformation.
Tell us a bit about how you do this, how media can cover the story without giving more oxygen to it. 
>> CLAIRE WARDLE: Thank you.  Thank you for inviting me on to this panel and to give more props to Julie and the team, I really couldn't believe it when it dropped and it was so long, trying to get a handle on this topic because it shifts all the time, it is an excellent piece of work and will be one of those documents that will remain really relevant, it is a concept as opposed to the tactics and techniques as just explained, they keep changing.
It was founded in 2015 as website to teach journalists how to verify images and videos online.  Then, a year later, in 2016 many people became interested in how to verify what's true online but our focus has always been media institutions as a key element in the information ecosystem and I will say that over the last year, we have recognized that the media is just one of many, many critical gate keepers and as we're seeing, there are many people, unfortunately in many, many countries that no longer see the news media as gate keepers, we're now increasingly working with other organizations and the challenge for the media is they need to be trusted by the audience.  There is now a reason why different government, politicians have a reason to undermine that trust.  The challenge for the news media is that they have always had a paradigm of more sunlight is a disinfectant that by shining a light on something, you're going to uncover truths and that's at the core of journalism.
The problem is, that has been weaponized and used against the news media.  Look at this shiny thing over here, come report that.  Journalists have unfortunately been used increasingly over the last few years and Julie is a right, a tactic, a technique to deliberately have the media cover rumor it's and conspiracy, if the media didn't cover them, they may not have that audience.  Disinformation actors are relatively small in number and they don't really have an audience, they're only effective if they turn this or create a process by which the disinformation turns into misinformation.
When people believe it, share it, not realizing that it is false, not realizing it is harmful and the media is a critical element of the ecosystem and as we have seen over the last four years in the country that I currently live in, the U.S., which is the media have been caught in a very difficult position because the main driver of disinformation in the U.S. has been the President and administration.  It is very, very difficult for news media to say we're not going to give oxygen to these rumors because it is a story in itself.  It has been an incredibly tough time and I think we're seeing many news media now grappling with what's happened over the last four years and how they move forward.  As we have seen, there's been a determined effort not just by trump, but by leaders around the world to undermine an independent media as deliberate tactic.  Act dental research shows when you ask people in the street what's news, CNN, BCC, New York Times, they see these previously trusted organizations as being part of a system that's against them.  Where we go here, from here, it is critical.  There is no ‑‑ you know, as was said, every country is different, every news ecosystem is different, I'm not making grand claims globally, but there are many, many worrying therns in many countries around the world that suggest you have half the population turning to trusted news sites for information and half of the population not.  That's absolutely playing out in the U.S. right now, it is like two parallel realities and that's ‑‑ I don't know where we come back from that.  It is a real worry ‑‑ the New York Times this week published a story after interviewing 50 secretaries of state to say was there any examples of election fraud in your states and of course, everybody said no, and the New York Times put it on the front page.  I don't think there was any New York Times reader that was like oh, thank you for letting me know.  I was want sure.
So how do we reach the 50% of the populous that are not consuming the New York Times and believe that the election was rigged?  Thinking through this, we can't keep having discussions about misinformation, disinformation as a problem of the platforms, it is, there's a lot of work to be done there, if we don't think about how the media ecosystem fits within all of that we're missing out and to Tina, who is ‑‑ I just have to pointed out, it is exciting to have Tina on the call, the work being done with the WHO, training up over 280 people in every country in the world is just wonderful.  I want to say there's a lot of things to talk about but Tina is a doer, how great is that!  What she was saying on how do we root this in communities, how do we understand all of these different elements, platforms, news media, government, all of this ‑‑ we have to understand it ‑‑ and to ‑‑  what do we do together with this problem.  The internet companies, they're not completely neutral unless more and more they have to take some moderation and currational position.  Do we see a kind of more possibility for better relations, I don't mean sweetheart relations but I mean some but pulling resources to make sure that verified information does ‑‑ they have the deliberate falsehoods, the annotations, all of that, how do we deal with that disinformation.
>> CLAIRE WARDLE: We're talking about the platforms, we have seen more actions in the platforms in the last three months than the last 10 years and on one hand, I'm glad we are seeing that and that's a step forward in terms of the recognition that there can't be a handoff approach.  All of the researchers on the call will nod with me, it is insane will is no independent oversight on any of this.  Props to twit, they blocked a post last night and listed the amount of take down, how it effected retweeting, it is a huge step forward and I'm excited about it.
I just would really want to see some independent analysis alongside the platforms marking their own homework.  We're getting there, it is good.  We can't keep saying these take downs are ultimately a good thing unless we understand the unintended consequences of what's it mean that more people are moving to parlor this week?  We need to understand what it means to have these take downs and what it means to the wider communication ecosystem.
I do think the relationship between the media and the platforms continues to be tense and my slight frustration with that is that this relationship is one that the platforms unfortunately have benefited from the news media during a lot of this research and investigations and ultimately becoming content moderators for the platforms, the news media are deeply frustrated with the platforms because of business model issues, what it means, I feel that we're sort of stuck in this tech clash paradigm that's not necessarily helpful for saying what's the public need and instead it is just this angry relationship between the PR guys and the platforms and the disinformation journalists and I think ultimately to Guy's point, we have to recognize there is a mixture of decreasing bad quality information and increasing quality information.  It is a question of who is a quality information provider, does ‑‑ do all users believe that they're a quality information provider, and back in March, there was a sigh of relief from platforms, it is okay, we can hang on to the WHO!  It is okay!  They can make the decisions.  Then as we realize that this complex, science takes time to develop a consensus on a new virus, and unfortunately, it was a couple of missteps in the health authorities, there was a sense of we want trust, what's it mean?  This is complex.  There aren't easy solutions.  It is easy to say that increase this, decrease that, as was said by Piotr Dmochowski‑Lipski, definitions of both of these, they're really, really, really again in every different country with different media ecosystems, so as ever we'll continue to talk about these issues for years and years to come.  It is okay.  There is no easy solution to this.  It is the challenge of our times.  They are very important questions.
>> GUY BERGER: Thank you.
That brings us to Stephen.  Thank you for being here, you are engaging in those issues.
Now, you're a director of public policy in the European Union for Twitter and I guess you could also speak from the global perspective, but tell us how you see these connections in the misinformation in the spaces, with COVID, what you're doing about it in general, this phenomena that impacts other areas as well?
>> STEPHEN TURNER: Thank you.  Thank you everyone for all of the great contributions so far.  (Poor audio quality).  (Poor audio quality). 
>> GUY BERGER: There's a bit of an echo, I don't know if you step back ‑‑
>> (Poor audio quality).  (Poor audio quality). 
>> GUY BERGER: Try and witch the mic on and off.  Let's try that..
>> (Poor audio quality)..
>> GUY BERGER: Claire Wardle, associate directer of a fact checking network, and so we come having covered a lot of ground with issues such as culture norms, emotion, identity, we come back to this question of fact checking.
Could you tell us, Christy you are in the international fact checking network, give us a sense of the network and then tell us how you have been working and what impact you see from fact checking, has fact checking had an impact that was talked about that you could create more friction in the system in terms of the flow of disinformation.
Over to you.
>> CRISTINA TARDAGUILA: Hey, everyone.  Thank you for having me.  I'm talking to you from Tampa, in Florida, it is a pit early for me still.
First I wanted to share the great news that I just got, that the coronavirus fact alliance, the group that we put together back in January to fight COVID‑19 misinformation has been selected by the Paris peace forum to be supported for one year which means that the work that we have been doing together as fact checkers to fight all of the hoaxes and we have detected more than 9,000 hoaxes so far is being highly recognized.  I was a bit late in the call, I was in the other event just learning that and I really want to share this with you and thank you for the support that you have been putting out and we really need support here, being a tough, tough year as you may know.
To your question, the ‑‑ well, fact checkers, they definitely ‑‑ they definitely believe that they do have a high impact and I can kind of tell you why.  We have based on the coronavirus fact database we put together, 9300 hoaxes that have been duo bunked, we managed to identify different waves of misinformation, waves that went global and I can detail that if you feel that's important in call, but what we're really proud of, it is the fact that we managed to kill or minimize some of those waves and I'm talking about, you know, we're no longer seeing people blaming the vac suit, that's global, we're not receiving those videos and images of people fainting in supermarkets and subway, that's gone, because ‑‑ there are so many other ‑‑ China is no longer burning people that are effected, these hoaxes were big in sectors of this year and I truly believe that if it wasn't for fact checkers and their attitude towards working together and fast those hoaxes would still be around and the misinformation environment and the disorder would be much worse.  Of course, we still need a lot of research and the database is now being shared with about ‑‑ I said 10 but I think it is 12 researchers that sent us the papers to use the database and they're analyzing more information regarding the impact so we're looking forward to having more data regarding the impact if that be helpful, I would be happy to share with you all as soon as possible.
>> GUY BERGER: Thank you.
Congratulations.
I think the work that you do to coordinate this international fact checking initiatives, it is super important and they need that practice and support because they need the support.  There is a second chapter in the study, it is on the effect, what it involves, how independent is it, how it could be weaponized in some cases and also then what the companies can do to support it.  Let me ask you then, what do you think is the biggest challenge faced by fact checking at the moment?  Is it the nature of the activity?  Is it because you can fact check and then people didn't care about facts?  Is it that we tonight have enough money?  Tell what you say are your biggest challenges?
>> CRISTINA TARDAGUILA: Right now I believe there are a few huge challenges to be honest!.
I believe the biggest challenge is the amount of misinformation.  If you take a look at the fact checking community, it is not big to be honest.  I'm Brazilian as some of you may know, and just ‑‑ I can just use some numbers from Brazil.  Brazil has 20 million ‑‑ 200 million people and about 50 fact checkers.  That doesn't quite go well, right?  There are lots and lots of misinformation floating around.  They will never, ever be fact checked and they can be very, very harmful.  The amount of misinformation is a big issue in the planet.
The second problem I would say is the relationship or the lack of a relationship with some important platforms.  We do have a good relationship and a program with Facebook and Instagram and we still don't have anything in place with Twitter, with others and there are so many ‑‑ how many false resumes are we seeing around the planet right now?  You know, I believe this would be an important move for 2021 to make sure that the platforms understand that they should work with fact checkers because we do have a code of ethics and that keeps us ‑‑ keeps us on track.
We need ‑‑ when we fight against misinformation, you have to be ‑‑ you have to be transparent, you have to have a methodology, and, you know, you have to have a correction policy and I kind of fear that platforms are moving towards solving the issue of misinformation on their own as we saw Twitter labeling some tweets in the U.S. election with kind of no transparency on how they choose and how they do it.
Connected to that idea, I would say that we could, and we need as a fact checking community, to explain to the platforms that whatever policy they put in place in the United States, it should be taken worldwide.  What we're seeing, it is some content there some policy, enforcement that works in the U.S., but doesn't work anywhere else.
You know, we are ‑‑ we need to understand that misinformation, it doesn't respect barriers so this would be a very important thing.  I'm glad to say that I think for the first time fact checking is not out of money.  It was a sad but good year for fact checkers.
Of course, we need to, as I said in the first point, to have more people fact checking, our teams need to grow. 
>> GUY BERGER: Now we have Stephen back.  Stephen, let's see if the audio works better now. 
>> (Poor audio quality)..
>> GUY BERGER: Thank you.  I hope my micing is working okay.
There is a vibrant chat going on, and it is in Q&A, please, if I can ask people to join both of those as we continue.
We have I think about 15 minutes left.  I'm going to ask each of the speakers to sum up what do you think is the number one issue related to internet governance that you take away from this discussion and the issue of discrimination around COVID.
What's the number one issue, internet governance?  Let me say, remembering that internet governance is a question of norms, principles, programs, practices, in the field of a lot of different actors in particular roles that they play.
>> JULIE POSETTI: I would highlight, however, I think that per a report that was publish that had I consulted on earlier this week by the democracy forum, the onus needs to be to a large extent on the platforms.  It is a result of the newly structured information ecosystem in which we live that we have this in the first instance.  There is information to the biggest extent and I would cautious against news organizations and platforms ‑‑ caution against ‑‑ working in a critical sense and I highlight the need for extreme transparency and governance, independent governance of funding of various programs and interventions.  I don't think we can take our eyes off of that.  That's something that a friend and colleague Maria would insist on me highlighting as the individual case study in all of these issues converging in a very cataclism ic way.
That does not preclude collaboration that's done with all of those caveats in place.
I want to give kudos to Steven Turner to turn up beside the audio issue, we need good faith in transparency and a seat at the table from the platforms.  And I have personally, and from a research per sec active, I have been impressed with what Twitter attempted to do, particularly in the context of the U.S. election does information that we're seeing.  This study, it was also over seen to an extent from the Broadband Commission, that Facebook is not at this table.  I think it is important in the interest of transparency, with an eye to governance to highlight that fact and there needs to be, you New York City trust between the various actors in the processes.
The other important thing I would like to briefly highlight, it is it has been said several times, I think that we must try to secure independent critical journalism as much as we possibly can in the context of internet governance, how do we enable it to be better surfaced, how do we insist upon funding mechanisms that support journalism as a potential bull work, yeah, there are many actors, information providers, what we're seeing in an erosion of the critical journalism, its role as a pill already of democracy, it is amiss in the tsunami of misinformation, disinformation, I want to end with that point.    there is rich, interesting interventions here that we can take away.  Decide want to unline those two things.  Thank you. 
>> GUY BERGER: Thank you so much.
Tina, 2 minutes, or 1 and a half minute?
>> Tina Purnat: Thank you.
Yeah.  I would like to bring in the health perspective to this.  So health is a Human Rights.  People have the right to seek and access information about their health.  You know, the wait we think about this in public health, people have the right to be scared, they're concerned in the middle of a pandemic which can also lead to sharing of low‑quality information, it is really the job of health authorities to offer health services to mitigate the health impact of the pandemic and to provide accurate information and address the needs of their populations.
Now, what's that mean for internet governance?  What would a healthy information environment look like?  I would, you know, really think about this way mentioned earlier, we have to foster more access to high quality health information and at the same time slowing the spread of disinformation.  Really we should be thinking, and I don't have easy answers here, what is the equivalent of two meters of social distance online?  We need to try to find the answers to this question and I really feel research and transparency and really measuring the effects of everything that we're trying to do is critical.  I underscore also what Julie was saying earlier, we really need transparency and research and trust in order to work together.
>> GUY BERGER: Thank you.  Beeban Kidron.
>> BEEBAN KIDRON: I want to echo something that Tina said, because information is one of children's rights and I think I was misunderstood by one of the attendees suggesting that kids should be pushed offline, I don't think they should be pushed offline, there ‑‑ they should be invited in.  I absolutely agree, we need a few more roadblocks to that information and a little bit more supersonic good information, but obviously we can talk about what good and bad is.  I actually think that at the governance level, we're going to have independent oversight, I think that if the companies are lending their network effect to the forms of disinformation that's set out so well at the beginning by Julyy and many of them are avoidable, you have to ask yourself the question which is are they fit for purpose if they lend their network effect to something that's having ‑‑ creating a health crisis, a crisis in democracy, a crisis in childhood, so on.  I think you get asked big questions.  Absolutely, the platforms have a role to play.  I do shoutout to Twitter for some of the moves they have made recently.  You know, it it is interesting to watch that happen.
I think that there was one thing that I will argue with, Piotr is used to that, everywhere is different, every country is different, have you noticed that the problems are very similar?  We're all using the same ‑‑ the same platforms, right?  I think we just have to concentrate on that.  We have to say that there's a new kid in town and we need that kid to grow up a little.  I don't think ‑‑ if we don't get that, you know, in our sights, it is too big for us.
>> PIOTR DMOCHOWSKI-LIPSKI: You are absolutely, right.  The thing is, we obviously have the same problems because we're human and we're also very different because we're human.  I stop at that, I look forward as we look over a glass of wine, this is a major floss call issue and somebody that Karl Marx would see something have different for people that follow others, Smith, whoever.  So to reply to the question about the affect of the current situation, on the internet governance, there is a person in the audience, sorry for pronouncing this name, there was a question on the catalyst for disinformation, so to stay within this chemistry metaphor, I would say it is not a catalyst, but just a fuel.  This information, it has been with us for ages and will be with us.  It is just a fuel.
However, I do hope, and this is replying to the question about the internet governance, it is a catalyst for debate about internet, about technology, the role in the society.
The internet has been relatively new phenomena for all of us.  This is probably leaving aside armed conflicts, so on, this probably is the first major crisis that internet is such a big part of ‑‑ it is not so much creating the crisis but sometimes accelerating it, sometimes helping to fight it, and I hope we'll continue the debate and from the public policy standpoint, from the organization of our society standpoint, we will try when the whole thing is over, everybody is healthy, and even before that, that we try to come up with some not only recommendations like we is it with the study but also with actual complex policies not to solve everything, because this is impossible, to understand the phenomena that internet is and the governance of it is even more.
>> GUY BERGER: Clare R your turn, internet governance and what we have been discussing? 
>> CLAIRE WARDLE: Quickly.  There is a drumbeat we need regulation, people say that, my fear is that we still have almost no knowledge of the scale of misinformation and the impact of misinformation.
So without that, we shouldn't be thinking about regular listening until we have more understanding.  Skilled say for the the last three years academics have been on the same bandwidth, we need the data, the data, the platforms, what type of data, it is complex, we just need the data.  There is consent questions and I'm not completely in the platform position of we need data infrastructures a researcher, we have to be innovative on the research questions we're asking, think much more qualitatively and stop believing that unless we have huge datasets there is nothing we can do.  We have just been doing some research with a partnership on AI asking people in the field to make a note in a diary essentially every time they come across a piece of problematic content and the flag that they see on Facebook.  It will not surprise any of you to hear there is not uniform responses to flags on the Facebook, people on the right are angry, driving down trust generally, people on the left love it.  There is no easy way here.  The way I get from that research is, the process of asking people to reflect on this, in itself, it was a tool of information literacy, people were forced to think is this the kind of content I would like to see, not see it, how do I feel about it being flagged, there is a million research questions we should be asking, we should be auditing, what is it that people see, Christina is right, there is a lot of people out there, the information, how is it different, not different, we know almost nothing about what people are seeing which is why we're jumping autopsy and down on the blog post yesterday, which is just the bare minimum!  Internet governance, yes, a lot we need to do, we have to build an empirical foundation and can't be just stuck in this we need the data, we have to think of other more qualitative, working with the community to ask themselves about what they're seeing because that process, it actually will do a really important job of getting the public to be part of this conversation about the types of information they want to see and how they want to see it handled.  It is just a call for more qualitative research.  It won't surprise people in this call. 
>> GUY BERGER: I think we're also calling for the public to become stakeholders in internet governance as well.
Christina. 
>> CRISTINA TARDAGUILA: , well, I firstly completely agree with Clare, she's awesome, keeps being awesome day after day.
I would like to raise four topics very quickly if I have the time.
First, the IFCM, until this moment, it is completely against any type of regulation to fight misinformation and say that based on a database that we have been building since 2018 and we haven't opinion tracking the efforts that are being done to fight this misinformation in 60 countries and what we see so far, it is kind of sad.  First, it is that no country has managed to fight the information and they can't serve as a benchmark for the planet, we don't have that.  No one is successful.
Number two, those countries that have moved towards legislation, they have ‑‑ that's mainly in Asia, they have created other problems without solving misinformation, they have created censorship, internet shut downs and they have created fact checking organizations by government and, you know, they're arresting people.  That's dangerous and we don't see that as a solution.
Going back to others that talked about Human Rights, education is one of them.  I truly believe that's the path.  I can't believe my daughter who is 11 years old goes to middle school and does not have a fact checking or a media literacy class.
I mean in the United States, just picture how it works in Brazil, 0, 0, 0.  That will be something that I would like to push governments to think about.  Everybody hates fake news, everybody hates disinformation, what are they actually doing to prevent the next generation to have to do what we're doing here, trying to come up with solutions.  They do have a solution.  They have to teach fact checking and media literacy as they teach math.  It is just the best way.
The other idea, it is that I have been thinking a bit about two topics and the role that media is playing in all of this, click bates Verizon good stories, I believe we could start talking about the disinformation editor, that role isn't around, I don't know any organization, any media outlet that has this disinformation editor, hey, this headline doesn't look good, this photo needs a label that says it is false or whatever.  I mean, we really need the media to get this person, some of them to review whatever they publish.  The latest is that I would love ‑‑ I keep ‑‑ since I saw social dilemma, that document, for me, it is very crazy, I'm wondering if those guys got everyone on the planet addicted to social media, could they get together with us or make things addicted to facts, they know how to make people addicted what, if we got them in the room, we say let's brainstorm on how to use platforms to get people addicted to facts.
I have been running around these two ideas.  Thank you.  Sorry for talking so much. 
     
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-high-level-leaders-track-security^^

 
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you.  I really enjoyed enormously this some sort of time machine with our panelists today with the Eugene and Christopher and other colleagues, and what we started is with some sort of message that in order to see forward, we have also to reflect on history and the past, especially this interplay between technology and security.
And my name is Jovan and I'm the Head of Geneva Internet Platform and Director of DIPLO Foundation and used to be co‑director of High‑Level panel on digital cooperation and it's my honor to be here with you today to introduce our panelists through the time zones and through the way of what they're seeing now.
I am connecting from the quite ghostly building of the UN here in Geneva, and it's empty, not only because of pandemic but it is almost 7:30.
We have two of our colleagues in daytime zones.  We have Izumi, UN Under Secretary General of Affairs connecting from New York, and we have Christopher Painter President of Global Forum on Cyber Expertise connecting from Washington DC, one of the first cyber diplomats from U.S. administration.
Then we have two panelists who are making real efforts to join us in this night zones.  First Eugene Kaspersky but I'm sure there is no need to introduce Eugene because you see Kaspersky and very well versed into the history of computer science, and that should probably be some topic for some good broadcast or even a book, Eugene.
Further, today is our dear colleague Latha Redd co‑chair of the global commission of stability on Cyberspace, another experienced cyber diplomat and Latha thank you for joining us and its midnight there and it's really appreciated.
Let me come back to the middle zone of Eurafrica to introduce the other panelists.  Today, we have John Denton joining from Paris and John is Secretary General of International Chamber of Commerce and we have Enrico co‑Director of C3 in Africa and Chair of GFC Research Committee.
That's more or less geography of today's session, and I would like to thank Chengtai, the organizer of today's session, to introduce some sort of time fairness.  Usually our colleagues in Americas have to wake up early in the morning or stay late in the evening and that is some sort of rebalance in that respect.
Now, today's major topic for our discussion is a question of cybersecurity, and I will just try in a few minutes to paint the canvas or backdrop of our discussion today before I pass the floor for our eminent speakers in our excellent panel.
While we're all familiar with what is going on around us and how the digital technology helps humanity to have some sort of societal business continuity over the last seven or eight months, and thanks to the robust digital infrastructure, students continue to studying online, and they're provided with even a rather simple facilities, but important in the times of lockdown of ordering food or working online.
And sometimes it is a given of how the technical infrastructure, how the digital infrastructure really sustained in this difficult time, and I think we should be proud, especially those of you who are involved in ensuring that the digital technology, it is major achievement.
In this process of changes of what has happened, digital companies, tech companies became more important, more relevant, and more dependent on the digital technology creating new vulnerabilities, and we will address them in a few minutes.
Now, this is the general backdrop.  Now, more specifically, cybersecurity issues and digital policy issues are raising relevance in forums and international meetings worldwide.  Now, we are finishing the first week of Internet Governance Forum and the cybersecurity has not been picking up so much, probably there was a need to have this important discussion and then to have more discussion on cybersecurity next week.
Now, before I pass the floor to our panelists, I would like to ask Luis to pose the ‑‑ to put the survey to see what is the atmosphere in the room when it comes to cybersecurity and vulnerabilities.  I hope technology will serve us, and if not, we'll move directly into discussion.  Luis?
Okay.  Well the question is as you can see, is the current turbulent times, for many the Internet is essential to work, relax, and stay in touch with family and friends.  How secure do you feel online, regardless of whether you use the Internet for professional, family, or leisure.  How you are feeling about the Internet, particularly secure, secure, not particularly secure, unsecure, or very unsecure?  Let me see what will be the answer from our colleagues in the room and then on YouTube and I guess there are more of them on YouTube that can participate in the survey.
Okay.  We'll get getting the news soon, and in the meantime, we'll be seeing from Luis, what is the result.  Okay.
Well, we feel quite secure, but not particularly secure, and unsure, and very unsecure.  It's a typical distribution when you ask this type of questions, but the answer is somewhere in the middle and we will see if the reality is also distributed in the same way.  This is the general back backdrop and the first intervention is from Under Secretary General, Izumi.  What do you see as threat of international security posed by COVID‑19?  What are the main priorities or main concerns at the place where you are?  You are in the middle of the negotiation of different policy processes on cybersecurity, sometimes complex as we know there are two parallel processes.  So, what do you see as the threats for international ICT security?  Over to you.
   >> IZUMI NAKAMITSU:  Okay.  Thank you.  Thank you very much, Jovan.  Fascinating members on the panel, and I would really like to congratulate you for putting it together.  And I like the way you started, actually, and I mean, you know, the Internet or the digital technologies have definitely provided enormous opportunities but I would like to add to that just to complement, that it is going to transform our lives, every aspect of our life, work, daily life, staying in touch, et cetera.
What we are now experiencing is a transformative change that are happening around the world, and that, of course, has an impact on where I am actually sitting, and I am responsible for international security issues at the United Nations.
Of course, the downside of this positive, you know, generally positive ICT technologies during the crisis is, of course, you know this change has also been accompanied by enormous spike in cyber incidents, and you know the ITU, the International Telecommunications Union has estimated that the Internet usage has increased during the pandemic by something like 30%, but in terms of cyberattacks or cyber incidents, the increase was actually almost 300%, so you know you can see the enormous impact on the downside as well, even though there are a lot of positive and transformative and positive benefits that these technologies are bringing to us.
Of course, our deep concern is mounting malware campaigns against critical infrastructures and especially during the COVID crisis, hospitals, medical research facilities, and other institutions over the past several months, and that includes the World Health Organization, for example.
I'm told that WHO has reported experiencing more than five times the number of cyberattacks than in the same period last year, and so these incidents are obviously con pounding people's already wide sense of insecurity around their health, livelihood, and future, and of course the ordinary people are experiencing, you know, these rapid increases of phishing incidents, malware, emails, et cetera.
And, of course, what we're wondering is whether this would also have a deep impact on more hard‑core international peace and security issues, of the kinds of cyberattacks that we are seeing, we are witnessing, is of course stopped short of traditional use of force‑type of situations.  It's not a kinetic scene, but it is increasingly posing very difficult questions as to what it is that we are actually looking at in terms of a very serious cyber‑incident that could potentially happen impacting on critical infrastructures that are deeply connected or related to stability and security of our general environment.  So for this reason, the Secretary General has indeed drawn attention to cyberattacks during the COVID‑19 pandemic and he has been repeatedly calling on the international community to do more to prevent and also end cyberattacks on critical civilian infrastructure including health care facilities, and I will stop here for now, and then looking forward to, you know, more in‑depth discussions in terms of what we need to do to make sure that first and foremost, prevent and also ending cyberattacks.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Under Secretary.  Thank you, Izumi, for great description of the landscape and shocking numbers for discrepancy of using the Internet of 30% and 300% in the cyberattacks numbers are useful to give us some sort of bearing of the overall situation, and definitely will be coming back to the quite a few points that you raised in the introductory statement on the actions from the UN Secretary General and the actions and activities of your office, which are very, very important for the global cybersecurity.
There was one interesting comment coming from the Amid, and he commented on my sort of map of the time zone, and he introduced the first interesting point that cybersecurity threats are as they were as time zones and that's is just one challenging point for our discussion, do we discuss the same similar or diverse type of cyber challenges?
Now, there is no need to introduce Eugene.  He introduced himself greatly about this survey of history of a computer, and it triggered a fascinating discussion in the chat, which mentions of Fortran, Cobol, and other tools.  And I can see that the age distribution of the current panel is more to do with us who used to start using computers in 80s and 90s, but we would like to hear also from the younger generation about their concerns.
Eugene, you have been, your company has been providing really deep detailed summary of cyberattacks, and the painting of the current landscape and you have this excellent useful tool that we use, for example, for our courses when we teach cybersecurity on what is the current threat situation.  Could you in your first intervention, help in the painting of this overall current cybersecurity situation based on the both data and your general insights, and then maybe hint to some actions that you have been suggesting or taking, and then we will be developing them throughout the discussion.  Over to you.
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  Yeah.  Thank you.  Well, actually, the situation during the COVID time in Cyberspace is well more dangerous, of course, obviously more dangerous than before, and actually the two factors which activate the cybercrime, the first factor is that many people they stay at home so they spend more time on the Internet so they ‑‑ they have ‑‑ they can easily crack the more victims than before.
The second factor is that many enterprises, well most of our companies, they sent employees home, but they're not able to guarantee the same level of security ass with in their corporate parameter, so the people are left at home with some basic security but they can access enterprise network, and so the criminals they use this to hack.  They hack the home commuters for access enterprise networks.  That's why we also see the increase of number of hacker attacks, the activities of cyber criminals, and actually we have quite a detailed data even for countries because we have our customers based in many countries around the world, so we see a sense of statistics of the criminal activities, so if you want to see more details, just visit our website securelist.com and there is a statistic page so you can see this data there.
And speaking about the code, I would say it's 25 to 25 increase of numbers of new malicious applications, and so before COVID, we were collecting about 350,000 new malicious applications, new malicious files a day, and so every day about 350,000 new malicious files which we never saw before.  Right now, we collect more than 400,000 malicious files a day, and it means that the global cybercrime is getting more active, and actually I don't know how many people are in this business, 10,000, 100,000, well the numbers are huge, the number of the attacks in different ‑‑ in the different tools developed by the bad guys.
So, the global cybercrime is most ‑‑ but in most cases technically it's not really a problem to protect people, to protect computer smart phones, devices from this kind of attacks because most of them are junior, so they're not too much complicated, and so technically speaking, it's not a problem to release the antidote for this kind of computer malware or cyber malware and the rising problem is that many of these junior cyber criminals, they getting more smart and they're getting more experienced, and they are joining professional hacker team, or they lead and create their new highly professional cyber gangs, and at the moment we're monitoring about 200 professional cyber gangs which develop quite sophisticated cyberattacks.
And then they're able to hack even very well protected organizations like banks, governments, and so actually this is the problem to protect the system from their targeted attacks, highly complicated, sophisticated, and unfortunately, in some cases, very successful kind of their malicious tools.
And at the same time, speaking about the physical systems, the infrastructure, the critical infrastructure, well we have more and more reports that the criminal gangs, this he access ‑‑ well they try to ‑‑ well it's not targeted attacks, but they try to touch infrastructure, they touch the systems that are connected to the Internet, and we don't have too many reports of the targeted attacks on the systems, and it seems that they just see that they're not just individuals, they're not just the computer networks or office networks connected to the Internet.  They see the complex structure.  In most cases they don't know what to do with that, but I'm afraid in the future they're criminals and they will easily recognize the power of attacks on the physical infrastructure, and I'm afraid that we are live willing in times when the criminals, they're turning to scatter systems from attacks on individuals, attacks on office networks, enterprise office networks, turning to their physical systems and well they're already in the Internet of Things.  They were botnets, infecting the security cameras, video cameras, and actually that was one of the most successful cyberattacks, global attacks, and leading for years.  And so I'm afraid that the next is massive attacks on the infrastructure and physical infrastructure.  Not like now, so they're just very, very few cases, actually, targeted cases, but I'm afraid in the future the position will be changed.
And, unfortunately, this evolution of cybercrime is really activated by COVID times because there are so many victims online, criminals they're humans as well, so they stay at home as other people do, so they have more time to improve the technologies, to improve the activity, and so actually I'm afraid that the situation of cybercrime is getting from bad to worse, so that's why the importance of cybersecurity and active measures about criminals is getting more and more important.
Thank you, Eugene.  I hope that we have the vaccine for the ‑‑ for this type of virus that is coming into our computers, but this is the question that we may reflect later on.  You introduced quite a few important elements, including this increasing vulnerability in the dynamics between home and the office, which is completely a new element, and also an element of professional versus newcomers into the cybercrime field, and this is the profession in itself, which has its own logic and dynamics, and subculture like all criminal organizations, and therefore we may later on reflect on it a bit more.
We are in the similar time zone, and moving a bit east toward Latha, and Latha we're now getting these threads into our tap industry of today's session with bringing links from the UN and Eugene from the trenches of cybersecurity where he's protecting many computers worldwide, and we would like to hear from you on your experiences as a cyber dip low mat and also person involved in geopolitics and we're collecting now individual business level to the global level.  Over to you, Latha.
   >> LATHA REDDY:  Thank you so much.  Thank you, Jovan, and given my background as cyber diplomat as you describe me, for me the key problem or challenge is now the difficulties in advancing dialogues on preventing cyberattacks, even in a critical area like the health sector.  Because you know if we can't agree on a norm to say that attacks of the health sector are unacceptable during a global pandemic, then really the purpose of international cooperation is not being served very well.
In the present tense geopolitical climate, and the tense relationships between major powers, it's very hard to focus on really vital international cooperation in policy issues, but cyber has never been more important, and dialogue on cybersecurity has also never been more important than it is today.
If we were to look at inter‑governmental tensions today, we could see in the context of what I would like to call possibly a tech war, can you see five fronts emerging and you can see the question of resources, you can see the question of network infrastructures, you can see the question of operating systems, you can see platforms, and you can see content in data.
This, I would say almost at the moment a cold war like situation prevailing between major power, but fortunately due to globalization, we do not have an iron curtain between the opponents.  The curtain we have today is flexible, porous, and not opaque.  Perhaps we can call it the Bambuco, to quote, I like this term.
And in other words, we can find a way to cooperate, provided everybody agrees that this is a global challenge, and agrees that in pandemic times, certain things must be out of bounds for cyberattacks.  How can countries cope?
We should continue our dialogues on Internet cooperation or interim the governance on international cooperation, and possibly on safeguarding the health sector through a universally agreed norm, and we should simultaneous build bubbles of strategic trust with partners, and I'll come back to the bubbles of trust later in my intervention, but I hope this sets in context of diplomacy, international cooperation, and norm building.  Thank you.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  We have a cold war in the making, but there is no iron curtain yet.  Diplomacy facilitates dialogue, but not as effective yet as it should be, so focus on the norms in the most critical sectors like health sector and develop more cooperation.  Great inputs in making all of this cybersecurity canvas vivid and relevant.
Now, from the UN Business Sector we have geopolitical input from Latha and then now to international secretary of chamber of commercial place where I guess many questions and some complaints around cybersecurity are coming from Chamber of Commerce Worldwide and also small and medium enterprises, so John, what would be your input on this question and what are the major cybersecurity challenges that we are facing in COVID‑19 crisis, especially from the business perspective?  Over to you.
   >> JOHN DENTON:  Thanks.  It's great to be on the panel and great to be back at the IGF.  I'm sorry we're not there in person, but this is the way it works.  Maybe I can put it a little bit differently.  I actually see a paradox, but let's be very clear so the International Chamber of Commerce we're the international voice of 46 million businesses now and we know that COVID‑19 is having real and dramatic impacts of what we call the real economy, and the real economy is actually the way in which SMEs, micro‑SMEs impact what is conducted and they've been subject to supply shortage and demand shortages and collapse of supply chains and seeing the economic impact beating them up even before the health problems got to them, and so it's actually been a really troubling time.  
One way that we've been working with this is we've actually run a campaign, and part of that has actually been to work on the digitalization of SMEs and micro‑SMEs because I think as you all understand, I think as Eugene said and others said as well, in this time of COVID, what we've seen in social distancing is the need to go online, so we've been enabling that.  9 paradox, of course is we're enabling that at exactly the same time as we're seeing the new feature, which is these kind of dark, menacing players, and these kind of robbers or the black heart as I think Eugene almost described them as playing in the space as well, so we've actually been encouraging mass uptick of digitization to SMEs and micro‑SMEs, and at the same time, this is a dramatic increase in malware, phishing on all the SMEs and micro‑SMEs and one of the challenges is they don't always operate as independent entities always and are actually integral parts of the supply chain.  So, what's actually happening is the weakest link, arguably in the supply chain, is being attacked.  
So what we're actually seeing is an increased vulnerability of the real economy to attacks through cybersecurity in the heart of COVID‑19 in the response, and yet the only way we can effectively respond economically is a way to suck up that risk, and then what we have to do is actually find tools, find approaches that can manage that, and I was very much taken by Ambassador Reddy that what we actually need to grapple with this is not just more training and more concern, but we actually need really effective interplay between government, the private sector, Civil Society, to actually develop a framework but also a culture which actually puts cyber risk as a classic risk that needs to be managed.  
We can't irradicate cyber risk and I think Eugene could show us why we can't but we can treat dealing with it as a process we need to manage and what we do need in order to enable that to happen is a lot more cooperation.  We still see too few countries actually take up some of the most important elements in terms of computer emergency response task forces, et cetera, and we do need a recognition that this is a global problem, so frankly wealthier countries, wealthier company, need to be helping, investing, and supporting the development of the tools to enable the SMEs and micro‑SMEs to no longer be weakest links but actually to actually enable themselves to build resilience so they can participate in the real economy effectively and save lives and livelihoods and manage a process which can actually limit the impact of cyber risk, that's what we see and that's what we think needs to happen because frankly as I said, this paradox continues and we've just launched a major campaign to digitize the further 5 million SMEs and micro‑SMEs so they can go forward and actually operate in the 21 Century, but particularly be part of the economic recovery.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  John, a fascinating scenario of the modern economy.  Thank you for that.  And you triggered one thought or one question for our audience and for our panelists that we may come to later on, whom we call when we have a problem, we as SME or we as citizen, or we as a country.  Is it a company help desk, or help desk with government or international help desk?  For us here in the panel, in the session, I'm sure that we're aware of CIRTs and other bodies, but for a young person just starting startup company or citizen, that may be a challenge, and for this just one question that we may try to reflect on very simple question, bringing geopolitical issues to reality of the people worldwide.
Wow, that was great session.  Thank you.  Thank you.  So easy to moderate it with such great inputs.  Now, we move to Chris.  Chris is in DC and there is no need to introduce Chris Painter now in his current role as President of Global Forum Cyber Expertise, and Chris, I know you can reflect on so many issues, but what do you pick up from the threads developing so far and develop them further?  Over to you.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  Well, it was great hearing the other panelists and I sort of feel like a lot of things have been said and there is this old saying of everything has been said but I haven't said it yet, so I'll try to avoid that and actually talk about some new things.
I mean, obviously, I think the pandemic is just highlighted what we're already seeing.  We're seeing great threats to Cyberspace, to both on an individual level, on a Nation State level, transnational criminal groups and others involved in this, and that's just accelerated with COVID because it highlighted our vulnerabilities and dependencies on these systems.
And that's hardly a surprise.  It's unfortunately that every time we had a major like disaster of any kind, there are always this group of criminals who try to attack that and take advantage of it, so it's hardly surprising, and it's unfortunate though.
So, what does that highlight for me?  Well a couple of things.  One, we're seeing these kinds of threats and I'm still worried about new threats.  One of them, you know, my friend the former President of Estonia, Thomas, always talks about a threat and worry about the integrity of information, and I worry about denial of service attacks, I worry about theft, I worry more if someone breaks into a hospital and changes my blood type so the next time I get a transfusion I die and financial markets can't settle.  We haven't seen that much yet, but I think that could be the wave of the future and we have to worry about that.
What it says to me is two things.  One, there is a little bit of silver lining here, to the extent there is any silver lining to COVID and this is really not much of one, but it has shown to countries around the world, both developing countries and developed countries, that this is an area of real priority and that we're so dependent on the systems and cybersecurity can't be treated as a boutique throw‑off issue, but as core issue for all of us a core political issue, a core issue that is a national security issue, an economic prosperity issue, a human rights issue, and also, ultimately, a foreign policy issue. 
And in terms of diplomacy, back when my office was created back in 2011, we were the first ones in the world at that time dedicated to these issues, and there are about 40 and growing around the world and that's important because it's being treated not just as a technical issue, and the technical aspects are clearly important, but as policy issue, and just like you don't need to be a nuclear engineer to understand the aspects of nuclear policy, you don't need to be a coder to understand the national security, economic, and human rights implications of cybersecurity and how we do that.
So that's one thing that I think is really important, and it leads and gives us an opportunity to mainstream this issue like we haven't done before and we need to do that.
The second thing I would say is it highlights for me the necessity, and this shouldn't be surprising coming from my perspective as now the President of the Global Forum on Cyber Expertise Foundation and the necessity for capacity building around the world and capacity building in many different ways.  The capacity building to help countries both developing countries and developed country, and again there are lots of developing countries who do an not have expertise, resources, structures in place, national strategy, and we have to work with those, and that's something that my organization, the multistakeholder organization which includes like 60 countries, over 60 countries, Civil Society, the private sector, academia, has been really focused on trying to coordinate some of that capacity building.
But also, the kind of policy capacity building, that's around like how do you engage this approximate these diplomatic debates happening in the UN, that people have talked about, and so I think we need to be able to do more on that level, too.
So, it gives us an opportunity to do that but we need to treat capacity building and cyber as not an odd duck, but really as a core part, a foundational part for our future prosperity and foundational part of the UN's Development Goals as well.
The last thing I wanted to touch on was, just talking about the role of the diplomacy, and I do think diplomacy and negotiations are happening now are critically important.  I think the norms that were agreed to in 2015 are critically important, we need to continue to get those implemented around the world and understood around the world, the confidence‑building measures, spreading through regional and other organizations is critically important, how international law applies is important to all of our safety and security and stability going forward but we also have to make sure there is accountability for transgressors and I don't mean escalate but accountable so we hold account those who break the rules, these understandings, but we need to think about how to do that as a world community.
And, again, think that goes hand and glove with developing the rules of the road and how do you make sure there is accountability for those.  Lastly, I just say that that again all folds into this idea of capacity building, which is the discussions in New York, almost everyone mentioned this, and that was pre‑COVID.  And now I hear it even more post‑COVID where we're doing everything virtually, and that's a good thing.  You know, there is a saying never let a good crisis go to waste, and I don't want to be quite like that, but we need to make sure not to lose the opportunity and we don't forget how important this is and when we see attacks on hospitals and others that we actually have a way to elevate the issue to Prime Ministers, presidents, CEOs of companies outside of the cyber club that we're all in.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Chris.  I think we're doing very well on your plea to build a communication between different policy communities.  We haven't been using jargon, and we did a bit in the pre‑session with the history, but it was tolerated, but throughout the session, we stayed very careful away from the technological or diplomatic or policy jargon, and it is great and I think we should continue in the same way.
Chris, there is one potential controversial topic for discussion, while I completely agree with your view that policy, leaders, diplomats should be aware of the political aspects of technology, we have to see whether the potentials of security by design and how far they can go with security by design.  I know that Eugene has been thinking a lot and working on that and we'll hear later on in the second iteration about this interplay between security by design technical solution versus the diplomatic, political solution.
Once more, thank you, Chris.  Now, in this interplay, we move to technology again.  And, Enrico, joining us from Cape Town.  Enrico, what is your take on this discussion between policy, diplomacy, geostrategy, technology, economy.
   >> ENRICO CALANDRO:  Thank you.  Thank you very much, Jovan for having me at the High‑Level Panel, and I think it's interesting because actually there are so many participants online that would say that late time in our time zone and also towards east meaning that probably people feel safer online than offline, or maybe that's unfortunately the result of these restrictions, resulting from COVID‑19.
But the perspective I would like to provide, I am a social scientist by profession, and so I've tried to describe how new forms of cyber mediated and processes can become a threat to human security, and so I'm going to talk about people.  With a focus also on developing countries because that's the focus of my activities and research.
So COVID‑19 has shown to all of us that good quality, affordable, and ubiquitous access to the Internet is not a luxury, and but it's a critical lifeline and in developing countries, actually, access to the Internet is still a luxury for the majority of people.  So, any barriers that actually stop us from using the Internet in a safe and secure way threaten to strip us of these lifelines.
In developing countries, cyber threats and risks are an extension of the persistent and increasing digital inequalities that have grown together with digitalization.  The current state of cybersecurity vulnerabilities, illustrates a considerable security gap beyond the digital divide gap, which is exacerbating existing patterns of inequality for individuals, for countries, and for regions.
Now, if we take a human‑centric perspective to cybersecurity, I think that four main threats have become particularly problematic from a policy perspective because policy and political responses have not been able, actually, to tackle these problems, and that there is some barrier also of addressing from a cybersecurity point of view, that normally, you know, address these issues of technical nature and ITE and computer network securities.
And here I'm referring to the so‑called infodemic and COVID‑related cybercrime and online violence and risk of increased state surveillance.
So, these four phenomena have either emerged from the pandemic or have been exacerbated with the pandemic, or have compromised the response of the different countries to COVID‑19.  So from the point of view of Internet diffusion in the African Continent which is probably as we know characterized by novel and first‑time users using the Internet through the mobile phone, and primarily on social media, and I think it becomes clear that the population is highly vulnerable to infodemic and the main danger of that is that it speeds up the epidemic process by influencing and fragments responses to fight against the virus and pandemic.
And then partially related to the infodemic and I think certainly growing from it is the phenomenon of COVID‑19 related cybercrime, and actually we talked a little bit about that, because infodemic can also be a vector of large‑scale cyberattacks and that's what we've seen as well, and so cyber criminals spread messages to plant malware, Phishing or ask for Bitcoin and but campaign of this information can actually facilitate cyberattacks also based on the exploitation of other human vulnerabilities such as fears, anxieties, and they can also have racist and xenophobic behavior.
Another pandemic that I think is exacerbated by the COVID‑19 pandemic and increased Internet use is the pandemic of online violence, and especially against women and girls and also against people experiencing multiple forms of discrimination and vulnerability and intersection between gender, age, education, and other special demographics, and so it becomes more pervasive with some developing countries, but the reality is problem is getting worse and not improving.
The last threat is related to an increasing number of these tracing and contract‑tracing technologies to identify and support quarantine.  Tracking and tracking‑technologies are important to find the pandemic as we know, but surveillance needs to be done in compliance with data protection regulation and due respect for privacy and confidentiality.
But it might be ineffective in countries with low levels of smart phone diffusion, because people you can't ‑‑ you can't seem to collect data, and it can also place citizens at risk of privacy violation in jurisdictions with poor data protection frameworks or in countries that have had difficulties in enforcing these frameworks with ‑‑ with legislation where it is actually present.  Thank you.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you.  Thank you, Enrico, for enriching what Chris started with the human rights societal legal and other aspects of cybersecurity discussion, which cannot be discussed in isolation and bringing infodemics and all of this concept.  Our apology for some problems with unmuting and muting, but this is going to be definitely the keyword of 2020, can you hear me, or unmute yourself, or mute, and therefore I think it's now fixed.
We have all these threads from the first iteration of the introductory statements, and we are receiving quite a few interesting questions, and I will just read the questions and comments before I invite you to comment on those few issues that emerged in the first part of the session.
Mike, great regards to Mike.  He says two questions and three words.  We don't see the questions, but three words are encryption, digital, and ID.  Maybe some of you can comment on this cybersecurity Trinity.
Amid, there are two camps; one, countries want to regulate cyber conflicts and some want to prevent cyber conflict, and recognizing the Cyberspace as a fifth domain of war warfare other than civilian in only peaceful environment we have to which camp?  That's an interesting question especially for those of you interested involved in geopolitics.
And Jacque, great regards to him, driving from COVID discussion, should citizens including corporate citizens patronized sanctioned or enforced to protect from cyber dangers or prohibited as restriction of personal freedom, freedom of doing business.  Wow, we won't have a boring discussion, I can see, and I invite our attendees, including one of the fathers of the Internet, Vint Cerf, best regards to Vint, to bring their comments and the questions.
Now, we are going to the second iteration based on these questions and at least from the initial discussion, and we'll ask Under Secretary, Izumi, what is achieved under the auspices of the UN?  Izumi, you heard many inputs on the current situation and concern and threats and risk.  What is happening at the UN and what can we expect from the UN in this context of answering some of these concerns?  Over to you.
   >> IZUMI NAKAMITSU:  Okay.  Thank you.  I feel that, you know, the panelists, definitely all the panelists and vast majority of all the people in the audience are all fully aware of what is achieved at the United Nations and what is going on currently in the UN.  I mean, but just to recap very, very quickly, of course the UN has been tackling this issue for many years now.  There are six iterations of what we call the Groups of Governmental Experts that, you know, they have been studying and analyzing and denigrating on key issues, and then this GGE has indeed managed to agree in the past, for example, that international law, in particular, the UN Charter applies to the use of ICTs, you know, so this links up with wonderful questions that you read out and it's an interesting question that I would like to perhaps comment on that a little bit later.
And, also, the group has recommended very practical confidence‑building and capacity‑building measures, and I completely agree with Chris Painter on the importance of capacity building and I think this is something that we still need to really develop and this is a critical component of the work ahead.
In particular 2015, GGE, were also able to recommend 11 voluntary norm‑binding, norms of responsible state behavior in the use of ICTs, and these norms cover key issues including cooperation between states in the use of ICTs, the respect toward human rights in the digital sphere, someone mentioned that also, and the protection of infrastructure, critical infrastructure from cyberattacks, and some of these norms, of course, are technical and operational in nature, but also deal with responsible reporting of ICT vulnerabilities as well as preventing proliferation of malicious tools and techniques and so they are, you know, a good practices that are recommended under these norms on the part of the private sector industry people.
Now, in 2018 as you all know already, I'm sure, a new GGE has been established under the UN and they are in the middle of their work.  You know, they're discussing, especially the strengthening of the norms but also confidence building and capacity building issues.  And, of course, there is a new process, a new platform that was established at the UN, which is inclusive.  It's called Open‑Ended Working Group and they're also the first group of Open‑Ended Working Group is still in the process of denigrating and bringing to conclusion next year, but also very recently just a couple of days ago, the first committee of the General Assembly also decided to create another Open‑Ended Working Group for the duration of five years, and so it's very much still a work in progress, but there are some good, solid foundations that we have, you know, that we have been able to agree on.  And the key in my view, is to make sure that these norms so far agreed to will be fully implemented, and I think one thing is to have a good normative framework but another thing, which is critical, is to making sure that this is implemented, and of course going forward, in order for us to be able to prevent major cyberattacks and cyber incidents, I think we need to have confidence‑building measures and capacity building, and this perhaps we will be able to discuss in the next, you know, what lies ahead in terms of a key challenges.
One thing that I would ask is that we are really increasingly aware and actually have acted upon already once in the context of the Open‑Ended Working Group that this has to be taken in the multistakeholder discussions.  This is not really just, you know, government and cyber diplomats coming and discusses, but we need to have a really meaningful engagement of industry people, researchers, and technical people, Civil Society included.  We are still exploring what more we can do in this regard, and I will be very keen to listen to potentially some creative suggestions on, you know, how the UN can indeed improve on multistakeholderness, if you will, of those conversations.  As you know, it's not ‑‑ it has not been so far a strength of the United Nations, necessarily, but we are acutely aware of that and going forward, we need to make sure we have meaningful input and participation from various stakeholders who can actually make huge contributions in this.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Izumi, and thank you for your efforts to bridge all of these processes that your office has been trying to find connecting points on capacity building, sharing information, and it's fascinating to bridge what is political reality and to do maximum out of it for the cybersecurity.
There was one question maybe that could be answered later on by you or someone else.  Well, I would say by most of the participants, which from a a Diplomat here in Geneva, which forum would be most important to make real global progress on addressing cyber threats, which features should it include, and which should it avoid?  That's an interesting question for the complete panel and I would like to invite others to think about it.
Now we move to Eugene, so you said that initially this very interesting discussion, and there are many threads that you can pick from this discussion and comment, but personally I would like to hear your view of interplay between policy and technology and security by design that at one point, and maybe one point I know you're very keen on capacity development and you have ‑‑ you're Kaspersky Academy, and what would be three points in the curriculum for diplomats and leaders in the world that you would like to teach them during one of the courses.
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  Yeah.  Thank you for the question.  And actually, I have some ideas on how to answer some questions which you already mentioned.  But in many cases, there is no simple answer of yes or no.  In many cases there is something in between, so yes and yes, and speaking about the importance of preparation against cybercrime, how to fight, how to address the cyber threats issues, I think three things have to be done, technologists, education, and law enforcement you including the international cooperation.
And so actually, well I can speak about all these three vectors of fighting the cyber threats, and in the Cyberspace, and well speaking about the technologies, I believe ‑‑ so we'll know how to protect their computer systems and smart phones, and actually we can guarantee pretty high, technologies can guarantee very, very high level of protection, but if we turn to industrial systems, Internet of Things, and if we keep in mind that there are more and more and more such devices around us, gadgets, everything, actually it's not possible to develop security, cybersecurity for each copy machine, vacuum cleaner, security camera, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So, actually my idea, the major idea is that we need to develop the systems which are secure by design, and I call it cyber immunity, so actually we have this ‑‑ we have its platform, and this is an operating system which is very compact, it's not multifunctional, it's not like Microsoft Windows or Linux, no.  It's simply not possible to build security through secure immune systems based on these systems, and so it's completely different and good enough for Internet of Things, and actually what we do, we designed the architecture of the systems in such a way that it's simply not possible to hack it, but at the same time the systems are quite flexible, you can update, you can install applications, and so actually it works, and we have the first ‑‑ the Internet of Things, the first cyber gadgets, sometimes they are quite unique and developed on top of this immunity agency system and for example I just have it on my table, and this is the industrial gateway which can connect the industrial system into the Internet in a secure way, so it's a gateway which is made on this immune operating system.  And we have some other stuff, but I'm not going to make the advertisement on this technologies and the products, but actually technically speaking, in for Internet of Things and for industrial systems, for infrastructures, especially critical infrastructure, we can reach such a level of security that a successful attack will cost more than possible damage, and so the bad guys, the attackers, must invest more than possible damage of the victim, and so I think this level of security, immunity, and so for the bad guys there is no reason to hack the system.
And so technically speaking, it is possible to develop such a technology in which you can guarantee that you in things of infrastructure and protection‑wise are unhackable.
So it's a first, it's about the technologies, and speak being international cooperation, it's the first time I said about that it's a must to have international cooperation, and that was early 2000 and somewhere at the same time there was a Budapest convention on the cybercrime that was introduced, and maybe I was the first to say Internet Interpol to investigate and to find the bad guys in the Cyberspace, and so we need to have some kind of the international cyber forces to account for these guys.
Unfortunately, what's going on there, the world is getting unfortunately more fragmented and geopolitical situation is very far from perfect, and I'm afraid that the cooperation between different countries from different parts of the geopolitical landscape, some cases are getting worse.  I'm not politician, I'm not President of the world to fix it, so I just do my best to advise others that we need to change that.  We are all living in the cyber age in a Cyberspace, so to keep this place safe and secure, at least to move into the direction of a safe Internet or the safe Cyberspace, we need to get cooperate and forget about geopoliticals, the rest of the geopolitical stuff, in a Cyberspace, the nations must cooperate to ‑‑ because once again, we're living in the same Cyberspace and we're facing very same cyber threats, and actually they are cyber systems that get more important and critical infrastructure depends on cyber more and more, and it's vulnerable and, actually the way the world is being developed, it's ‑‑ it's danger.  So, we need ‑‑ we need to fix it, we need to create the new ways or new ideas to build more trust in Cyberspace and have to make nations to work together against the cyber threats.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you.  Thank you, Eugene.  Great dictionary today, cyber immunity, Internet Interpol which is a bit, as you said historical need for digital or for cooperation across the board.  And in the closing, in the next iteration, you may give us also the answer to the question of what could be curriculum for diplomats and politicians on cybersecurity, three major points.
Now we move to India to Latha, and now Latha you increased the interesting concept of trust bubble and you may reflect briefly on that or any question that has been emerging on let's say geopolitical aspect on question of two camps, and mentioning how there are two camps and how they contribute to the cybersecurity.  Just pick one of these questions and reflect on it, but tell us more about the trust bubble.  This is an interesting concept.
   >> LATHA REDDY:  You know, the question of the trust bubble, Jovan, was you know to build lasting partnerships and deal effectively with cybersecurity issues, we need strategic partnerships.  That's what I call a trust bubble, or in fact we would call it technical bubbles of trust.  What should each country expect from such a partner in a tech bubble?  Firstly, you'll have to have political and strategic convergence.
Secondly, you would have to have trusted each other's legal and jurisprudence systems, and thirdly, you would have to have a broad‑based economic partnership across technology, trade, services, defense, and other key areas.
And lastly, is there broad trust between the peoples of each country, and so I think that that is absolutely necessary if we are to move forward with this idea of technology bubbles of trust or, in fact, for strategic partnerships between countries.
I think that, you know, the ‑‑ there are concerns today about the technology of trade, for instance, or trade technology.  As we saw in 5G, when vendors are o no longer judged only on price and effectiveness but also on location and geopolitical tensions, there are concerns about the country of origin and the prevailing legal systems in that country, and of course the relationships with that country.  Therefore, it's no longer run purely on commercial considerations, and certainly it will present a lot of difficulties for sellers and buyers, and I think that this is where the bubbles of trust will play an even greater role, and I'm sorry, Jovan, I forgot the second question you asked me.  Was there anything else you wanted me to comment on?
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  There was one question which was asked what should be the fora?  Do we need to create one forum to discuss cybersecurity mutually, or where should that coordination happen on the global level, a policy or geopolitical question, I think that was one of the comments in chat?
   >> LATHA REDDY:  Well, I certainly think that we do need to coordinate our efforts in so many different fora.  You know, there is a huge multiplicity of effort, and we are having dialogues in so many different fora, whether it's the Paris Peace Forum, the IGF, our own global commissions which I've worked own and any number of think tanks and et cetera.  So in one sense it would be good to have a body come together where all of these efforts could be coordinated and classified together, but I think it will be very difficult because at the moment there is not much appetite to create another international mechanism, and certain countries would certainly be opposed to creating a global internationally recognized body to deal with these cyber issues.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Latha.  That was one of the questions of the High‑Level Panel that was probably one of the underlying and most challenging questions, whom to call to address your digital issues, not only cybersecurity, but in general digital issues.  Which is a big challenge in small countries, where big countries have many forums, but we may get to that point through in the next with John.  John, who can businesses call to address their digital issues and all of these concerns?  Or you can pick on any other points from our discussion.
   >> JOHN DENTON:  Well, straight up, I think if anyone said there is one person to call, I think there would be grossly misleading, so I think that's the first point to make.
I might just open this intervention by saying this time 12 months ago I was actually at the IGF and I launched one of the famous ICC Campaigns to make technology work for all, and I did that because we recognize, I think as we all do, the digital divide.  But the point I want to focus on today is there is also a capability divide by we actually need to think about in terms of digital capacity divide as well, and I think that's been touched on a bit by Eugene and also by Latha so far.
Where I'm getting to here is that what we see too often now is the absence of an effective regulatory framework, both at a policy level and legal level to actually encompass and enable the kind of things we want to see on cyber, and that's something that we see as an element which is missing, not everywhere, but in many, many economies, and in many respects even in some surprising economies.
The private sector can do so much, but in the end to create these frameworks, these policy frameworks which are capable of being implemented by regulation and by law, we actually need governments to step up, and we still see too many governments without that capacity.
And so the private sector simply cannot do the heavy lifting at all on its own, but the point I make there is even in developed countries and partly picks up the comment that Izumi made earlier on, if you want to develop good policy or even policy from developed countries, you can't do it in isolation.  This policy always has a strong business voice in it and Civil Society and in particular when it comes to issues like digital, and the reason for that is that ultimately we have to implement it, so if you don't involve the end users or the key stakeholders in the development of policy, then you're always end up with difficulties, and that's just in developed country, but in developing countries we also need, and I shouldn't say this is only reserved for developing countries because there are a number of developed countries without I think the requisite framework in place, and we need to work together, and they need to being a knowledge that if we need to call anyone, it's got to be someone who is actually able to encapsulate Civil Society, the private sector, and government and put the citizen at the center in order to achieve this, so in a way it's almost the holy Trinity that we actually need to have in place to deliver on this outcome, and so one of the questions or one of the observations made in the chat was that in order to help SMEs and micro‑SMEs to combat cyber, we should look to the wonderful tools from the cyber readiness institute, and please be assured that we're doing so, please be assured that that is something that we see as critical, and you know please be assured that the ICC, we have five years ago we actually preempted this debate by the standards that we created in the guidance we gave out, and that still rings true, and I was just looking at some of the points we made in our guidance five years ago and it actually still, envision the company should adopt, holistic approach, looking at effective risk mitigation, and preparation to breaches, and all the elements we talked about there in a more detailed paper are all still relevant, so I hope that's useful to you, but it's actually ensuring that there is this stakeholder engagement in the formation of policy and regulations and law, but actually governments ultimately need to act but we need to help them act as best as possible with all of those inputs.  Thank you.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, John, for bringing more precision to multistakeholder approach.  Sometimes we stay on the general notion, but you zoomed in in both reasons and practicalities of how multistakeholder approach can function, and I think this is under researched and underdiscussed issue, because if you want multistakeholder approach to flourish, we need to really zoom in and develop a procedure and approach much better.
We will be moving now to Chris, but Chris you can think on the few questions that remain unanswered and there was a question on two comments and a comment from Wolfgang very interesting as always, and UNGG and open‑ended working group are important but probably some progress can be made in next few years, optimistic view, so let's hear if the panelists share the optimism from Wolfgang, but we should also discuss the progress in the laws and autonomous system group and the region from Libya caucus are testbed how AI and Internet based devices can be integrated in military operation and there has to be ‑‑ there has to be discussed also mutually stakeholder environment.  As always, can challenging thoughts from Wolfgang, so Chris a lot on your plate, geopolitics, so go ahead.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I love Wolfgang, but all of these issues are increasingly multistakeholder and increasingly interrelate as well.  I want to pick up on one thing that was just said by John and that is that it is important to have multistakeholders and different stakeholders as we develop policy and this is one of the things that the global Forum on cyber expertise tries to do when we talk to countries, for instance, about having national strategies which is often the document that shows it's a priority for that country and it's the organizing document for that country and that they should create that strategy by talking to a number of stakeholders and not just government stakeholders, but industry, academia, Civil Society, that's the best practice and we try to showcase that.
I'd say a couple of other things too.  I don't agree, using a term I used before, that we need one ring to rule them all.  We need one giant institution that's going to take up all of these issues.  Frankly, it would collapse under its own weight and it would be too complex, too hard to actually have an effective function.  And I think what we need to do is to make the existing dialogues that we have, including in the UN, more effective, rather than trying to create a new one.  You know, I similarly think that, you know, one of the questions was about do we need a new binding cybercrime tree or cybersecurity treaty, and I have the same feeling about that.  We are still in the early throws of this issue and we need to focus on things like what are the expectations, what are the rules of the road, what are the norms and getting countries to follow those.  We could think about something down the line, but a treaty doesn't solve our issues in this space either.  People violate, and countries violate existing treaties, and so that doesn't make ‑‑ you know, you autonomous have a treaty and everything goes away, but we need to think about the rules of road and get consensus around that and go get those implemented.  I think that's critically important.
And you know I guess the other ‑‑ the other two issues, one was on cyber and you mentioned someone, the idea about a course for cyber diplomats that is critically important, we did that internally in the state department, trained officers from all over the world, brought them back to DC, had Vint talk to them and people talking about geopolitical issues, so they were involved in that, Estonia is good on that and training diplomats on cyber and they've had several organizations.  Your organization has been working on that, other organizations have been working on that and this is an important issue to get those people involved.
The final question I'll take a swing at is the one of, you know, there are two camps managing conflict and preventing conflict, I don't think that's really true.  I think those things merge, right.  If we think that cyber tools are not going to be used for offensive operations, that may be a fanciful way to think of the world, but that's not going to happen, right.  So, there is no way that's going to happen.  So how do we just like we do in other areas, control this and make sure conflict doesn't occur.  So, part of controlling conflict, having rules of the road, international law and norms is to prevent conflict and we should be working toward that so I don't see those as opposite things and I see those as merging together, so I tried to hit a lot of definitions in that short blurb, but thanks for that.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Chris, and please help me not to become with the IGF Secretariat because of time management, but it is such a unique opportunity to have such good speakers and inspiring speakers and very good questions from then there is a question on the funding and skeptical view about the need for the any sort of centralization in that respect, and it has been elephant in the room, if I say, small and big elephant to use the metaphor, do we need central space and then there was a question, an interesting question from Mark from UK leading digital diplomats and recently retired, should IGF + establish a dedicated observatory for cybersecurity that provides technical advice, education, capacity building, resource, and this is an interesting issue and probably building inputs from GFCE and other existing initiative and great work of Singapore by the way in field of cybersecurity and training, and therefore that's one of the concrete questions and suggestions, and discussion really moving fast in the chat and we have 10 minutes now.
So, I will just give a chance to Enrico, and Enrico, so many questions from this discussion, so help me to stay within the next 10 minutes limits of this session with your comment.  Pick on any of the leads in the discussion and comment, please go ahead.
   >> ENRICO CALANDRO:  Yeah.  Thanks, Jovan, I will try to be very brief and I would like then to maybe expand a little bit on this idea of the cyber observatory at the UN, and so as a researcher, I truly believe that, you know, the domain of the Cyberspace and cannot be isolated by unique national and regional contexts.  That somehow can create a distinct set of challenges and it's through research that you can identify then the different maybe priorities and mechanisms for learning cybersecurity within national jurisdiction, and so also to fight against cybercrimes is a complex task that requires multilateral and multistakeholder dialogues, and it's really important to understand, I think through research, the cyber threat landscape and so that the response is really a design in an evidence‑based and informed way.
And I think it's also important then that, you know, once you're able to collect this evidence and identify uninformed response, some policies somehow have to be human‑centric, and so you know we do want to build more resilience, but the first step is really then to empower the Internet users as a number of speakers have said as well.  And resilience can be seen as a function of capacity, and so Internet resilience, I think it's a function of cyber capacity.  As we've seen, you know, during the COVID‑19 outbreak and I mean during the history of the Internet, the Internet infrastructure actually is a resilient network, you know, and as we keep working and under pressure and also under several attacks, still here up and running, and it works every time better and better and faster.  But for what actually we do need to build is the human resilience because it's actually the human security that is at risk.
And, you know, there is a problem of people's vulnerability, and I don't know for difference in developing countries, the landscape there is that the technology is updated, it's not scrutinized, and there are very low security standards and devices in practice in software, and there are really no measures to mitigate it.  So considering then the people can be the first line of defense against threat, is the most important vulnerable, you know, that we should try to protected and educate, and so cybersecurity policy, I think it should really aim at providing safe and security access and use of the Internet by building these human resilience and protecting, of course, the human rights online.
Just one final comment on these entity, you know, that should somehow I think create trust in Cyberspace, and I think that, you know, in the current landscape of tension, the UN from my perspective is recognized by a number of countries and especially developing countries as this kind of center of gravity, and I'm quoting here Dr. Mashabani from South Africa, developing countries feel they can really sit at the table of the UN and I believe at that level it's important to have global consensus on Cyberspace, but what needs to change from my perspective is the traditionally multilateral mechanism should then encourage a wider participation, both from developing countries that, you know, they're not always capacitated to meaningfully participate in this kind of debates, and of course to have also broader dialogue with a number of actors including Civil Society organizations, technical community, and others, so that all together we really can define these principles, norms, and rules for a safe and secure Cyberspace that at the end is truly inclusive and secure.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you.  Enrico, thank you for this.  You have support from Chrystiane on human‑center cybersecurity, and you mentioned human secure in your first intervention which is somehow forgotten in the international par lance but it's extremely interesting concept and I know it is supported a lot by Switzerland also because of the humanitarian aspect.
Now, Enrico, we will start with you, by asking you to make voluntary commitment, and be very careful because the Secretariat is taking good evidence of whatever we promise, and hopefully next time IGF will be so we have to deliver on that.  30 seconds for your voluntary commitment until the next IGF.
   >> ENRICO CALANDRO:  So, my voluntary commitment is to keep growing these needs of data, of evidence, and all information for development of evidence‑based cyber policy‑making, and so I'm committing myself to work more towards that.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Okay.  Chengtai, I'm sure you took this note.  Thank you for that.  Chris, what is your voluntary commitment.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I'm going to commit on myself and organization to increase regional focus in Africa and make our efforts more efficient and effective and overall, really raise the awareness and level political level of cyber and cyber capacity building.  We hope to hold a conference, but it's still in the planning but I can't announce it now but I can announce what I just announced and we'll do all we can do to that.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thanks.  John, over to you.
   >> JOHN DENTON:  Thanks so much.  We commit to work with members and partners to ensure that access to Internet and digital technology works on free layers of the digital ecosystem, infrastructure, applications, and skills, to work with policymakers to improve their understanding of how ICTs actually work in practice, to co‑create incentives for investment and innovation to develop and rollout and maintain tools and solutions to secure meaningful access for underserved communities and vulnerable groups, and co‑design frameworks that enable connectivity based on light‑touch ICT policy and regulations, encouraging competition and enabling the entry of new players into the ICT ecosystem and mobilize our amazing network of 45‑million companies, 12,000 chambers of commerce to get all of this done.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, John.  We will follow line by line next year when we meet at the IGF.  Latha?  What is commitment from your side, in addition to write a good blog post about trust bubble, it requires Latha.  This is commitment of time I'm imposing.  Please go ahead, I'm joking.
   >> LATHA REDDY:  As a cyber peace warrior, as I like to call myself, my commitment is to continue my work on increasing international cooperation, more democratic Internet governance frameworks, and on formulating cyber norms.  We need to coordinate and consolidate our national, regional, unilateral and global efforts to achieve this goal of keeping Cyberspace as safe and stable as we can.  That's my commitment.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Latha.  Eugene, what can you promise until the next IGF for our community?
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  Cybersecurity trainings for UN cyber diplomats.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Oh, great.
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  And just to answer, actually, I think we'll do it in very funny way.  Actually, we have different trainings of cybersecurity, and one of them is like it's a table game, it's like a monopoly game where there is enterprise which is under cyberattack and you are like CEO of the company of this enterprise and you have budget, options, and you have time.  And you must survive.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Wow!
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  We can provide this kind of training for UN cyber diplomats and it's really, really funny game.  Thank you.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  That's great to learn with a bit of fun by playing games.  And I'm sure that I will follow up directly on this voluntary commitment because it's so, so interesting.  Thank you.  Izumi, we're concluding voluntary commitment list from you.  What can we expect from your side, please?
   >> IZUMI NAKAMITSU:  Thank you.  Before that, Eugene, definitely also I would like to follow up on your offer as well.
So, from our perspectives, obviously in line with the Secretary General's agenda and also to the agenda, I will continue to the best of my ability my efforts to promote a global culture of cybersecurity, and that we do by continuing and further increasing our engagements with Member States to help foster a culture of accountability, which is another keyword, and also adherence and implementation of the norms that we talked about, rules and principles on responsible behavior in the use of ICTs.
Also, I commit to further increase our engagement with other stakeholders, including businesses, industries, Civil Society, and tech people in general, and I would like to actually add a second bit of my commitment.  It didn't come up today but I would like to make a commitment to promoting the full and equal and meaningful participation of women in all decision‑making processes related to this extremely important issue of cybersecurity.  We already do have a shortage of, you know, cybersecurity capacity, and in particular female capacities and we need to do all sorts of different kinds of efforts to bring up new capacities and also making sure that women are involved in decision‑making processes as well.
Thank you.  Thank you, Izumi for great news, and thank you to all of our panelists to helping me to remain in good standing of the IGF Secretariat because we're finishing on time, and thank you for a great attendance.  
I think the questions were excellent.  I tried to answer a few questions, and I ignored one question by one because he works for my organization, although it was a great question, but he can tolerate me ignoring his question.  It was really great discussion, and we should discuss serious issues also with some fun, and Eugene a commitment to learn on cybersecurity via a game is great, and I would like on this note to thank you for organizing it, thank the special thanks to the IGF Secretariat and UNDESA and all the people that put a lot of efforts behind this session.  And hopefully see you in person next year for a discussion on commitment and for having some fun.  For time being, I will have to ‑‑ I have to share with you virtually this drink, but next year we may develop whatever, beer‑to‑beer network and discuss serious issues in relaxing setting, which is in traditional diplomacy also a way to make breakthroughs.  Have a nice day, evening, late night for Latha, it's almost 1:30, and keep on.  Bye‑bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-ws325-internet-of-things-trust-trick-or-threats-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> Welcome to everyone.  This is our little panel on IoT.  We have a very interesting proposal, proposition that maybe you were not seeing around much.  We'll talk about IoT in the home environment.  You may be asking yourself what's different about that.  You know, whenever I think about the IoT, the first thank that comes to mind are those Articles about the future of automatic cars, about degradation, all of that, that's in the headline, but it often should be reflected this is valuable, IoT, for the end user as well.  Valuable and a little bit dangerous.  That's exactly where the title of the panel comes from, Halloween is still around, we're in that wood, we'll talk about the different ways in which this technology can influence lives of people and from different angles.  We have people who are researching this, in the industry, we'll carry out several different discussions about it. 
Just to frame things a little bit, I'm Mark Datysgeld.  I own a small consultancy in Brazil, Governance Primer, I work with clients in the Global South that want to participate in standard such as this one and helps set standards for technology.  I remember my first big contact with this subject was in 2016.  Some you have may remember, some of you may not, it is what's known today as the 2016Dyn cyber attack.  That was the first time that the subject really popped in my head.  It hit very hard, Dyn, which is ‑‑ it operates some of the worst DNS.  That was perpetuated by a botnet and that botnet, it was interesting, it made use of data driven home appliances like baby monitors, internal cameras, very simple day‑to‑day things that you wouldn't think as big threat factor, but since they had standard passwords, since they had those things that simply were default settings, didn't apply any particular security setting, they could be instrumentalized to attack a DNS provider which is pretty bad because that took offline a lot of websites such as github, Amazon, Airbnb just off the internet due to the action of one botnet and all of it originating from the home environment.  It is a lot of printer, baby monitors just attacking this very key resource of the internet.  It was concerning to me.  I'm like, okay, this is a subject for the future.  I think this is exactly ‑‑ an example of what we see on the side of the threat.
I would like to talk to my panelists today, it is an honor to have you all here, a lot of good people from a variety of backgrounds.  I'll get started with Savyo.  Savyo Vinicius de Morais, he is a researcher who specializes in this produce lots of interesting outputs and he's involved in the ICANN community and developing solutions for working with that protocol.
What do you think are the origins of the problem, exactly how this goes if you could.
>> SAVYO VINICIUS DE MORAIS: Thank you very much, hello, everyone.
I think the root source of this type of problem starts with the designing of the device.  There is a lot of on the shelf IoT devices with some types of design flaw that can lead us to security problems such as authorizing the IoT levels which led us to this type of botnet infections and other situations that starts in a simple point that sometimes the manufacturer set as coded on the source board of IoT devices and the full user name and bass words and the user cans change it or the users with easy guessable passwords by the end users which enables the unauthorized access.  Not only be botnets are the problem of these access, some are with access protocol.  Also they can lead us to some kinds of physical harm.  If you think in cases like a telecommunication connected thermostat being controlled by a hacker organization, they can set fire to a house or someone controlling the autonomies device creating an accident.
Not only these problems, but going to the privacy issues, there are a lot of cases of IT devices communication and this enables that everyone can see that network and has a life data source of accessible information since if you can see that, you can filmer that information and in times of data protection, GDPR, the initiatives, I think we should take a look on it so. 
When I think of this exact problem, it can be solved by updating firmware, but it is also a problem because the manufacturer, the manufacturer cannot just update the firmware and the end users, they hey not update the firmware and in the case of automatic update points you have to pay attention on it because a hacker can create a false firmware and expose the vulnerability on the firmware update systems.  When we think about this, I think one of them, it was an important point, to prevent this type of fraud, it is focusing in on having regulation of the certification of the devices and another point of view, to remediate the ongoing threats and maybe focus on summarizing ‑‑ standardizing network solutions to prevent these type of attacks.
Thank you.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: That's very something, Savyo.  When you mention controlling a thermostat to attack a home, even a corporation, that's very interesting in the worst way possible.  We transcend just this digital layer and we start to talk about physical damage which is again something that I think is being overlooked.  It is really good to get the perspective.  I think somebody who would maybe talk about what's happening when it is in the person's home, when that threat factor is actually there, it is Martha, head of operations at Zlitch technologies and is with the international bridge group in Ghana.  Martha, it would be really good to know from you what happens when that is in a person's home, what's going on there, how do we deal with that once it made it out of the facilitatory?  What's going on there.
>> MARTHA TEYE: Yeah.  Thank you, Mark.
Just as Savyo said, the designing is really sometimes ‑‑ most of the time, it is the root cause and privacy and security is among significant challenges of the Internet of Things now.  Such things like device updates, lack of sufficient, security protocols, user unawareness that people usually do not really know what to do when it comes to managing their devices, those are some challenges that the youth is facing.  Because the IoT introduces the connective concept where different people, different organizations, they can communicate with each other effortlessly, that poses so much of a challenge, that poses so much risk especially on the grounds where people actually are using these devices, they have to go through the challenge of having to secure passwords as Savyo mentioned, but realize that many of the devices of the Internet of Things are designed for deployment on a massive scale.  Because of this, the comprise of nearly identical appliances, similar characteristics, so this characteristics, amplified a magnitude of any vulnerability because anyone can connect at any point in time and similarly, many decisions have come up with guides for risk assessment, conduction, even within your homes, within your individual space that was conducted in the risk assessments to be sure of you're exposing your information, exposing your privacy to.
Let's say when it comes to authentication, IoT faces various vulnerabilities and that remains one of the most significant issues in security in many applications.  What we usually see, it is limited to how it protects just basically one area, the denial of service attacks and the replay attacks.  Information security, it is one of the most significant, vulnerable areas in authentication of IoT devices.  Because now it is embraced in almost every phase of life, for instance, in every home people try as much as possible to keep up with IoT devices because that's the trend, to realize that this risk keeps increasing and if nothing is done, people would be subject to privacy to the general public because the manufacturers, they're finding ways to protect the system and I guess I'm also always trying to find ways to bypass them to be able to get access to information.
If we take, for instance, the contact lists, credit cards which we use, realize that these cards are capable of allowing card numbers and names, the details of the cards, they're entered in, in this case, no authentication is done, and it makes it possible for hackers to be able to purchase and goods by banks using the cardholders' identity without authenticating if that's the real user because you just have access to part of the information.  These are some of the bridges and the design issues we see usually in the use of the IoT devices especially homes and institutions where they're used.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: That's pretty interesting, Martha, when you say something like lack of efficiency protocols and so son, it just ‑‑ it gives me a little worry about how the protocols are, what is the standards.  I think you're not very happy with that, you're not exactly very confident, is that so?
>> MARTHA TEYE: Yeah.  So you always see, even though there are protocols, guiding the use of the IoT devices in terms of guiding people, going through the price procedures, securing data, we usually see that people are unaware of these protocols, especially and people who are supposed to make sure that their passwords are not exposed, people are to make sure that the systems are secured, they purchase the devices outside of the manufacturing and the scope within homes, there is unawareness, creating a huge problem which leads to these issues and attacks and stuff like that.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: I would say that's sounding concerning and I think that we may have somebody that may have something else to say about that.  We are discussing here the manufacturing, the problems that's actually in the home, and our panelist, the senior researcher of IoT in cyber physical systems of Ericcson, Finland, and also works in AI distribution and the devices for IoT, he can say a little bit more about what's going on in terms of the protocols and how exactly you can get together what Savyo is saying, Martha is saying, Edgar, how do we move this forward?  What's going on?  What do you suggest?
>> EDGAR RAMOS: First of all, there is two sides of the same coin.
On one hand, for example, Martha was talking about, that this kind of credential, different data that's coming from the devices, which is kind of accessible and it could be attack, they have tried to solve this by centralization of data and this means many device manufacturers, they're having the same Cloud systems or they're having ‑‑ hiring Cloud systems from public Cloud where they actually start to collect a lot of data and they went credentials, everything, it is kind of in the same place and then they have a very big infrastructure, specializing, protecting certain types of assets, like, for example, credit.
On the other hand, the other side of the coin, it is that this model is scalable up to certain point.    the more devices that start to exist, the more difficult it will become to be able to centralize everything.  You have this data, so by now, there is data produced by all IoT devices and then the question is, who is consuming that?  That's also the problem with privacy.  If all my data is being collected in certain ‑‑ who knows wherever the data centers are, which are having the Cloud systems, so what regulatory framework is applied to my data?  Is it so that anyone from all countries that have an order from the law to access my data can do it, is it that I have some protections even for being a citizen of certain country, but not if I'm not, and so on.
Then there is another perspective to that, it is the end user agreement.  If I'm a use, I want to agree with another company, well, this is the data that you use, this other data, there is no way you can take it and do anything with it, what happens?  Today what happens normally, it is that you cannot Hughes the product.  Basically up buy a product, it says please do you accept everything, yes or no, and then if you say no, okay, sorry, then you cannot use the product and that is the situation today.
Finally, who wants that data, if my device is on ‑‑ it is my car, I'm driving it, my data, why should that data be shared to somebody else if I don't allow it or ‑‑ and then, again, if I have ‑‑ if I have already signed off that in order to use my car I have to be okay with that.  It is all this, you know, intertwined policies and agreements, something that I as a consumer will be fine with.  Maybe not.
Then the control that we have over these kinds of things on central level, it is very little.
When I was talking about the other side of the coin, it is can we actually bring down and try to recover, because if I have my own car, my own refrigerator, my own thermostat, can I adjust it for that particular device certain type of policies of what type of data is produced and where does it go.  Basically, what we're trying to do now, one of the main reasons for centralization, it has been AI and trying to bring intelligence to this device that can crunch big numbers, data, bringing you back some value, but then some of this, it could be on the device them self or even in systems which could be in our whole houses.  We could have our small server that could be put into a router which is the one that we cast on certain control over it and it could be a   gateway manager, a policy of what things can be brought outside, what things can I control in keeping my own ecosystem, my system in my house, and then also what things I want to have direct control and maybe some of them I can even provide some certain guidance, and then manage it in some way.
All this brings a lot of issues which is related to fragmentation.  How you could actually make possible that if all the devices are difference, all of the platforms are differences, should we just come out with certain way to being enable to implement this distributed system, taking into account the heterogeneity of hardwares and platforms.  Another problem is the monetization of the business model, nothing will happen if somebody doesn't make money out of it.  Unfortunately, that's the reality.  That's where the tri is playing a role, we're trying to look at solutions that brings up market incentives so we can be a part of solving this problem and at the same time that we're doing a service to society, we're also let's say having a profit out of it.  The profit is so that we can continue with our RND so that we can produce better solutions and then also everyone gets benefit and the user, the customer will be happy with those options.
I think that pretty much brings speculative of the problem, not only the problem of security, but what happens with the data and with the process.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: Thank you.  I think that sheds a lot of light on what we're trying to discuss, especially when you talk about the dreaded terms of service.  What actually are we agreeing to when we click that big button.  I see a lot of activity on the chat.  I would like to take this opportunity to introduce or our very valued supporters, we have Jaewon from the AP region, she was my next generation a few years ago and now she's starting in her right much bigger than me, thank you for being here, Jaewon, we have Liz from Brazil helping us here, keeping us honest and keeping us on time.  Thank you for being here.
I would like to ask from you guys if there is any specific question right now that we should be tackling, that you gather from the chat or should we move on to round 2 or should we ask our audience to maybe post on the QA part, what do you think.
>> JAEWON SON:  Maybe go to round 2.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: Have a list of intervention, everyone, so we can keep track of what's going on.  I would ask the audience if you have any pointed questions for our discussion, put it on the Q & A board.  We're good on time and we should be able to discuss them.
The second round, I would bring something a little more in, I would like to know how do we bring all of this together.  So we made this introduction, I think we know what problem we're trying to tackle here, and I would like to ask Savyo to bring this perspective from something that I know he's involved with, he's ‑‑ he has been involved with the idea of having studied this so Savyo, how do we tackle this from that particular angle?
>> SAVYO VINICIUS DE MORAIS: I'm following some executions on reinforcing IoT security in the network level.  I can say that they are doing a huge ‑‑ playing a role ‑‑ sorry, playing a huge role in re‑inforcement of IoT security in the network level.  There are operational Working Group and other groups and I would like to share here on a most important standard that was released by IGF related to IoT security and that is the RFC number 85.20 that is the manufacturer user description or just ‑‑ what's important for security, because I enabled the device, enabled the reduction of the capacity of the IoT wise being attacked or being used as an attack method and causing it ‑‑ to find ways to the manufacturer of the device, should the network manager, what are the expected network communication tracking off of the IoT devices.
There are skills that are building of a new working group at IGF to work in other more standards for IoT security, proving standards like these and others and for example in ICANN, I have contact with some operators just like from Netherlands and Canada, and they're working on, for example, home gateways frameworks which implement this mitigating of the botnets which are effecting the systems stability.
Academia is working on it, I can cite some great works from the University of sydney, others in the Netherlands and sydney, Australia, and as a master's candidate, I'm also working on it, developing a security complement for centralizing and it gives a second reliant point and the point of security in which you are not only relying into the manufacturer description of the usage of the device but the security operation set or security specialists can analyze, for example, the files and find possible backdoors created by the manufacturerer or if a new vulnerability is discovered, that is a communication, to exploit this vulnerable aand to have the manufacturer make a firmware update and we can ‑‑ the security team can bring this into the mass networks using description of these related malicious activities and then I hope that next year I'm going to ‑‑ I'm going to submit it as a drafting, this is an extension issue, it is IN issue and it is exposure, the analyzed activity.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: That sound good.  As someone that's been part of the youth movement, has been in the past and have comfortably moved into post youth, it is really good to see young people in the arena, it is good to know that you're managing to get the work started.  And on a personal note, it makes me happy to see that.  It is something that's very needed it ties perfectly with what Martha discussed with us on the preparation for this panel, it is exactly what goes on to terms ‑‑ in terms of ‑‑ some things have been deployed, some things have not, and there are many devices out there, there are many devices that are yet to be produced and there are standards and how do we title this together, what are good practices for us to make sure that this is not going very bad very fast.
>> MARTHA TEYE: Thank you.  It is not an implemented rule, they may be compliant, the policies, they're defined locally, what are some things that we can do to make sure that we're adhering to the Best Practices that conforms with all privacy and laws and so first of all, I would want to taking you a they went occasion serious, something that may have been overlooked, we need to rely on up to date encryption protocols that would help us encrypt end‑to‑end so that even if hackers managed to get access to your network or the penetration to the network, they're able to get information out of that, crypto, it is only as strong as it is implemented, if it is poorly implemented, with all of the protocols, they're non‑vulnerable, they will be more vulnerable in the future inasmuch as we take authentication seriously we make sure that we rely on updated encryption protocols and it also comes down to how strong these protocols are made.  Also, I would like to mention that aside taking authentication seriously, we need to also make sure that we change default passwords and credentials.  Many times, we purchase these devices, we bring them home and then we still go with default passwords that are easily guessed by hackers or any other person.  This advice may seem like common sense but it is real people out there, just going ahead, using supply default pathways.  We need to configure and make sure we change the passwords because this is something that in the industry we see a lot and also we need to look at the data which we're providing to this or putting into the IoT devices and we understand how the devices interacts with the data provided and also to be able to utilize that, to identify and analyze the activities which may happen and it is okay along the way.
We can say that we need to track and manage the devices well so it is a very good point to start with.  When we understand what exactly a device is connected to and then what they do, we will be able to tell and be able to keep up with all of them, even manually.  I would track and make sure that the devices are not being intruded and going into attacks or any of these ‑‑ finally, I want to say that we need to consider using a risk‑driven strategy and we have these IoT devices that comes and we require some cybersecurity and I would recommend that we use this strategy to set off and place priority on certain critical assessments in the IoT infrastructure and we look at them and value them and prioritize them and secure them accordingly and then we'll stay safe also.
Yeah.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: Thank you.
You said a magic phrase which is critical on IoT structure.  When I hear that, I'm immediately brought back to my little word of internet governance and ICANN, a critical source and asset.
Moving forward, I think we need to think even more on how the devices are working, not only how the network is work, so you're adding a little extra complexity to something that's already complex, we have a lot of problems with routers and the default passwords and that exploitation, and it looks like it is not getting any easier, which is why we would like to call on Edgar to help a little bit more on what can be accomplished in the other groups and what different postures can be taken around the industry for us to see light at the end of the tunnel.
>> EDUARDO BARASAL MORALES: Sure.  I would like to also bring even additional aspects that are beyond networking.
In connecting with what Martha has been saying, additionally engrips, for example, we think that they are end‑to‑end, that's the end of the problems and then everything would be secure and then we have to ‑‑ we have the two places so what's the task, this end‑to‑end connection, it means that you have a relationship between the two entities.  How do you work where trust cannot be ensured in the sense that if I'm a car, I'm driving, then I go to the next traffic light, how do I trust that traffic light?  I have never seen it before, I have never seen a traffic light there previously, how do I start to communicate with that.
This mechanism of trust that we use today, they're starting to be evolving to be becoming something more Ad Hoc, something that you actually have to handle with policies instead of handling with rules which the rules is like if I find traffic, traffic light 1.3.4, then I do B.  If it is not that, then I don't do anything because I don't trust it.  You can't apply that kind of model any more.  Another problem that we're having, it is problems of discovery, how do I know that that traffic light exists, where do I start to look for it, how I can find what it does, and then when I finally want to know what it does, how do I know what that is, how do I know that a traffic light, that it is actually showing me the colors to know that I have to go forward or maybe it is just seconds, in so many seconds the traffic light will be lasting or if it is having a sound, whatever, whatever is the service that this traffic light is behaving.  I need the models on top of what it is being given.  Then I have to understand this in the same way, how the traffic light understands it.  If the traffic light thinks that red is a color and it is defined with certain patterns, I have to understand red as the same traffic light.  All of this mean, it means that we need standards when using this, same for distributing, we're talking about the decentralization, we may need federation, we may need ways to connect systems that iOS are not connected and they need to have connectivity not only from the physical layer perspective but also on higher layer, how you actually access those services, is it a API, using calls, whatever type of things that we're given and then if you're talking about criticality, there is an issue about latency, capacity, so do I actually have what I need.  Do I want, then my car sends a packet to the network to ask do I need to break in this moment, because there is something detected in the lighter in front of myself‑driven car, but I want the car to be the one that takes that decision, so I break now, I don't wait for the whole latency to send the packet to the processing, so it comes back, yes, please, break as soon as possible.
We have these issues that need to be solved and it requires joint effort, it is not only the device manufacturer, not the network provider, it is not the application developer, it is everyone that's in the chain.
Therefore, we need beyond standards that we're having in internet governance and in IEEE, we need consortiums based in a specific group of use cases, for example, the automotive is one good example but there are quite many other example, for example, the critical processes with robot, then we have also maybe the consumer devices, we'll also have their own consortiums and then not only that, we think to go a little bit more horizontal and identify the specific things which are effecting to everyone and seeing how we can give tools that everybody can reuse so that we have a better way to solve this kind of more particular problems which are what we call verticals.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: Thank you so much.
I think what you did, it was on a broader manner, how do we look at the way that the network interacts with the devices and who takes control, who takes decisions and I think this kind of puts us in a seamless way to some of the things that have been raised in the chat or with attendees, in particular I would like to bring a question brought here by professor that tells us about data ownership, so he has the data ownership over problems in our daily life, any alternative, this is something that I think we have discussed a lot in our preparation, exactly where is the data, who owns the data, if they were to control it and I do think that the panel has something to say about that.  I know for a fact that you do.  I would like you to make maybe 1, 2 minute interventions on the subject because I know we have something to say about it.
>> EDGAR RAMOS: Data is interesting, you think that data, it is Harmonic, you can transfer from one place to another.  But the things, you can copy, you can keep it, then money, you don't copy, and then you give it, you lost it, that's it.  Data, it is different.
That means that we need mechanisms that could in a way mimic with what we do with money, if you give the data to somebody and that person can use it, that institution can use it, cannot have the chance to copy itself.  So there's been research done based on electric knowledges to do this and try to address specifically that problem, how can we do that the data is not applicable, if you're not given permission to do that.  I think it is very interesting research, it is going in a direction that will bring us there, so that you can pinpoint what's the owner of certain owner.  How is this generated, what level is the generation established?  We have another thing that has to be considered and it depends on policy, regulations and maybe your own preference.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: I know Martha may have something to say about that.  Want to intervene a little bit?
>> MARTHA TEYE: Yeah.  I do.
Just to add on to what's been said so far, when it comes to data ownership, the owner of the data, whoever is providing that data should have an opportunity to request or refuse how data is transferred outside to any collection without user action.  As it stands now, the manufacturers, the companies, they have access to the data no matter what, and even if they're not going to have access to the data, some way, somehow, data is told either locally or even on Cloud, so there should be some form of strict policy or laws binding so that the people have the right to either refuse the transfer of the data and then we can say indirectly, individuals are also having ownership of data other than third parties having ownership of the data.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: This ties well with another question that we have had, is there a rule on connection or unconnection to full‑ data home, that ties directly with that, right?  Exactly how it works with the fact that there will be dataflowing between the device and the manufacturer.
Before moving on to the next question, which is really interesting, I would like to ask, Savyo, anything in particular to add to this one?  Should we move to the next question.
Perfect.
Are there thoughts on legacy IoT that's been up for years since the last update was provided.
On the matter of legacy IoT, it is something that I have researched a little bit, and I know for a fact that from the time that the device is planned to when the components are developed, when it is deployed, there is a huge life cycle, and then after that, there is the whole life cycle that goes into the person's home and then there's no policy there.  How do we work with that, everyone?  How exactly do we deal with this and we make sure that whatever comes forward, we have the legacy five years from now, what do we do with that?  I see that we're unmuted, he's fired up to answer this one!  I give it over to you.
>> EDGAR RAMOS: Yeah!  This is one of my passionate things in the sense, I believe in a sustainable world.  I believe we should be in a planet where the things shouldn't just be trashed because they cannot be updated.  I think there's a crash here between let's trying to make things sustainable, the most long‑living possible, and the other thing, let's bring new products, let's bring the new features as a new product so you have to buy again the same thing that you had but a little bit better, and then at the same time, we don't get ‑‑ do we force you to go to the upgrade?  I leave it ‑‑ I work in the industry.  I know how this thinking goes.
This should be more circular economy thinking, it is being brought to the industry and it is being brought to the industry.  It is starting to belong there, where we are now starting to generate products which are more generic, generic in the sense that they're more like platforms, they enable features and these features, they may be software features and they use artificial intelligence features or they use support from other parts, like, for example, new sensors, new type of data inputs which may be services given by websites, whatever, that maybe the previous generation didn't have and the only thing you have to do is a software upgrade and then getting new things in the data platform, a little bit, we can think about ‑‑ I like Android a lot.  It has brought a bit of that, not fully, I still ‑‑ still we have to buy a new phone if you have the latest Android, let's say device.
But you can actually have quite many updates and bring quite a lot of new value to your device.
Then my refrigerator, the car, until the end‑of‑life of that device gets, so, okay, you cannot have enough processing because the lithium battery can no longer be processed and there is certain reasons for that.  Then maybe you only need to change certain parts and then the device could continue going on.  I believe that's the future, that's how it should go, but everything is a market economy these day, now you have to find the incentive to make it happen.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: I find that rather insightful.
We really need to balance out things here.  It is not just being an activist, saying how do we do this, how do we balance the industry, how do we make sure, okay, let's make money, at the same time, let's make this responsible.  I think there is a very tricky balance there.  Savyo, I wonder if you have anything to add on top of that, you're the academic/industry/‑‑ you're there.  You're in the middle.  How does that go?
>> SAVYO VINICIUS DE MORAIS: Another point of view, it is legacy systems.  It is not quite so different from in computers, for example, so we still have cases, for example, of computers and companies and schools using Windows XP, which was ‑‑ which has now security updates a long, long time ago.  Still we're saying that it was a continuation, not that much user group, but we still have end users using it.  We just deal ‑‑ this is a problem we'll have to deal with dramatically in IoT because of the nature of the ecosystems and then thinking in countries, in development countries, who ‑‑ I think that will happen in this type of situation, it is that ‑‑ okay, we have a smartphone, I have ‑‑ I want to be able to buy and use my phone so I'll sell my one here and buy another and the life cycle will keep going and going and going from a different point of view, ongoing on the shelf IoT at least for the mass enjoyment systems, they're available on a website where you have to communicate to the website to use your IoT systems.  This can force us to change again.
It is not a big difference.  We have some different points to take in consideration in this type of thing.
Maybe we'll have maybe not that much problems because we'll have this type of communication with the device that's created by the vender.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: I find it fascinating we're moving to a point where we can actually start to have these conversations and hopefully we will.  I wonder if Martha has anything to say, I know that is something that's also very much in your heart.
>> MARTHA TEYE: I think to add to what's been said so far, an alternate way would just be to use gateways where you provide the data chain that you have, the sensors, trying to get or create all of the data and then use them.
This is an opportunity to have an optimized device and prevent failure in most cases.  So it would much more services at the end of the day and this would have to come with intelligence, including intelligence in that this is done to avoid any mishappens in the system.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: That sounds perfect.
A lot has been discussed here, exposed here.  For the benefit of the audience, in case anyone wants, I'll be posting my email on the chat, in case anyone wants to connect with any of the panelists to ask further questions or learn more about some of the technologies that we have discussed here, please reach out to me, I would be more than happy to connect you and bring this information to you as I think we're discussing some very valuable points here and time flies.  We have 3 minutes to go.  I would like to thank my panel, you have been wonderful!  I think this discussion has been well structured and we have brought very interesting points and it is so good to have everyone talking about such interesting things and I would leave a space for a small 30‑second consideration, 1 minute top consideration that you may have for us to closeout the session.  You can also do some spam and advertise any project that you have.
I'll pull the trigger now, going straight to Savyo.
>> SAVYO VINICIUS DE MORAIS: Thank you.
The first thing, I would thank you for the invitation.
An interesting point to think about, this is not a future problem, this is an ongoing problem or not just a problem but a solution.  We have an ongoing problem.
Thank you.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: I would call from the floor our Rapporteur Jaewon, you have been watching so intently our discussion.
JAEWON SON:  Thank you to the panelist, I have learned a lot today since I'm from a very non‑technical community.
Yesterday I was talking about exhausting computing anno IoT can help environment and now we're talking about the threat.  It made me kind of think of everything.  For me, the users, they may not even know about these system, I really hope that this session may have brought more awareness toward the issues.  Just when you buy a cigarette, it says the warning about you may buy or something, but for the IoT devices, the one really says, when you buy it, you don't really know what's on it, right?  I think the company wouldn't really write about it, since they have to set it.  I thought of ways, that maybe there should be a policy, a law about the implementing a warning, maybe you have cyber attack, something, maybe it should be there. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-bpf-gender-and-access^^

 
   >> BRUNA MARTINS DOS SANTOS:  Good morning, everyone.  I think we are going to give it another one minute before we start.  Just so you are aware.      (Pause). 
   >> Ms. Sorina, I think you can start.  They are in another session.  I will make you a host for now and then I will rejoin you.  
   >> SORINA TELEANU:  We can start in a few seconds.  
   >> BRUNA MARTINS DOS SANTOS:  Do you want me to start?  Welcome, everyone.  Welcome to the BPF session at the IGF 2020.  My name is Bruna Martins dos Santos.  I am a advocacy coordinator.  And I would like to welcome you all again to this session.  Happen to be one of the co‑coordinators and Moderators of the session today.  And I will be sharing this task with Marwa Azelmat who should be joining us any moment now and to mention the names of the cofacilitators.  Today's session is taking ‑‑ is a taking stock exercise over the past six years of BPF activities.  And for these subsequent years we have looked in to topics such as access barriers in the gender digital divide in 2016 and identifying the needs of refugee women and indigenous women and women with disabilities back in 2017.  So supplementary models of connectivity in 2018 and the opportunities and challenges that women face to gain necessary skills from the Digital Economy in 2019.  
For this year ‑‑ and also in light of the discussions of the IGF strengthening we decided to conduct an assessment of Internet related policy spaces and processes through a feminist approach to determine whether and how to protect and foster participation of women in to gender diverse people, particularly young ones.  The focused will be placed in Internet related policy processes that addresses issues related to violence, harm, pleasure and consent.  And as I said the session today is a dialogue on this topic, on these four topics violence, harm, pleasure and consent and how we should work on improving that and making sure that these topics are being addressed at IGF and other Internet Governance related Forums and also being addressed in the correct and a nonrepressive manner.  
We will start with the presentation of the BPF draft report delivered by Sorina.  Sorina Teleanu is a BPF consultant for this year.  And then we will go in two shorter panels from our panelists who will be Jennifer Chung, director of corporate knowledge at Dot.Asia and Anri van der Spuy, Reseach ICT Africa and Avri Doria, ICANN board.  Hopefully we will be joined by Koliwe Majama from the APC but she might be having issues with the agenda today.  I will hand the floor to Sorina and hopefully she will conduct a good presentation of our previous side report which is a great word from her.  You have the floor.  
   >> SORINA TELEANU:  Thank you.  Hello, everyone and a special thanks to our panelists who have woken up quite early in the morning.  Many, many thanks for that.  I will try to go as fast as possible through our long, long, report.  We will explain a bit how we got there and what were the main findings that were looking at IGF itself and focusing more on the recommendation that the BPF has put forward.  And we can continue the discussion from there.      So let me try to share my screen.  And you should be able to see it.  All right.  So the best practice Forum on gender, this year the thematic focus has been on four key issues and these were violence, harm, pleasure and consent.  Sorry for the bad typing.  From a gender diversity perspective.  And the focus was on the IGF itself, trying to see whether and how these four thematic issues have been brought up at IGF over the past four years, basically when the new mandate of the IGF started and how the IGF has fostered the participation of women and this discussion focused on the four thematic issues.      What we did is we conducted quite an in‑depth analysis of sessions held at the IGF over the last four years.  We were looking at session descriptions, reports where they were available.  Not everyone apparently submits a report after an IGF session and session transcripts.  We conducted a public survey.  We received 30 contributions and those received were impactful.  We conducted interviews with the IGF community and members of and the MAG Chair.  And those who took the time to guide us to the experiences with IGF and gender inclusion.  And then we looked at contributions submitted in to the usual IGF taking stock processes which happen at the end of one IGF cycle and before the start of another IGF cycle.  
So based on all of that, our report is focused on two main issues.  And the first one is again how gender issues have been featured at the IGF with the focus on violence, harm, pleasure and consent online from the gender diversity perspective.  And what you can see I hope on this screen are the basic key findings on these issues.  The first one is why IGF has featured discussion on gender‑based violence and harm.  And we have seen that over the past four years.  There hasn't been so much focus on issues related to pleasure, consent, self‑expression and alike and it seems there is a tendency to focus more on problems and negative issues.  Promote Internet as a space for self‑expression and consent as a guiding principle.  This is something that you will find in the report.  
These are some of the numbers behind our research and some percentages.  Just keep it quickly because otherwise I would spend too much time on it.  And again some of the key findings also based on those numbers that you have seen.  The percentage of IGF sessions that are focused exclusively on gender issues is sort of constantly low.  So it is between 3% and 7% across the four years, but there is a positive and encouraging trend showing an increased number of sessions on other Internet topics.  This has increased from 16% to 41 in 2019 which is quite good.  And then percentage of sessions dedicated to the BPF, violence, harm, pleasure and consent or all consent has been relatively constant across the four years oscillating between 2 and 6%.  
And one general observation across all the years that we have looked again scanning to session transcripts and reports, gender issues tend to be discussed in access and inclusion.  This is a quick overview at some of the topics that have been featuring in discussions.  I just move next.  And here obviously you see that there have been more discussions related to violence and harm.  And these are a few examples of topics that have been discussed.      And the second broad issue that we looked at was the inclusion of women and gender diverse people both in the IGF itself at large and also in discussions related to the four thematic issues.  And some of the key findings IGF discussions on violence, harm, pleasure and consent do exceptionally well.  I guess it is expected in terms of gender diversity amongst speakers, Moderators and participants.  IGF data.  And the overall general feeling among the people we have been talking about is that there has been good progress over the years to foster better gender diversity but there is always room for improvement.  There is no mechanism in place to measure inclusion of gender nonbinary people.  And we need some more disaggregated data to look at these things as well.  
Now moving in to the recommendation section, I will try to go as fast as possible through them.  We also have a few categories of recommendations here.  The first broad topic is around gender mainstreaming at the IGF.  And quickly we would like to suggest to the IGF to continue encouraging the integration of gender related issues within discussions on other Internet and digital policy issues building on policy trends.  A suggestion for the MAG to maybe consider including a question in the IGF workshop proposal forms inviting session organizers to indicate how they plan to approach or whether they plan to approach the proposed topics from which the diversity perspective.  And looking a bit at the gender report cards would be a bit unused over the past few years to maybe assess them a bit and see if they could be made mandatory for all session organizers, but then really use them to conduct some sort of an analysis.  
And while discussions dedicated only to gender issues should still happen it is important to ensure that these discussions are not only attracted to communities they are referring to.  Go a bit beyond the usual circles and suspects.  Then reaffirmation of the fact that inclusion in gender in the debate is a two‑way responsibility.  It has to be encouraged from the top, from the MAG, IGF Secretariat.  The community should be more proactive in requesting gender‑related discussions or gender mainstreaming, whenever it is felt that it is more needed.  Should promote more discussions and linkages between the best practice Forums in order to foster or allow for more interdisciplinarity.  
Our recommendations are the following, encourage more discussions on empowerment, self‑expression, pleasure and consent.  As women and gender diverse experiences are not, should not be limited to harm or violence issues and recommendation which is sort of new to us, the IGF has the opportunity to become the main space that fosters discussions on how to empower and uplift women and gender diverse people in the digital space.  And it should not miss this opportunity.  Then making sure that discussions on the four issues do not happen again inside (inaudible), but they reach and include the wider IGF community and even beyond the IGF community.      On gender diversity, as I have said earlier, there is a need for more disaggregated data to fully assess the degree of gender diversity across the overall IGF.  And the MAG could consider legal ‑‑ some sort of a mechanism to measure inclusion and participation of gender, nonbinary people.  And we do acknowledge this is not an easy task.  It would be quite difficult to figure this out and this is why we suggest the inclusion of gender diverse people in a conversation on whether a mechanism could be built.  Then the gender diversity principle should apply, of course, across all sessions including those focused on gender issues.  And avoiding eco chambers once again is an important thing.  
And then another thing which is sort of dear to us the participation of women and gender diversity in sessions and other IGF activities should not be tokenized.  Just having women on the panel should not be the end call.  It is about empowering these people to participate and contribute to the discussion.  Not only in one session but going beyond that and see how they can contribute to IGF work.  And related to this is the recommendation to go beyond capacity building, towards developed confidence building for those who work on gender issues at IGF and maybe beyond as well.  
Another important recommendation is to work more closely with other organizations that are active and actively engaged in gender related issues and creating more linkages with the communities at the local and regional level.  Another specific recommendation is to use the famous or not famous list of resources, to have more gender diversity in sessions.  And then when discussing approaches for fostering more gender diversity at the IGF, we should seek input from the targeted communities and not try to solve programs without involving the specific communities.      Then it should not only be about the workshops and sessions that happen at the annual IGF meeting but also look at IGF as practice Forums in general, Dynamic Coalitions, various MAG Working Groups or community Working Groups and would benefit from having some sort of agenda assessment in terms of how they are thinking and tracing gender participation and topics of gender in their work.  On the capacity development building side there is also the issue of trying to allocate more funds to encourage the participation of less represented gender communities.  And we are finding is always a challenging issue but we could not miss this recommendation.      And another recommendation is to encourage innovative session formats within the annual IGF meeting as a way to foster some sort of cross‑pollination and break the silos in which we have again the same people having the same conversations.  And related to the MAG because we also looked at this and also based on some of the discussions we had during the interviews we have two main recommendations.  One is for the UN itself.  When appointing MAG members the Secretary‑General should look at whether candidates that do have expertise on issues, having women on the MAG does not necessarily mean that expertise on gender issues are present.  When the wall for nominations for the MAG is open it might be useful if we make it somehow more clear about gender diversity.  And that might encourage gender diversity people to get in to the process.  
And the final thing I am going to cover is our recommendation for some further work that the IGF could take up.  And this is also because of the facts that the best practice Forum didn't have enough resources and capacity to go beyond just looking at the IGF.  And that's basically, first of all, mapping policy processes and spaces that discuss the four issues in the digital space from which gender diversity perspective.  Then mapping policy processes and spaces that discuss violence, harm, pleasure and consent and then trying to bring this community somehow together in the framework of IGF by inviting them to contribute to IGF discussions and activities focused on these issues.  And that's basically it.  
Our report was published a couple of weeks ago.  It is online.  It is still open for public comment until the end of the IGF.  So that's not so much.  We only have a few days left, but if you would like to add to our recommendations and add more suggestions, please send us an e‑mail by next Tuesday and many thanks.  
   >> BRUNA MARTINS DOS SANTOS:  Thank you very much for the presentation of our draft report.  And maybe just highlighting some of the recommendations and bridging them with one of the comments in the chat.  There was a comment about how we should make IGF more friendly for gender diverse people.  And this was definitely some of the recommendations and things that we have been hearing at the BPF space for years now on how even the registration form isn't welcoming enough for the gender diverse communities.  These are ways to kick off this.  Although the name is the BPF gender and access.  We welcome and we could ‑‑ from broader discussions on these topics and moving just for beyond ‑‑ we have been trying to move beyond the female axis and framing this as women and so on.  So we could definitely profit from this community inside the BPF.  I'm going to hand the floor to Marwa, is one of the other BPF cofacilitators and my fellow co‑Moderator for today's session.  Marwa, you have the floor if you are here.  
   >> MARWA AZELMAT:  Yeah.  Thanks, Bruna.  And hey, everyone.  This is Marwa.  And I'm also working at the Association for Progressive Communications as a policy advocate coordinator.  Today I'm very happy to see this culminating.  It has been so many months of work.  And I would like to thank Sorina for leading this process.  So it is really great to see that coming out finally.      And just to begin with the thematic around violence, harm pleasure and consent, it has been hard to find that sort of position for this thematic within the realm of Internet Governance and digital rights space because it is a thematic that's leaning towards feminist practices but also needs to be more consolidated from a policy ‑‑ from a policy perspective.  But also within the Internet related spaces.      And because we know that if we ‑‑ if you are to build safe spaces for women without undermining their agency because that protection approach can have a chilling effect on freedom of expression and women's ownership of their online experience, but also when it comes to translating feminist work around consent and pleasure in to policy recommendations, it is very hard to just have these policy centered perspective that would really be ‑‑ that would really speak to different stakeholders.      And so for today's panel we have Anri with us.  And unfortunately Koliwe couldn't join.  So the good news is that we will be speaking with you, Anri, for the whole panel.  But we also open the floor for interventions from the panelists and participants.      And so basically my question to you Anri, is that do you think this thematic has developed in the context of the Internet governance and digital rights space?  The floor is yours.  
   >> ANRI VAN DER SPUY:  Thanks, Marwa.  And also just thank you to everyone who has worked so hard on this initiative.  As someone in the past who was been involved more intricately and knows how hard it is and it is very joyful but it can be very hard to put a best practice Forum together.  Congratulations on this work.  I enjoyed reading your report.  You have started a lot of new conversations and steered it in a new direction.  There is a lot of potential in there.      And, you know, with that then I think it is maybe useful to pause and look back a little bit at where we are coming from because I think that might help us understand to some extent where we are going to given that there is a lot of recommendations in there that we can build upon.  And maybe I think Avri will be able to jump in on this, but so I say this with a caveat, that I joined the IGF in 2015 and immediately roped in to helping the best practice Forum on gender which is like baptism by fire because it was a very interesting year in that we discussed the topic of online abuse and gender‑based violence, which then also became sort of the best practice Forum became, sort of subject or the object of a group of trolls affiliated to the gamer gate travesty in the U.S.  It was not an easy time for a lot of participants.  And also ‑‑ it became a very good case study of how much we still need to do in this space in terms of enabling people to talk about online abuse and gender‑based violence.  I know from my own purposes it really highlighted to me how people don't understand yet properly that online abuse is a real form of abuse.  And I think that's sort of ‑‑ it is actually ‑‑ it is ‑‑ it is a common theme in my work and research.  Because I think understanding online risks better and seeing it as a real risk is something that a lot of policymakers still don't get.  
I say this with the idea of looking back, as I hope that Anriette and Avri help on this.  Jac Kee who was leading this group for the first two or three years I remember her saying to me it took a long time for the IGF to put gender on the agenda and to get a best practice Forum.  It started in the second year of the best practice Forum and it took a lot of convincing to get to that point.  Take that look back.  And to realize that it is also going to become a continuous struggle.  It is really interesting when you read this report, we are getting this in to a more nuanced understanding of what we mean by gender and unpack issues around positive and negative rights of freedoms to.  And then also the need to go beyond just binary notions of gender which I think is great in this report.  And it is great that we are looking at these things.  
So I just wanted to give that sort of brief background because I think it is important to know where we are coming from before just sort of analyzing and trying to understand where we are now.      I think broadly speaking Marwa, you asked about to what extent the themes of pleasure and harm and violence are now common across Internet Governance spaces.  In my experience I think it has become more common, but I still think ‑‑ I'm not at all surprised at how uncommon it is in the space.  You mentioned about the fact that you see in sort of some ‑‑ we still have a very sort of siloed approach to dealing with these issues.  And just one recent example is Chenai and a couple of us were involved in making a submission in Africa to go around violence.  It took some convincing to get parliamentarians or policy makers to realize and to believe us when we tried to convince them that the online dimension of domestic violence is something real.  And the problem there is so little data out there, which is great that the best practice Forum has tried to unpack some of the data that's out there.  
We need that sort of data in order to better address these problems.  Without that data we really are sort of trying to address things while being blind.  I think the point that you make in the report about the emphasis being on more negative constructions of rights, so sort of freedom from being abused, et cetera, that's very true.  I think we see very little focus on the more empowering aspects of freedom, but again given sort of the experiences that I have had outside of the digital space I still think there is a need to talk about the risks and the harms, et cetera.  Because I think it is easy for us because we are in this world, we sort of deal with it a lot to think it is very common and people realize that there is such a thing as online abuse.  But as soon as you step outside of our little bubble it is not very common.  And people don't yet understand.  There is a lot to this sort of the need to encourage more sort of multi‑disciplinary conversations which I know that the UN Secretary‑General has highlighted as a priority for the IGF.  And I think that's very true.  We need to get outside of the bubble to talk more in gender spaces about digital dimensions and the best practice Forum.  And similar sort of policy spaces need to probably do more to invite more gender experts and people working in complimentary fields.      So that's just sort of a point in terms of trying to pick up on some of the recommendations and findings that Sorina has highlighted.  Some of you might know that Research ICT Africa as commissioned to do analysis of data around participation in IGF since IGF was created.  And among other things we looked at gender or male, female participation.  There is a lot of interesting findings that we come up with.  I will try and share my screen.  And while I try to do that I will explain.  What we did is we tried to ‑‑ we looked at the annual participation data that we have for annual IGFs.  And basically we sort of tried to assess various dimensions of it.  One of it was gender.  And as Sorina mentioned a big problem is that most of our data that we have only see gender in the binary male, female.  
Since 2017 we have had the category other which very few people have responded to.  So I mean I think that the other dimension is around 2%.  I think, you know, that's a very easy fix and you can better define what we mean by other.  I don't think that anyone enjoys being defined as an other.  But broadly speaking participation from women, females have improved since 2006.  It used to be around 30% and it is now around 42%.  So that's broadly speaking a positive thing.  And in terms of sort of stakeholder groups there is always sort of an allegation that Civil Society are way more active, and especially women from Civil Society to some extent that's true.  Because most of the stakeholder groups we have more men participating than women except for Civil Society.  And then we also sort of ‑‑ we looked at and I think this is kind of interesting and also worrying, we tried to look at the Intersessional activities at the IGF and tried to analyze to what extent there is actually active participation in these activities.  And meanwhile findings are very much provisional.  They tend to show that there is kind of decreasing participation    and less active participation.  
That most of the participation on the mailing lists seem to come from IGF staff and that a few of the same people keep on sending messages.  And just I say that because I think it is interesting and it is important to note that we need to probably do more to ensure that when we talk about diversity, equity and inclusion that we are doing enough to make sure that that isn't just a tokenistic notion.  And I think Sorina also mentioned that in the recommendation.  It is quite a hard thing to do.  I think that's part of the problem, going beyond tokenistic sort of tick box approaches is a difficult thing to do.  But that's partly why the best practice Forum has a good job ahead of it, to think of how we can talk about these things.  And I think in to some extent it can be quite influential in other policy spaces in trying to set a trend and showing how do we better ensure that we don't have tick boxes to measuring things like participation that goes to male female and other.  How do we ensure that people are actively participating.  I saw in the chat that someone was mentioning that it is different to know how to participate.  How do we make sure that people know what the end is.  And I think that's sometimes ‑‑ that's sometimes difficult.  Especially when we talk about more difficult or sort of controversial topics that might invite discomfort and Anriette is saying on the chat.  A conversation around diversity, equity and inclusion, we all need to become comfortable with being uncomfortable, but I think that's enough from me for now.  Thank you.  
   >> MARWA AZELMAT:  Thank you.  Thank you very much for this comprehensive intervention and for sharing the findings of your organization.  And I really echo, yeah, your concerns about moving beyond this sort of eco and moving this bubble at the IGF where everyone is at their comfort zone basically.  And it is good to challenge the way it has always been challenged.  And I guess one of these ways is to move beyond this tendency to just frame this thematic from, that negative perspective.  We would need also to be more focused on the pleasure part, the consent part and the women's agency part.  But also the agency of people of diverse gender and sexualities.  Because I still think it is ‑‑ it is often overlooked within these spaces where we more see how the Internet related spaces are harmful for people, are violent and are abusive whereas I guess we have a lot of potential to enlist when it comes to giving people that agency to just embrace themselves and their identity online.      And so I guess we still have a bit of time if some of the panelists would like to also jump in or if the participants have any questions for Anri.  I'm seeing some comments.  No.      I'm just seeing some ‑‑ reading some comments about the discomfort that talking about sex, pleasure, consent, and yeah, I mean and gender.  Not as in the gender divide but from the feminist perspective that creates that discomfort within these policy spaces.  And I know that it is ‑‑ that it is very ‑‑ yeah, this is very hard to tailor these sort of, yeah, interventions for different audiences.  Perhaps if ‑‑ yeah.  Avri.  
   >> AVRI DORIA:  Yeah.  Thank you.  I'm a panelist.  I'm Avri Doria.  A panelist later but just so there would be no responses, or so there wouldn't be no response to, one of the things I'm wondering is I have not been actively involved with the IGF for the last couple of years, was not involved at all in the BPF.  So I'm coming from reading and observing, but I'm wondering how comfortable it was working on the BPF within the current IGF?  Is the IGF a safe space for these conversations?  Has it been?  I know from my first years of involvement in the IGF when before Jac sort of broke it open with one of the other presentations in the first years, it wasn't unmentionable.  Now it is mentionable.  One can talk about the broad umbrella of gender issues.  But how safe did it feel?  How welcome did the conversation feel to those of you in the BPF at this point?  Thanks.  
   >> MARWA AZELMAT:  It has opened the floor for conversation and I guess that's a good starting point.  And that's why we are trying to here to dig in to that issue.  Chenai, you had a question?  
   >> Yes.  Thank you so much for Sorina and Anri for being in this conversation and following up on the question that Avri has raised, in addition I think ‑‑ sorry.  The host is starting my video.  So I think in addition for me is in addition to Avri's question is also in your ‑‑ both your reflections, Anri and Sorina, and whoever else participated in the actual review of this work, would the IGF be a space where we can actually talk about women that's having agency, women and gender diverse people having agency and the need to have policies that respond to that.  And the discomfort about sex, is the UN space more kind of like we have to be conservative.  And we are trying to protect.  Therefore we are not going to engage in this issue.  I'm sort of like juxtaposing the two points but that's something that's quite important to reflect on.  Is the IGF the space for this conversation or should we go to the UNWOMEN's group, for example?  
   >> MARWA AZELMAT:  Thank you for that very poignant question.  
   >> ANRI VAN DER SPUY:  I am glad that Avri brought up Jac and the fact that it was really uncomfortable and that's maybe six, seven years ago.  It is not that long.  I mean I know it is a long time in the history of the Internet.  But it is not that long.  So I kind of ‑‑ and to Chenai's point as well, I don't think ‑‑ the fact that something is uncomfortable should mean that we shouldn't speak about it.  I like the fact that you have framed it as such.  Around what's happening in today, around ‑‑ whatever you want to call it, colonialism, we really need to be interrogating things around agency and especially so for women and people who are typically left out of the equation.      And I think this is definitely the space to do so.  I think if anything ‑‑ as I said in my earlier intervention is I think we might have been a little bit amiss in not doing more to reach out to other fora to bring it there more.  And I know in the early years, in the best practice Forum we worked closely with the women.  And maybe there is a need to do it again.  They need to work more with the IGF.  So I think yeah, I think there is definitely a need for more sort of cross fertilization between spaces and the need to deal with discomfort and to talk about it.  And again like really like the framing of agency, although that would require us to also talk about power and where the power lies and why certain people feel excluded.  
When we talk about diversity, equity and inclusion that's something that we often neglect is talking about what are the barriers to having more people in a more diverse space.  And I think one of the comments was around the difficulty of knowing how to participate.  That's a barrier that should be quite easy to address, but it does require a lot of hard work.  Thank you.  
   >> MARWA AZELMAT:  Thank you for that and I guess it also goes back to the language question and how we can tailor it for different audiences and stakeholders.  Anriette, you have the floor.  
   >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thanks.  Thanks, Sorina, for a great report.  You know, I think the answer to that question that we discussed and yes, I think the IGF is the right place.  But I think that we need to think where in the IGF and in what way.  I think ‑‑ and in what ‑‑ the part of ‑‑ not what way, I think applies not just to this work but I think to IGF work in general.  And you need to ‑‑ I think especially for a best practice Forum, I think the narrower your focus, the more effective you can be in raising the issue.  I think the reason that the best practice Forum on violence, on gender‑based violence worked well and they had various reasons.  The one is that it was a very narrow focus.  The second is it was being discussed broadly.  And in fact, APC and partners who were part of this best practice Forum had done a lot of research around the world.  So you had a kind of bottom‑up approach because APC had these voices of sex workers in the Philippines, for example.  They had the voices of feminist groups in Latin America talking about their experience of online gender‑based violence.  
There was a lot of evidence and voice that would inform that process and come in to some kind of policy recommendations on a common problem.  The problem was gaining recognition.  So you even had in the IGF context other stakeholders.  You had Government.  You had business.  Technical community interested, willing to contribute.  And I also think you had to some extent the freedom of expression advocates who had been opposed to considering any kind of recognition of the need to control or regulate or prevent harmful speech.  That also kind of come to the table.  So the circumstances came together.  I think with other topics that can be quite hard, but I think you need to think who you ‑‑ what you are talking about.  
Let's take pleasure and consent, the whole issue of erotic and content on the Internet, a lot of people are interested in.  Think of the businesses that are making money out of it.  How do we get that topic to be discussed at the IGF in a way that brings the porn hub to the table?  And there can be more debate how do we actually look at sex, sexual experience, sexual expression, sex business on the Internet.  Sex work on the Internet.  And in a way that's more inclusive.  And I think to me is what's really challenging.  And I think that while there is a coherence to the feminist analysis being applied to a best practice Forum, I think it inevitably excludes a lot of participation.  Because there are just so many people to kind of just run amuck when they see the words feminist analysis.  And I mean I might find that annoying but that doesn't ‑‑ I think in the IGF context if you want to have a results in the form of a best practice Forum, you have to find a way of making your framing somewhat broader.  And maybe for me and I have been learning a lot since I have been MAG Chair about the differences between Dynamic Coalitions and best practice Forums.  You can be more creative in a Dynamic Coalition.  A Dynamic Coalition on the feminist principles on the Internet.  In a best practice Forum if you go in with a feminist framing you are going to struggle to get all the kind of, you know, the multi‑stakeholder buy‑in that you kind of have to have in an IGF context.  
So for me if it is not that whether it is the IGF or not.  I think the IGF is the right space but I think we have to be tactical, realistic.  But what type of strategy and approach works best in what type of IGF platform.  And in that sense I think Dynamic Coalitions might be a lot better for pursuing the feminist approach.  And you can still bring that to bear to a best practice Forum.  But yeah.  I mean I will stop at that.  So the answer is yes, but we have got to be careful and realistic and tackle about the limitations of a multi‑stakeholder ‑‑ (no audio)   
   >> MARWA AZELMAT:  Thanks, Anriette.  I guess we lost you at the last point or just me.  In all cases I really echo your points about yeah, I mean creating that sort of third wave of the BPF within the IGF itself.  Because the IGF holds a lot of potential to pave the way for such conversations.  And I guess I would hand it over to Bruna for the second panel.  So yeah.  Thanks, everyone.  Bruna, over to you.  
   >> BRUNA MARTINS DOS SANTOS:  Thank you very much for this excellent discussion.  I was very happy with what I was listening to.  Maybe inverting a little bit of discussion or changing kind of our direction on this, I would start by echoing a comment from Anri, that when she said that it is interesting and important for us, that we need to do more when we talk about diversity, equity and inclusion and that we do this in a way that it is not tokenistic.  And this past point of discussion in which we were talking about this discomfort and also how to ensure that we can move towards the moment of cross‑pollination and so forth.      So the discussion right now is more focused on the IGF and policy spaces.  The idea is to discuss with Avri and Anri and whoever wants to join, the policy issues.  My question to you would if what some of the recommendations provided by the BPF are applicable to the Internet Governance Forum or other policy spaces around Internet Governance?  So I think I'm going to hand the floor to Avri first and then Jennifer.  
   >> AVRI DORIA:  Okay.  Thank you.  And let me repeat what others have said about Sorina's report.  It was very good reading.  And actually learned a lot from it.  Because these ‑‑ the violence, harm, pleasure and consent aren't subjects that have given a whole lot of thought to before reading it, always looked at gender issue in terms of inclusion and in terms of access.  Because those are such big problems and remains such big problems.  But ‑‑ and then perhaps except for the consent issue, which has sort of very much entered a legal realm where it is actually being spoken of.      So very grateful for that.  I do sort of wish there had been greater data samples for the ‑‑ for the data because they are small sample sets.  And trying to think about that as a first issue is sort of how does this work get done.  And it is a very broad umbrella we are looking at here.  You know, going all the way from sex to the legal issues of consent and such.  So how do we then zero in actually getting things done, getting things in to policy, getting considerations in to policy.      Now one of the things that occurs to me is that while those of us in the bubble that are even willing to talk about it, even willing to sometimes say the words don't sort of realize or don't work that much with those who don't even understand that there are such concepts.  That there are such issues.  And they are looking at their very narrow areas of policy.  And when they are looking at them and then you basically ‑‑ but how does this fit within a feminist sort of principles.  How does this deal with the issues of gender.  You hit a blank wall.  You hit a place where the conversational frameworks are so separate, that they do not know how to even apply the concepts.  And that is not to judge anybody's ability to apply the concepts, but I think that there is a certain amount of translation needed where people who are concerned, who are doing theoretic work, who are steeped within the theme of violence and harm or of pleasure or of consent, can sort of dig in to the other issues and say, this is the place.  These are the sentences.  These are the words.  These are the concepts that apply specifically in the view that you are looking at.  That means having a fair number of people with a fair, broad set of understanding so that you can go to the various DCs.  
I was thinking back to the DC that I'm coordinating on schools and Internet Governance.  And as I was reading this report I said gee, we never talked about that and I'm even someone who should know what I'm talking about.  Someone who should maintain awareness on it.  And yet looking at the schools on Internet Governance and even thinking through the curricula that we have started to talk about, that issue did not figure in.  And so why ‑‑ even when you have people who are aware of the topic not connecting it to the other policy issues.  Let alone people to whom the whole issue was, you know, was forbidden.  And perhaps still is.      You know, Anri was referring to five, six years.  The first time that Jac brought up as a concept was the first five years that I spent as the Secretariat.  Where she brought up sexuality in a regular main session and the Secretariat had a crisis.  Can we include this?  Can we list it in the transcript?  And have all sorts of Delegations that was like how could you talk about such things.  We have come a long way.  We can talk about it now but still connecting it to the policy themes.  How does the IGF go further on it?  Inclusion.  I think the idea of including questions is good.  Including questions that ask people not specifically perhaps what are you doing for diversity, what are you doing for gender, but questions that are more considerations.  You have considered this in the planning of.  Have you considered that in the planning.  And sort of getting in to more detail that asks them to look at their considerations specifically.      So I think there is a lot of value in that.  I think that the report cards are good.  I think anything that anybody makes mandatory is a problem.  But that may be my own particular fetish on things that are mandatory.  But ‑‑ so I think there is a persistence that is necessary.  I think there is a focus that is necessary.  It takes people that understand both the gender issues and the other issues that are being spoken of and can translate.  And it is important to use our own language.  It is important to use our own framing.  It is important within our own thematic work, within our own framework building.  And yet it is also important to be able to translate that in a tactical sense to the language that other people are using when creating the policy so that they understand.  
Very similar to things that Anri mentioned about, you know, I think it was Anri, about ‑‑ or maybe it was Chenai, please forgive me, that talking to the South Africans, talking about yes, there is domestic violence online.  But basically having to basically do a transaction.  So think that is the tactical part that really needs consideration.  And it needs focusing on lots of things.  It needs perhaps in the construct of a Dynamic Coalition focusing on looking at the work that others are doing and how can we import our knowledge, concerns, how can we import the feminists' analysis.  
Perhaps even without using scarey words at first and explaining it and then say oh, by the way that was a feminist analysis as opposed to at the front door saying all yee who enter here prepare for a feminist analysis.  And not to negate the agency or the drive to use our own terminologies in these discussions.  Because the question goes to when you take it outside the IGF, it really involves understanding constraints that other people are talking within.  It involves the understanding their language.  It understands the way ‑‑ understanding the way they talk.  The way they tactically because people accept new ideas kind of when they are slipped in.  But they back off and get defensive at times when things come on in language they don't understand.      With pressures that they feel being put upon them.  And that doesn't excuse that.  But it does make it a tactical necessity to get around it.  If you are going to actually, you know, achieve anything with policy processes.  I think that sort of persistence and making tactical decisions and doing that sort of analysis that goes deeply in to how does my topic, how does consent, how does harm, how does pleasure map to the discussions of others are having and that's hard work that can be done in a place like the IGF.      That can be done in a place where talking about models is reasonable.  Go to a lot of other places and start talking about models it is like no.  We are here to talk about protocols.  We are here to talk about this.  We are here to talk about that.  We are not here to talk about brand visions.  We are not here to talk about models of social justice or feminist framework.  So how do you then bring it down to that.  And I think the IGF especially in the DCs and in sessions when in the IGF we notice main sessions being set.  So is there someone that is on the panel that is capable of bringing up those issues.  So working with the groups that are setting up panels to make sure not necessarily that there is a woman on each panel.  Or perhaps if you have a panel of just women, that there is a man on each panel.  But making sure that, you know, there is someone who is able to talk about the issues under discussion in that framing.  To be able to bring those issues.  To be able to ask those questions.  Very often use a platonic style can help as opposed to telling people what's going on and what they should be thinking about.  You are asking questions that led them to thoughts that are real ‑‑ thoughts that will actually affect the policies that are being made.  I don't know how long I have been talking and waving my hands, but I think I will stop now.  And then if there are questions, talking this early in the morning is tricky.      But basically, you know, maybe there will be questions later after Jen has talked or what have you.  So thanks.  
   >> BRUNA MARTINS DOS SANTOS:  Thank you very much, Avri.  You have touched upon a lot of ‑‑ some of the recommendations and points of convergence between our recommendations as well.  And it was specifically on the framing and how it is important for us and for everyone in the space to make sure that the framing is taken forward.  And this sort of inclusion is just not something that's on the paper or just something that's relatively mentioned in IGF and ‑‑ at like IGF Forums or even schools or so on and so forth.  
One of our recommendations for beyond the IGF was to positively foster this sort of linkages between those processes and inviting people to contribute to the IGF discussions but also help with activities focused on other thematic issues.  And I'm going to pass this discussion to Jennifer right now because I know ‑‑ Jennifer works for Dot.Asia and also somebody who has been within APrIGF.  So, Jennifer, maybe you can bring a little bit of your experience on whether how to include these topics in different Forums beyond the IGF or anything you would like to add to this discussion.  The floor is yours.  
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you, Bruna.  I want to echo all the speakers and panelists before me.  Reading the report from the BPF gender is enriching.  There is a lot of really good points that are actionable.  A lot of datasets that are analyzed and I actually echo what Avri said before me.  It is a shame that the sample size is bit small, but then I think that one of the things that can be actionable.  If we are looking at trends, looking at where we should be going, that's one of the things that we can start improving on.  And I think the IGF and also the MAG as well have improved in the years since Jac opened the door to making this more a normal conversation.  So I think having more data means probably looking at every part of the chain.  I heard a lot from Anri earlier and it is really encouraging to see the statistics of participation, at least the categories who do not subscribe to, you know, traditional male, female, a place ‑‑ this is what I identify with.  
So this actually is an improvement from previous years.  But more than that, we should look at it in the scope of the entire arc of the process.  So speaking a little about with my MAG member hat on right now from the beginning of the process of the year, we go to the community to ask them what they want to talk about and I think, of course, we do get a lot of input from various sectors, various regions, various people who represent different communities, stakeholders.  But I think we need to go a little beyond that as well.      There is a feeling actually to years ago since Paris from the speech of the Under‑Secretary General, Secretary‑General of the UN we want to find the people that we want to bring in to the IGF space.  We want to reach out to the marginalized communities.  In the very beginning of the process we should not only open the door and say that everyone could come in and tell us what we want ‑‑ what you want to hear from the IGF.  We need to go to these communities that tackle these issues, to these communities where we want to hear from and ask them specifically.  So it is not just opening the door.  We have to go to their door.  Knock on their door and say we want to hear and please tell us what you want to talk about.  Please tell us what is important to you in this context.      So that's No. 1.  And then I guess moving a little bit more to when we are talking about consultations as well, to bring in more gender experts from, you know, gender experts, people who work in this field.  I must admit I myself, I'm not a gender expert.  I have a lot to learn both from the report and the panelists who spoke before me.  But within the space where you create this work, we need to bring in that.  And I think Anri also touched on the cross‑pollination issue with working a little bit more with UN agencies such as UNWOMEN or other organizations that do specifically tackle these issues.  So bringing in the gender experts you want to hear from as well.  To kind of level up the knowledge of people who are interested in this space as well.      And then another point in the process is you need representation.  Now I know a lot of us have already talked about, you know, need to move beyond tokenism, but the image that we project is important.  And the image we project starts not only with who we are asking to come and speak at the panels, who we are actually including in to the MAG, who we are asking to speak at high level sessions.  And a lot of us have noticed that through the years this has improved a lot, but it also depends on the different buckets, the different themes that the IGF really holds.  
Now in the inclusion theme, in the access theme, on the rights themes there is quite a robust representation of women, of people who are marginalized, people with disabilities, people who identify as nonbinary.  In other areas that's not so much the case and I think myself coming from a background, I mean for Dot.Asia we sometimes are considered a technical community.  Sometimes we are considered private sector.  I see a lot fewer people, women, people who come from these communities in this space discussing technical items, discussing cybersecurity.  Lots of times the panels or experts gathered around these tables are less diverse.  And there could be good reasons, historic reasons about that.  It also means that we don't have the responsibility to reach out to create at least the image that we project out to people, a welcome space that we participate in.  
Moving on to the logistics part of the whole arc of work in IGF, I guess in the workshop proposal, like logistics and forms where we ask people, I think I saw in the chat earlier, if we ask workshop proposers if they plan on involving gender issues within the discussion, not that we are saying you have to talk about this is the only topic that you talk about, but in the context of framing different issues in the Internet Governance Forum in IG are you planning to talk about this with a different perspective as well.  I think that's really important.  That gets people thinking about what kind of policy questions they want to put in the proposal.      And then I think the post session report is also important.  I know that people have said the gender report card is great.  How do we improve it.  And this year I'm responsible for organizing one of the main sessions.  Working on the, you know, quick report I already see those questions there that ask, you know, did you talk about gender issues in your ‑‑ in your panel.  And I think that's really important, too, because it is like not only are you asking was this talked about, there should be other dimensions you are looking at as well.  So it could be that the main subject of any panel may not be particularly based on gender but the nuances of issues that are talked in between could be teased out that way.  
And lastly, I don't want to take too much time, lastly is data.  So from the APrIGF point of view we actually started working with BPF gender I think since 2016 or '17.  I do recall when we were in Bangkok, which is 2017, we did have a joint session with BPF gender talking about this kind of introducing taking statistics, having a gender report card and that was really a successful session.  It was a very interesting session.  And since then in our post session reports we have also included that.  We included questions worthy to be discussed.  What is the gender balance on your panel.  And these are the questions that every time a workshop comes in they are accepted, they are implemented at the actual Forum.  The post report is actually very important because I guess a little bit of context in APrIGF, we do look at the post session reports.  How the session was already conducted and that does have knock‑on effect of whether or not these same organizations or same proposers next year will have a successful workshop coming through.      And then finally, I think I want to move my intervention back to the BPF.  I think that a lot of us already said, you know, we see a lot of the contact at the IGF when we talk about gender being based in to inclusion and access.  And I think what is interesting is the name of the BPF is BPF on gender and access.  And this was something that was implemented or suggested by the MAG either two or three years ago.  My memory is a bit fuzzy now.  And I think linking these two at the very top in the name of the BPF already kind of brings a direction this way.  It brings the direction this way.  And people who participate in this BPF coming in new were already ‑‑ have a preconceived, at least a notion this is what we are going to talk about.  And we are going talk about gender and access.  
So a suggestion maybe if we want to move it to somewhere different, if we want to move it beyond that, you have to start with the name.  And another thing I want to pick up on, the last point I want to pick up on that Avri mentioned and Anriette mentioned is finding a balance and a tactical approach in being able to talk about what we want to talk about.  It is important to have people you need at the table.  And if you kind of gauge that at the beginning with a title or something like that it is not going to be possible.      And you need to also balance it because you don't want it to become an echo chamber, but you also don't want it to become a space where it is not comfortable for everyone to participate.  And finding the commonalities is something that's really important, I think.  I will stop here and see if any other one wants to jump.  
   >> BRUNA MARTINS DOS SANTOS:  Thank you very much.  Thanks to all who have been contributing to this discussion on the chat.  I guess now we have a space for anyone who wishes to ask for the floor or to add anything to the discussions.  On the chat so far we have made a lot of comments on this need for the change in the BPF name and also some other points and our involvement in policy processes and how the BPF is committed to continue working on this.  I'm going to open the floor again.  And ‑‑ so if anyone wants to join please raise your hand or just open your microphone.      Okay.  Seeing as say in ICANN, seeing none and hearing none I think ‑‑ 
   >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Can we just look at the recommendations?  Because I think your team and Sorina have some very concrete practical recommendations in the report.  And it might be interesting to get people's perspective on them.  Maybe we can look at them again and reflect on how to work with them.  
   >> BRUNA MARTINS DOS SANTOS:  I am sharing my screen now.  I think you can see them properly.  Let me know if I need to make it slightly larger or not.  But the recommendations were divided in to four streams.  And Sorina, if you want to jump in to this discussion and help, the four streams were gender mainstreaming, integration of discussion on violence, harm, gender and consent and gender diversity at the IGF and beyond the IGF.  
   >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thanks a lot.  And maybe if we can jump to the one on data.  Because I think the fact that Anri shared earlier that she has been doing this research that we managed to get some support from ISOC for and the research turned out to be very complicated because of the data.  The IGF has limited capacity and the gathering of data.  Because we are going to look at how to in the light of Anri's research which is about participation broadly, not just in terms of gender.  We are going to come up with some recommendations to the Secretariat on data.  And so I wonder Anri, seeing as you have looked at both this and your own experience of doing the research, what are the recommendations that we would like to see put in to practice let's say from January, post this IGF, January 2021 with regard to data?  Data gathering and gender disaggregation of data.  
   >> Sorina, you want to jump in or any of my BPF cofacilitators?  
   >> ANRI VAN DER SPUY:  Thank you.  There is a couple of easy quick fixes that could be done.  And one of those, those is how do we ask about participation, male, female or other and maybe expanding on that.  I saw there was a suggestion that the gender report cards be made compulsory.  I think I share Avri's concern about anything that's compulsory.  In the session reports that the workshops have to do we might include more questions around participation.  My concern and my experience and slightly ashamed to say this but I know how these workshop reports and afterwards you are I have to submit this workshop report and I kind of estimate how many people were in the room and how diverse you think it was.  So I think we need to do something that's more sort of a realtime assessment and whether that means like you have a Rapporteur at the moment in each session.  You might have to have someone report in each session on gender and diversity and equity and inclusion.  
I think the more difficult things, and this is something I'm grappling with more broadly with the IGF participation study is that I think, you know, broadly this kind of comes to the notion or it speaks to the notion of multi‑stakeholder participation.  And at the moment the metrics that we have in place are simply to tell us much about diversity, equity and inclusion.  We need to sort of go back to the foundations and think about why we support the notion of multi‑stakeholder participation.  And a lot of that has to do with the benefits of getting diverse views on issues and people from different stakeholder communities.  And one stream of that is ensuring you have people from different cycles, communities and whether that's private sector and breaking down private sector in to sort of a bigger group, whether that's sort of big tick organizations or Mobile Network Operators.  So there is clearly a broad need for more nuance in how we ask questions about participation.  
And I think, you know ‑‑ and what we are doing around the study is trying to unpack how we can talk about exclusion and inclusion and active and passive participation.  And that's a harder question that might take some time to address.  But at least I think we are starting that conversation.      So I'm sorry, I don't think I have provided a lot of answers.  I probably provided more questions.  I like some of the suggestions that Sorina has made around gender report cards and how we include those things.  Yeah.  
   >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  I think those are very concrete.  Sorina, what would you say are the concrete questions that you'd like us to implement in the short term?  
   >> SORINA TELEANU:  IGF has made a few concrete recommendations, maybe not so big changes.  And one of them is looking at the list of resource persons.  And it is not extremely well used.  And that could help session organizers have more gender diversity intersection.  And those help assess how that goes.  And one specific recommendation there was considering including tags that would allow experts who are women or gender diverse people to identify themselves if they want to.  It won't be something compulsory.  And then when the session organizer is saying hey, we have a difficulty bringing gender diversity on the panel, we would direct them to the list of resource persons.  
Another recommendation was to maybe encourage session organizers themselves to invite speakers to identify themselves as if they want to and then put that information on the workshop page or whatever with the consent.  And that would help with getting data later on how exactly the gender diversity was on the session beyond men and women.  There are a few concrete and specific recommendations.  Maybe we can put them in to practice as the new cycle starts.  Thank you.  
   >> AVRI DORIA:  If I can jump in?  One of the recommendations that really sort of rang with me was the one of basically, you know, having women and gender diverse people in sessions is not the end goal.  Participation is not tokenized.  Nor should participation stop once the session ends.  That point.  And also the point in the subbullet about basically whether it is the IGF, or DC that's specifically focusing on this, or some other, you know, group of people working together, of supporting presenters and participants.      And that sort of goes to what I was talking about before, in terms of how to basically find ways to mesh things.  To basically bring the gender issues and the ‑‑ and the policy issues together.  How to start merging them so they are not separate.  So that it is not just often a bubble of people.  Or just a token participant on a panel.  But that that communication, that steady state of participation is continuous.  It is why also the recommendations about the Intersessional, especially when combined with Anriette's suggestion of doing something more intentional, will Intersessional activities so that mid year as opposed to just at the annual, if this, you know, set of issues, if the gender set of issues is brought in to bear and actual weaving in of the concerns of the issues of the content is done and that kind of context you start to get it more persistent, repeated more often, brought in different contexts and different ways, planting little seeds that grow up later, but basically that sort of effort.  So I think those are important parts.      One thing that I don't see here and ‑‑ but that occurs to me, and it is perhaps because I'm spending too much of my life prioritizing things lately, given that this is such a broad area, not every issue is pertinent to every discussion at every point in time.  So figuring out priorities, for particular, you know, main sessions, four particular DCs, four particular other organizations is sort of not bring all of it in at once, but what is the most pertinent issue that can make headway, that can start to build the awareness.  So those are things that show up in these recommendations that I really recommend paying attention to as this effort moves on persistently.  Thanks.  
   >> BRUNA MARTINS DOS SANTOS:  Thank you very much.  We are going to move to the close‑up of the session.  And I'm going to hand the floor to Marwa in a few seconds, but just again this point of continuity and also ensuring that the IGF is not broken up in to parts or before the event or after the event was also a main concern for us this year.      And before handing the floor to Marwa we have two Q and A questions that I think at the close‑up or even as we can maybe try to approach, but the first one would be is an Ombudsman question on the table and why going with the feminist approach at IGF and would it be part of the solution that would change the Forum itself.  So Marwa, you have the floor.  
   >> MARWA AZELMAT:  Thanks, Bruna, and thanks, everyone, for this very thought‑provoking session.  We all have some food for thought.  And we all agree that we need to find these sort of commonalities, but to break the silos and find that third wave of keeping up the momentum within the BPF.  Right now I will just hand it over to all the panelists for a closing remark.  And if you want to pick up one of the questions that we have in the Q and A that Bruna just read, feel free to, yeah, to just include that in your remark.  Thank you.  Whoever would like to go first, just take the mic.  
   >> BRUNA MARTINS DOS SANTOS:  IGF this year is also about the voluntary commitments.  Do our panelists think that there would be any voluntary commitments that we should take on with regards to this topic or moving the BPF forward or anything like that?  
   >> ANRI VAN DER SPUY:  I can jump in.  I think I'm uncomfortable with silences clearly.  I have learned so much in this session.  I know that everyone has said thank, you but even for the study on participation of the IGF, I think I really liked and I wanted to pick up on one point that I can't remember who made it, but the fact that we need to consider the sort of saying about whenever you see a nail and you have a hammer you want to hit that nail.  And consider where it is actually relevant.  And be much more tactical about whether we talk about these things and how we talk about these things.  
So really like those two kind of separate suggestions.  And there were a few really interesting suggestions around having a mid year check‑in which I think is quite doable and sort of virtual IGF showed us how it can work really well.  So just again thank you from my side.  I have learned a lot from reading this report.  And I think if anything it can get us going, thinking about in the best practice Forum conditions another year what the focus should be.  I think my vote would be for something quite narrow.  I think the best practice Forums that are narrow work well.  And I like the suggestions of ‑‑ suggestion of thinking of a Dynamic Coalition to talk about more uncomfortable subjects potentially.  So yeah.  Just a couple of very unorganized thoughts from me.  But thank you very much.  It was a great session.  
   >> AVRI DORIA:  Thanks.  And if I can jump in I would endorse everything that Anri just said.  Because it does make a lot of sense.  One of the comments did ask about shouldn't a feminist principle, a feminist way of looking at things become a norm inside of IGF.  And certainly that's to be hoped but that's not something that can be stated upfront.  It is something that again will take growth.  And yes, I'm very grateful for the BPF paper.  It certainly made me think about what things I'm not paying attention to in other spaces and should perhaps start paying attention to.  And I would recommend that others read it in your own spaces, what are the pieces that I can bring them in and when can you bring them up.  And thanks so much.  
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  I will jump with a few words.  Endorsing and saying plus one to what Anri and Avri also said.  I guess my final point really is to look at data.  We really do need a comprehensive set of data.  We want to take note where we are doing well and take note where we need to improve.  And touching slightly I think on the question of an Ombudsman and it was answered in the Q and A.  It is always a funding issue.  Having a space where to come up without putting extra workload.  I suggest that we take that forward to the community, to the next MAG.  And the current MAG is done.  But I think it is very important that we need to work towards.  Tell. 
   >> MARWA AZELMAT:  Thanks.  Sorina, would you like to wrap up?  
   >> SORINA TELEANU:  I was writing in chat a thank you note.  At once we looked at IGF itself and it was the right time.  Thank you, Anriette, Anri and Avri and Jennifer.  Many thanks for that.  There is still a bit of time to help with more suggestions and recommendations as we finalize our report.  If anything else you would like to add, send us an e‑mail and we will be sure to include it in the consolidated report to be ready at the end of the IGF and many thanks.  
   >> MARWA AZELMAT:  Thanks, Sorina.  And thanks to all of our panelists and attendees.  We are still open for inputs, comments, recommendations.  Just keep them coming in.  And I guess that's it.  Right, Bruna?  
   >> BRUNA MARTINS DOS SANTOS:  Just to add my thank you as well.  And ask everyone to join the BPF if you haven't yet.  This was a great session that I hope sets the rhythm for the next year.  Thank you.  
   >> MARWA AZELMAT:  Thank you.  
   >> Thank you.  
   >> Bye. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-high-level-leaders-track-security-%E2%80%93-raw^^

   
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Hello.  Welcome to the session.  It's 9 L 9:30 in Moscow Friday the 13, late night.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Great intro, Eugene.  What is happening now should never happen in future.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I think my first computer was ATARI 800 with cassette tape drive so it was hard to get any virus back then because it wasn't popular enough.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  I'm worried we're revealing our age with this information.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  Too late on this one.
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  Do you remember this?
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I took a class at Johns Hopkins in learning to program on those in Fortran and then Lisp.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Eugene, 82 or 83?
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  80s.  Do you remember this?
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Of course!  Let me see if I have something.  (Laughing).
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I highly recommend everyone goes to the Wesly Park museum that has the rooms where they broke the Nazi codes but also a museum of computing history with hard disks like the size of your car and everything, it's great.
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  I'm not sure about others but in Munich there is very first electric computer made by German guy, what was the name of that guy?  It was like the name of computers was Z1, Z2, Z3, like this in 40s, during the Second World War, so I had a picture of him standing in front of this computer and then the computer ‑‑ yeah, the electronic ‑‑ electronic calculating machine.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Christopher has a background from another machine which determined the outcome of Second World War.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  The original first digital programmable computer that broke the Nazi High Command code and Bri ts kept it secret by mid 70s so they lost their leg up by that, but you can see this at the museum.  Joaf scroaf well, I hope that Chengtai will promote or moving into ‑‑
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  Moving from past to future.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Yes.  Do you know to Churchhill said in order to look forward, you have to also see backwards, that's that interplay which is always important.
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  Exactly, especially when you're speaking about technologies and the human behavior of technologies, you have to predict what the cyber criminals are going to do next, okay, so learn.
   >> CHENGETAI MASANGO:  I think you can start now, four minutes behind, yes.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you.  I really enjoyed enormously this some sort of time machine with our panelists today with the Eugene and Christopher and other colleagues, and what we started is with some sort of message that in order to see forward, we have also to reflect on history and the past, especially this interplay between technology and security.
And my name is Jovan and I'm the Head of Geneva Internet Platform and Director of DIPLO Foundation and used to be co‑director of High‑Level panel on digital cooperation and it's my honor to be here with you today to introduce our panelists through the time zones and through the way of what they're seeing now.
I am connecting from the quite ghostly building of the UN here in Geneva, and it's empty, not only because of pandemic but it is almost 7:30.
We have two of our colleagues in daytime zones.  We have IzumiUN UnderSecretary General of affairs connecting from New York, and we have Christopher Painter President of Global Forum on Cyber expertise connecting from Washington DC one of the first cyber diplomats from U.S. administration.
Then we have two panelists who are making real efforts to join us in this night zones.  First Eugene Kaspersky but I'm sure there is no need to introduce Eugene because you see Kaspersky and very well versed into the history of computer science, and that should probably be some topic for some good broadcast or even a book, Eugene.
Further today is our dear colleague Latha Redd co‑chair of the global commission of stability on Cyberspace, another experienced cyber diplomat and Latha thank you for joining us and it's midnight there and it's really appreciated.
Let me come back to the middle zone of Euro‑african to introduce the other panelists todayment we have John Denton joining from Paris and John is Secretary General of International Chamber of Commerce and we have Enrico co‑Director of C3 in Africa and Chair of GFC Research Committee.
That's more or less geography of today's session, and I would like to thank Cengetai the organizer of today's session to introduce some sort of time fairness.  Usually in our colleagues in Americas have to wake up early in the morning or stay late in the evening and that is a some sort of rebalance in that respect.
Now, today's major topic for our discussion is a question of cybersecurity, and I will just try in a few minutes to paint the canvas or backdrop of our discussion today before I pass the floor for our eminent speakers in our excellent panel.
While we're all familiar with what is going on around us and how the digital technology helps humanity to have some sort of societal business continuity over the last seven or eight months, and thanks to the robust digital infrastructure, students continue to studying online, and they're provided with even a rather simple facilities, but important in the times of lockdown of ordering food or working online.
And sometimes it is a given of how the technical infrastructure, how the digital infrastructure really sustained in this difficult time, and I think we should be proud, especially those of you who are involved in ensuring that the digital technology, it is major achievement.
In this process of changes of what has happened, digital companies, tech companies became more important, more relevant, and more dependent on the digital technology creating new vulnerabilities, and we will address them in a few minutes.
Now, this is the general backdrop.  Now, more specifically, cybersecurity issues and digital policy issues are raising relevance in foras and international meetings worldwide.  Now, we are finishing the first week of Internet Governance Forum and the cybersecurity has not been picking up so much, probably there was a need to have this important discussion and then to have more discussion on cybersecurity next week.
Now, before I pass the floor to our panelists, I would like to ask Luis to pose the ‑‑ to put the survey to see what is the atmosphere in the room when it comes to cybersecurity and vulnerabilities.  I hope technology will serve us, and if not we'll move directly into discussion.  Luis?
Okay.  Well the question is as you can see, is the current turbulen times, for many the Internet is essential to work, relax, and stay in touch with family and friends.  How secure do you feel online, regardless of whether you use the Internet for professional, family, or leisure.  How you are feeling about the Internet, particularly secure, secure, not particularly secure, unsecure, or very unsecure?  Let me see what will be the answer from our colleagues in the room and then on YouTube and I guess there are more of them on YouTube that can participate in the survey.
Okay.  We'll get getting the news soon, and in the meantime, we'll be seeing from Luis, what is the result.  Okay.
Well, we feel quite secure, but not particularly secure, and unsure, and very unsecure.  It's a typical distribution when you ask this type of questions, but the answer is somewhere in the middle and we will see if the reality is also distributed in the same way.  This is the general back backdrop and the first intervention is from UnderSecretary General Izumi.  What do you see as threat of international security posed by COVID‑19?  What are the main priorities or main concerns at the place where you are?  You are in the middle of the negotiation of different policy processes on cybersecurity, sometimes complex as we know there are two parallel processes.  So what do you see as the threats for international ICT security?  Over to you.
   >> IZUMI NAKAMITSU:  Okay.  Thank you.  Thank you very much, joaf Jovan.  Fascinating members on the panel, and I would really like to congratulate you for putting it together.  And I like the way you started, actually, and I mean, you know, the Internet or the digital technologies have definitely provided enormous opportunities but I would like to add to that just to complement, that it is going to transform our lives, every aspect of our life, work, daily life, staying in touch, et cetera.
What we are now experiencing is a transformative changes that are happening around the world, and that, of course, has an impact on where I am actually sitting, and I am responsible for international security issues at the United Nations.
Of course, the downside of this positive, you know, generally positive ICT technologies during the crisis is, of course, you know this change has also been accompanied by enormous spike in cyber incidents, and you know the ITU, the International Telecommunications Union has estimated that the Internet usage has increased during the pandemic by something like 30%, but in terms of cyberattacks or cyber incidents, the increase was actually almost 300%, so you know you can see the enormous impact on the downside as well, even though there are a lot of positive and transformative and positive benefits that these technologies are bringing to us.
Of course, our deep concern is mounting malware campaigns against critical infrastructures and especially during the COVID crisis, hospitals, medical research facilities, and other institutions over the past several months, and that includes the World Health Organization, for example.
I'm told that WHO has reported experiencing more than five times the number of cyberattacks than in the same period last year, and so these incidents are obviously con pounding people's already wide sense of insecurity around their health, livelihood, and future, and of course the ordinary people are experiencing, you know, these rapid increases of phishing incidents, malware, emails, et cetera.
And, of course, what we're wondering is whether this would also have a deep impact on more hard‑core international peace and security issues, of the kinds of cyberattacks that we are seeing, we are witnessing, is of course stopped short of traditional use of force‑type of situations.  It's not a kinetic scene, but it is increasingly posing very difficult questions as to what it is that we are actually looking at in terms of a very serious cyber‑incident that could potentially happen impacting on critical infrastructures that are deeply connected or related to stability and security of our general environment.  So for this reason, the Secretary General has indeed drawn attention to cyberattacks during the COVID‑19 pandemic and he has been repeatedly calling on the international community to do more to prevent and also end cyberattacks on critical civilian infrastructure including health care facilities, and I will stop here for now, and then looking forward to, you know, more in‑depth discussions in terms of what we need to do to make sure that first and foremost, prevent and also ending cyberattacks.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, UnderSecretary.  Thank you Izumi for great description of the landscape and shocking numbers for discrepancy of using the Internet of 30% and 300% in the cyberattacks numbers are useful to give us some sort of bearing of the overall situation, and definitely will be coming back to the quite a few points that you raised in the introductory statement on the actions from the UN Secretary General and the actions and activities of your office, which are very, very important for the global cybersecurity.
There was one interesting comment coming from the Amid, and he commented on my sort of map of the time zone, and he introduced the first interesting point that cybersecurity threats are as they were as time zones and that's is just one challenging point for our discussion, do we discuss the same similar or diverse type of cyber challenges?
Now, there is no need to introduce Eugene.  He introduced himself greatly about this survey of history of a computer, and it triggered a fascinating discussion in the chat, which mentionings of Fortran, Cobal and other tools and I can see that the age distribution of the current panel is more to do with us who used to start using computers in 80s and 90s, but we would like to hear also from the younger generation about their concerns.
Eugene, you have been, your company has been providing really deep detailed summary of cyberattacks, and the painting of the current landscape and you have this excellent useful tool that we use, for example, for our courses when we teach cybersecurity on what is the current threat situation.  Could you in your first intervention, help in the painting of this overall current cybersecurity situation based on the both data and your general insights, and then maybe hint to some actions that you have been suggesting or taking, and then we will be developing them throughout the discussion.  Over to you.
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  Yeah.  Thank you.  Well, actually, the situation during the COVID time in Cyberspace is well more dangerous, of course, obviously more dangerous than before, and actually the two factors which activate the cybercrime, the first factor is that many people they stay at home so they spend more time on the Internet so they ‑‑ they have ‑‑ they can easily crack the more victims than before.
The second factor is that many enterprises, well most of our companies, they sent employees home, but they're not able to guarantee the same level of security ass with in their corporate parameter, so the people are left at home with some basic security but they can access enterprise network, and so the criminals they use this to hack.  They hack the home commuters for access enterprise networks.  That's why we also see the increase of number of hacker attacks, the activities of cyber criminals, and actually we have quite a detailed data even for countries because we have our customers based in many countries around the world, so we see a sense of statistics of the criminal activities, so if you want to see more details, just visit our website securelist.com and there is a statistic page so you can see this data there.
And speaking about the code, I would say it's 25 to 25 increase of numbers of new malicious applications, and so before COVID, we were collecting about 350,000 new malicious applications, new malicious files a day, and so every day about 350,000 new malicious files which we never saw before.  Right now we collect more than 400,000 malicious files a day, and it means that the global cybercrime is getting more active, and actually I don't know how many people are in this business, 10,000, 100,000, well the numbers are huge, the number of the attacks in different ‑‑ in the different tools developed by the bad guys.
So, the global cybercrime is most ‑‑ but in most cases technically it's not really a problem to protect people, to protect computer smart phones, devices from this kind of attacks because most of them are junior, so they're not too much complicated, and so technically speaking, it's not a problem to release the antidote for this kind of computer malware or cyber malware and the rising problem is that many of these junior cyber criminals, they getting more smart and they're getting more experienced, and they are joining professional hacker team, or they lead and create their new highly professional cyber gangs, and at the moment we're monitoring about 200 professional cyber gangs which develop quite sophisticated cyberattacks.
And then they're able to hack even very well protected organizations like banks, governments, and so actually this is the problem to protect the system from their targeted attacks, highly complicated, sophisticated, and unfortunately, in some cases, very successful kind of their malicious tools.
And at the same time, speaking about the physical systems, the infrastructure, the critical infrastructure, well we have more and more reports that the criminal gangs, this he access ‑‑ well they try to ‑‑ well it's not targeted attacks, but they try to touch infrastructure, they touch the systems that are connected to the Internet, and we don't have too many reports of the targeted attacks on the systems, and it seems that they just see that they're not just individuals, they're not just the computer networks or office networks connected to the Internet.  They see the complex structure.  In most cases they don't know what to do with that, but I'm afraid in the future they're criminals and they will easily recognize the power of attacks on the physical infrastructure, and I'm afraid that we are live willing in times when the criminals, they're turning to scatter systems from attacks on individuals, attacks on office networks, enterprise office networks, turning to their physical systems and well they're already in the Internet of Things, they were botnet, infecting the security cameras, video cameras, and actually that was one of the most successful cyberattacks, global attacks, and leading for years, and so I'm afraid that the next is massive attacks on the infrastructure and physical infrastructure.  Not like now, so they're just very, very few cases, actually, targeted cases, but I'm afraid in the future, the position will be changed.
And, unfortunately, this evolution of cybercrime is really activated by COVID times because there are so many victims online, criminals they're humans as well, so they stay at home as other people do, so they have more time to improve the technologies, to improve the activity, and so actually I'm afraid that the situation of cybercrime is getting from bad to worse, so that's why the importance of cybersecurity and active measures about criminals is getting more and more important.
Thank you, Eugene.  I hope that we have the vaccine for the ‑‑ for this type of virus that is coming into our computers, but this is the question that we may reflect later on.  You introduced quite a few important elements, including this increasing vulnerability in the dynamics between home and the office, which is completely a new element, and also a element of professional versus newcomers into the cybercrime field, and this is the profession in itself, which has its own logic and dynamics, and subculture like all criminal organizations, and therefore we may later on reflect on it a bit more.
We are in the similar time zone, and moving a bit east toward Latha, and Latha we're now getting these threads into our tap industry of today's session with bringing links from the UN and Eugene from the trenches of cybersecurity where he's protecting many computers worldwide, and we would like to hear from you on your experiences as a cyber dip low mat and also person involved in geopolitics and we're collecting now individual business level to the global level.  Over to you, Latha.
   >> LATHA REDDY:  Thank you so much.  Thank you, Jovan, and given my background as cyber dip low mat as you describe me, for me the key problem or challenge is now the difficulties in advancing dialogues on preventing cyberattacks, even in a critical area like the health sector.  Because you know if we can't agree on a norm to say that attacks of the health sector are unacceptable during a global pandemic, then really the purpose of international cooperation is not being served very well.
In the present tense geopolitical climate, and the tense relationships between major powers, it's very hard to focus on really vital international cooperation in policy issues, but cyber has never been more important, and dialogue on cybersecurity has also never been more important than it is today.
If we were to look at inter‑governmental tensions today, we could see in the context of what I would like to call possibly a tech war, can you see five fronts emerging and you can see the question of resources, you can see the question of network infrastructures, you can see the question of operating systems, you can see platforms, and you can see content in data.
This, I would say almost at the moment a cold war like situation prevailing between major power, but fortunately due to globalization, we do not have an iron curtain between the opponents.  The curtain we have today is flexible, pourous, and not opaque.  Perhaps we can call it the Bambuca, to quote, I like this term.
And in other words, we can find a way to cooperate, provided everybody agrees that this is a global challenge, and agrees that in pandemic times, certain things must be out of bounds for cyberattacks.  How can countries cope?
We should continue our dialogues on Internet cooperation or interin the governance on international cooperation, and possibly on safeguarding the health sector through a universally agreed norp, norm, and we should simultaneous build bubbles of strategic trust with partners, and I'll come back to the bubbles of trust later in my intervention, but I hope this sets in context of diplomacy, international cooperation, and norm building.  Thank you.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  We have a cold war in the making, but there is no iron curtain yet.  Diplomacy facilitates dialogue, but not as effective yet as it should be, so focus on the norms in the most critical sectors like health sector and develop more cooperation.  Great inputs in making all of this cybersecurity canvas vivid and relevant.
Now, from the UN Business Sector we have geopoll it kal input from Latha and then now to international secretary of chamber of commercial place where I guess many questions and some complaints around cybersecurity are coming from Chamber of Commerce Worldwide and also small and medium enterprises, so John, what would be your input on this question and what are the major cybersecurity challenges that we are facing in COVID‑19 crisis, especially from the business perspective?  Over to you.
   >> JOHN DENTON:  Thanks.  It's great to be on the panel and great to be back at the IGF.  I'm sorry we're not there in person, but this is the way it works.  Maybe I can put it a little bit differently.  I actually see a paradox, but let's be very clear so the International Chamber of Commerce we're the international voice of 46 million businesses now and we know that COVID‑19 is having real and dramatic impacts of what we call the real economy, and the real economy is actually the way in which SMEs, microSMEs impact what is conducted and they've been subject to supply shortage and demand shortages and collapse of supply chains and seeing the economic impact beating them up even before the health problems got to them, and so it's actually been a really troubling time.  One way that we've been working with this is we've actually run a campaign, and part of that has actually been to work on the digitalization of SMEs and micro‑SMEs because I think as you all understand, I think as Eugene said and others said as well, in this time of COVID, what we've seen in social distancing is the need to go online, so we've been enabling that.  9 paradox, of course is we're enabling that at exactly the same time as we're seeing the new feature, which is these kind of dark, menacing players, and these kind of robbers or the black heart as I think Eugene almost described them as playing in the space as well, so we've actually been encouraging mass uptick of digitization to SMEs and microSMEs and at the same time this is a dramatic increase in malware, phishing on all the SMEs and microSMEs and one of the challenges is they don't always operate as independent entities always and are actually integral parts of the supply chain, so what's actually happening is the weakest link, arguably in the supply chain, is being attacked.  So what we're actually seeing is an increased vulnerability of the real economy to attackses through cybersecurity in the heart of COVID‑19 in the response, and yet the only way we can effectively respond economically is a way to suck up that risk, and then what we have to do is actually find tools, find approaches that can manage that, and I was very much taken by Ambassador Reddy that what we actually need to grapple with this is not just more training and more concern, but we actually need really effective interplay between government, the private sector, Civil Society, to actually develop a framework but also a culture which actually puts cyber risk as a classic risk that needs to be managed.  We can't irradicate cyber risk and I think Eugene could show us why we can't but we can treat dealing with it as a process we need to manage and what we do need in order to enable that to happen is a lot more cooperation.  We still see too few countries actually take up some of the most important elements in terms of computer emergency response task forces, et cetera, and we do need a recognition that this is a global problem, so frankly wealthier countries, wealthier company, need to be helping, investing, and supporting the development of the tools to enable the SMEs and microSMEs to no longer be weakest links but actually to actually enable themselves to build resilience so they can participate in the real economy effectively and save lives and livelihoods and manage a process which can actually limit the impact of cyber risk, that's what we see and that's what we think needs to happen because frankly as I said, this paradox continues and we've just launched a major campaign to digitize the further 5 million SMEs and microSMEs so they can go forward and actually operate in the 21 Century, but particularly be part of the economic recovery.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  John, a fascinating scenario of the modern economy.  Thank you for that.  And you triggered one thought or one question for our audience and for our panelists that we may come to later on, whom we call when we have a problem, we as SME or we as citizen, or we as a country em.  Is it a company help desk, or help desk with government or international help desk?  For us here in the panel, in the session, I'm sure that we're aware of CERTs and other bodies, but for a young person just starting startup company or citizen, that may be a challenge, and for this just one question that we may try to reflect on very simple question, bringing geopolitical issues to reality of the people worldwide.
Wow, that was great session.  Thank you.  Thank you.  So easy to moderate it with such great inputs.  Now, we move to Chris.  Chris is in DC and there is no need to introduce Chris Painter now in his current role as President of Global Forum Cyber Expertise and Chris I know you can reflect on so many issues, but what do you pick up from the threads developing so far and develop them further?  Over to you.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  Well, it was great hearing the other panelists and I sort of feel like a lot of things have been said and there is this old saying of everything has been said but I haven't said it yet, so I'll try to avoid that and actually talk about some new things.
I mean, obviously, I think the pandemic is just highlighted what we're already seeing.  We're seeing great threats to Cyberspace, to both on a individual level, on a Nation State level, transnational criminal groups and others involved in this, and that's just accelerated with COVID because it highlighted our vulnerabilities and dependencies on these systems.
And that's hardly a surprise.  It's unfortunately that every time we had a major like disaster of any kind, there are always this group of criminals who try to attack that and take advantage of it, so it's hardly surprising, and it's unfortunate though.
So, what does that highlight for me?  Well a couple of things.  One, we're seeing these kinds of threats and I'm still worried about new threats.  One of them, you know, my friend the former President of Estonia Thomas always talks about a threat and worry about the integrity of information, and I worry about denial of service attacks, I worry about theft, I worry more if someone breaks into a hospital and changes my blood type so the next time I get a transfusion I die and financial markets can't settle.  We haven't seen that much yet, but I think that could be the wave of the future and we have to worry about that.
What it says to me is two things.  One, there is a little bit of silver lining here, to the extent there is any silver lining to COVID and this is really not much of one, but it has shown to countries around the world, both developing countries and developed countries, that this is an area of real priority and that we're so dependent on the systems and cybersecurity can't be treelted as a biew teek throwoff issue but as core issue for all of us a core political issue, a core issue that is a national security issue, an economic prosperity issue, a human rights issue, and also ultimately a foreign policy smoo, and in terms of diplomacy back when my office was created back in 2011, we were the first ones in the world at that time dedicated to these issues, and there are about 40 and growing around the world and that's important because it's being treated not just as a technical issue, and the technical aspects are clearly important, but as policy issue, and just like you don't need to be a nuclear engineer to understand the aspects of nuclear policy, you don't need to be a coder to understand the national security, economic, and human rights implications of cybersecurity and how we do that.
So that's one thing that I think is really important, and it leads and gives us an opportunity to mainstream this issue like we haven't done before and we need to do that.
The second thing I would say is it highlights for me the necessity, and this shouldn't be surprising coming from my perspective as now the President of the Global Forum on Cyber Expertise Foundation and the necessity for capacity building around the world and capacity building in many different ways.  The capacity building to help countries both developing countries and developed country, and again there are lots of developing countries who do do not have expertise, resources, structures in place, national strategy, and we have to work with those, and that's stionz that my organization, the multistakeholder organization which includes like 60 countries, over 60 countries, Civil Society, the private sector, academia, has been really focused on trying to coordinate some of that capacity building.
But also the kind of policy capacity building, that's around like how do you engage this approximate these diplomatic debates happening in the UN, that people have talked about, and so I think we need to be able to do more on that level, too.
So it gives us an tiewcht to do that but we need to treat capacity building and cyber as not an odd duck, but really as a core part, a foundational part for our future prosperity and foundational part of the UN's Development Goals as well.
The last thing I wanted to touch on was, just talking about the role of the diplomacy, and I do think diplomacy and negotiations are happening now are critically important.  I think the norms that were agreed to in 2015 are critically important, we need to continue to get those implemented around the world and understood around the world, the confidence‑building measures, spreading through regional and other organizations is critically important, how international law applies is important to all of our safety and security and stability going forward but we also have to make sure there is accountability for transgressors and I don't meaness carboxylatery but accountable so we hold account those who break the rules, these understandings, but we need to think about how to do that as a world community.
And again, think that goes hand and glove with developing the rules of the road and how do you make sure there is accountability for those.  Lastly, I just say that that again all folds into this idea of capacity building, which is the discussions in New York, almost everyone mentioned this, and that was pre‑COVID and now I hear it even more post‑COVID where we're doing everything virtually, and that's a good thing.  You know, there is a saying never let a good crisis go to waste, and I don't want to be quite like that, but we need to make sure not to lose the tiewntd and we don't fur get how important this is and when we see attacks on hospitals and others that we actually have a way to elevate the issue to Prime Ministers, presidents, CEOs of companies outside of the cyber club that we're all in.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Chris.  I think we're doing very well on your plea to build a communication between different policy communities.  We haven't been using jargon, and we did a bit in the pre‑session with the history, but it was tolerated, but throughout the session, we stayed very careful away from the technological or diplomatic or policy jargon, and it is great and I think we should continue in the same way.
Chris, there is one potential controversial topic for discussion, while I completely agree with your view that policy, leaders, diplomats should be aware of the political aspects of technology, we have to see whether the potentials of security by design and how far they can go with security by design.  I know that Eugene has been thinking a lot and working on that and we'll hear later on in the second iteration about this interplay between security by design technical solution versus the dip low mattic plit solution.
Once more, thank you, Chris.  Now, in this interplay, we move to technology again.  And Enrico joining us from Cape Town, Enrico, what is your take on this discussion between policy, diplomacy, geostrategy, technology, economy.
   >> ENRICO CALANDRO:  Thank you.  Thank you very much, Jovan for having me at the High‑Level Planl and I think it's interesting because actually there are so many participants online that would say that late time in our time zone and also towards east meaning that probably people feel safer online than offline, or maybe that's unfortunately the result of these restrictions, resulting from COVID‑19.
But the perspective I would like to provide, I am a social scientist by profession, and so I've tried to describe how new forms of cyber mediated and processes can become a threat to human security, and so I'm going to talk about people.  With a focus also on developing countries because that's the focus of my activities and research.
So COVID‑19 has shown to all of us that good quality, affordable, and ubiquitous access to the Internet is not a luxury, and but it's a critical lifeline and in developing countries, actually, access to the Internet is still a luxury for the majority of people.  So any barriers that actually stop us from using the Internet in a safe and secure way, threaden to strip us of these lifeline.
In developing countries, cyber threats and risks are an extension of the persistent and increasing digital inequalities that have grown together with digitalization.  The current state of cybersecurity vulnerabilities, illustrates a considerable security gap beyond the digital divide gap, which is exacerbating existing patterns of inequality for individuals, for countries, and for regions.
Now, if we take a human‑centric perspective to cybersecurity, I think that four main threats have become particularly problematic from a policy perspective because policy and political responses have not been able, actually, to tackle these problems, and that there is some barrier also of addressing from a cybersecurity point of view, that normally, you know, address these issues of technical nature and ITE and computer network securities.
And here I'm referring to the so‑called infodemic and COVID‑related cybercrime and online violence and risk of increased state surveillance.
So these four phenomena have either emerged from the pandemic or have been exacerbated with the pandemic, or have compromised the response of the drch countries to COVID‑19.  So from the point of view of Internet diffusion in the African Continent which is probably as we know characterized by novel and first‑time users using the Internet through the mobile phone, and primarily on social media, and I think it becomes clear that the population is highly vulnerable to infodemic and the main danger of that is that it speeds up the epidemic process by influencing and fragments responses to fight against the virus and pandemic.
And then partially related to the infodemic and I think certainly growing from it is the phenomenon of COVID‑19 related cybercrime, and actually we talked a little bit about that, because infodemic can also be a vector of large‑scale cyberattacks and that's what we've seen as well, and so cyber crim Nats spread messages to plant malware, Phishing or ask for Bitcoin and but campaign of this information can actually facilitate sieb are attacks Alts based on the exploitation of other human vulnerabilities such as fears, anxieties, and they can also have racist and zen oaphobic behavior.
Another pandemic that I think is exacerbated by the COVID‑19 pandemic and increased Internet use is the pandemic of online violence and especially against women and girls and also against people experiencing multiple forms of discrimination and vulnerability and intersection between gender, age, education, and other special demographics, and so it becomes more pervasive with some developing countries, but the reality is problem is getting worse and not improving.
The last threat is related to an increasing number of these tracing and contract‑tracing technologies to identify and support quarantine.  Tracking and tracking‑technologies are important to find the pandemic as we know, but surveillance needs to be done in compliance with data protection regulation and due respect for privacy and confidentiality.
But it might be ineffective in countries with low levels of smart phone diffusion, because people you can't ‑‑ you can't seem to collect data, and it can also place citizens at risk of privacy violation in jurisdictions with poor data protection frameworks or in countries that have had difficulties in enforcing these frameworks with ‑‑ with legislation where it is actually present.  Thank you.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you.  Thank you, Enrico, for enriching what Chris started with the human rights societal legal and other aspects of cybersecurity discussion, which cannot be discussed in isolation and bringing infodemics and all of this concept.  Our apology for some problems with unmuting and muting, but this is going to be definitely the keyword of 2020, can you hear me, or unmute yourself, or mute, and therefore I think it's now fixed.
We have all these threads from the first iteration of the introductory statements, and we are receiving quite a few interesting questions, and I will just read the questions and comments before I invite you to comment on those few issues that emerged in the first part of the session.
Mike, great regards to Mike.  He says two questions and three words.  We don't see the questions, but three words are encryption, digital, and ID.  Maybe some of you can comment on this cybersecurity Trinity.
Amid, there are two camps, one countries want to regulate cyber conflicts and some want to prevent cyber conflict, and roidzing the Cyberspace as a fifth domain of war warfare other than civilian in only peaceful environment we have to which camp?  That's an interesting question especially for those of you interested involved in geopolitics.
And jacque, great regards to him, driving from COVID discussion, should citizens including corporate citizens patronized sanctioned or enforced to protect from cyber dangers or prohibit dz as restriction of personal freedom, freedom of doing business.  Wow, we won't have a boring discussion, I can see, and I invite our attendees, including one of the fathers of the Internet, Vint Cerf, best regards to Vint, to bring their comments and the questions.
Now, we are going to the second iteration based on these questions and at least from the initial discussion, and we'll ask Under Secretary, Izumi, what is achieved under the auspices of the UN?  Izumi, you heard many inputs on the current situation and concern and threats and risk.  What is happening at the UN and what can we expect from the UN in this context of answering some of these concerns?  Over to you.
   >> IZUMI NAKAMITSU:  Okay.  Thank you.  I feel that, you know, the panelists, definitely all the panelists and vast majority of all the people in the audience are all fully aware of what is achieved at the United Nations and what is going on currently in the UN.  I mean, but just to recap very, very quickly, of course the UN has been tackling this issue for many years now.  There are six iterations of what we call the Groups of Governmental Experts that, you know, they have been studying and analyzing and denograting on key issues, and then this GGE has indeed managed to agree in the past, for example, that international law, in particular, the UN Charter applies to the use of ICTs, you know, so this links up with wonderful questions that you read out and it's an interesting question that I would like to perhaps comment on that a little bit later.
And, also, the group has recommended very practical confidence‑building and capacity‑building measures, and I completely agree with Chris Painter on the importance of capacity building and I think this is something that we still need to really develop and this is a critical component of the work ahead.
In particular 2015, GGE, were also able to recommend 11 voluntary norm‑binding, norms of responsible state behavior in the use of ICTs, and these norms cover key issues including cooperation between states in the use of ICTs, the respect toward human rights in the digital sphere, someone mentioned that also, and the protection of infrastructure, critical infrastructure from cyberattacks, and some of these norms, of course, are technical and operational in nature, but also deal with responsible reporting of ICT vulnerabilities as well as preventing proliferation of malicious tools and techniques and so they are, you know, a good practices that are recommended under these norms on the part of the private sector industry people.
Now, in 2018 as you all know already, I'm sure, a new GGE has been established under the UN and they are in the middle of their work.  You know, they're discussing, especially the strengthening of the norms but also confidence building and capacity building issues.  And, of course, there is a new process, a new platform that was established at the UN, which is inclusive.  It's called Open‑Ended woip working Group and they're also the first group of Open‑Ended Working Group is still in the process of denograting and bringing to conclusion next year, but also very recently just a couple of days ago, the first committee of the General Assembly also decided to create another Open‑Ended woip working Group for the duration of five years, and so it's very much still a work in progress, but there are some good, solid foundations that we have, you know, that we have been able to agree on.  And the key in my view, is to make sure that these norms so far agreed to will be fully implemented, and I think one thing is to have a good normative framework but another thing, which is critical, is to making sure that this is implemented, and of course going forward, in order for us to be able to prevent major cyberattacks and cyber incidents, I think we need to have confidence‑building measures and capacity building, and this perhaps we will be able to discuss in the next, you know, what lies ahead in terms of a key challenges.
One thing that I would ask is that we are really increasingly aware and actually have acted upon already once in the context of the Open‑Ended woip working Group that this has to be taken in the multistakeholder discussions.  This is not really just, you know, government and cyber diplomats coming and discusses, but we need to have a really meaningful engagement of industry people, researchers, and technical people, Civil Society included.  We are still exploring what more we can do in this regard, and I will be very keen to listen to potentially some creative suggestions on, you know, how the UN can indeed improve on multistakeholderness, if you will, of those conversations.  As you know, it's not ‑‑ it has not been so far a strength of the United Nations, necessarily, but we are acutely aware of that and going forward, we need to make sure we have meaningful input and participation from various stakeholders who can actually actually make huge contributions in this.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Izumi and thank you for your efforts to bridge all of these processes that your office has been trying to find connecting points on capacity building, sharing information, and it's fascinating to bridge what is political reality and to do maximum out of it for the cybersecurity.
There was one question maybe that could be answered later on by you or someone else.  Well, I would say by most of the participants, which from a a Diplomat here in Geneva, which forum would be most important to make real global progress on addressing cyber threats, which features should it include, and which should it avoid?  That's an interesting question for the complete panel and I would like to invite others to think about it.
Now we move to Eugene, so you said that initially this very interesting discussion, and there are many threads that you can pick from this discussion and comment, but personally I would like to hear your view of interplay between policy and technology and security by design that at one point, and maybe one point I know you're very keen on capacity development and you have ‑‑ you're Kaspersky Academy, and what would be three points in the curriculum for diplomats and leaders in the world that you would like to teach them during one of the courses.
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  Yeah.  Thank you for the question.  And actually I have some ideas on how to answer some questions which you already mentioned.  But in many cases, there is no simple answer of yes or no.  In many cases there is something in between, so yes and yes, and speaking about the importance of preparation against cybercrime, how to fight, how to address the cyber threats issues, I think three things have to be done, technologists, education, and law enforcement you including the international cooperation.
And so actually, well I can speak about all these three vectors of fighting the cyber threats, and in the Cyberspace, and well speaking about the technologies, I believe ‑‑ so we'll now how to protect their computer systems and smart phones, and actually we can guarantee pretty high, technologies can guarantee very, very high level of protection, but if we turn to industrial systems, Internet of Things, and if we keep in mind that there are more and more and more such devices around us, gadgets, everything, actually it's not possible to develop security, cybersecurity for each copy machine, vacuum cleaner, security camera, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So, actually my idea, the major idea is that we need to develop the systems which are secure by design, and I call it cyber immunity, so actually we have this ‑‑ we have it platform, and this is a operating system which is very compact, it's not multifunctional, it's not like Microsoft Windows or Linux, no.  It's simply not possible to build security through secure immune systems based on these systems, and so it's completely different and good enough for Internet of Things, and actually what we do, we designed the architecture of the systems in such a way that it's simply not possible to hack it, but at the same time the systems are quite flexible, you can update, you can install applications, and so actually it works, and we have the first ‑‑ the Internet of Things, the first cyber gadgets, sometimes they are quite unique and developed on top of this immunity agency system and for example I just have it on my table, and this is the industrial gateway which can connect the industrial system into the Internet in a secure way, so it's a gateway which is made on this immune operating system.  And we have some other stuff, but I'm not going to make the advertisement on this technologies and the products, but actually technically speaking, in for Internet of Things and for industrial systems, for infrastructures, especially critical infrastructure, we can reach such a level of security that a successful attack will cost more than possible damage, and so the bad guys, the attackers, must invest more than possible damage of the victim, and so I think this level of security, immunity, and so for the bad guys there is no reason to hack the system.
And so technically speaking, it is possible to develop such a technology in which you can guarantee that you in things of infrastructure and protection‑wise are unhackable.
So it's a first, it's about the technologies, and speak being international cooperation, it's the first time I said about that it's a must to have international cooperation, and that was early 2000 and somewhere at the same time there was a Budapest convention on the cybercrime that was introduced, and maybe I was the first to say Internet interpoll to investigate and to find the bad guys in the Cyberspace, and so we need to have some kind of the international cyber forces to account for these guys.
Unfortunately, what's going on there, the world is getting unfortunately more fragmented and geopolitical situation is very far from per spect, and I'm afraid that the cooperation between different countries from different parts of the geopolitical landscape, some cases are getting worse.  I'm not politician, I'm not President of the world to fix it, so I just do my best to advise others that we need to change that.  We are all living in the cyber age in a Cyberspace, so to keep this place safe and secure, at least to move into the direction of a safe Internet or the safe Cyberspace, we need to get cooperate and forget about geopoliticals, the rest of the geopolitical stuff, in a Cyberspace, the nations must cooperate to ‑‑ because once again, we're living in the same Cyberspace and we're facing very same cyber threats, and actually they are cyber systems that get more important and critical infrastructure depends on cyber more and more, and it's vulnerable and, actually the way the world is being developed, it's ‑‑ it's danger.  So we need ‑‑ we need to fix it, we need to create the new ways or new ideas to build more trust in Cyberspace and have to make nations to work together against the cyber threats.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you.  Thank you, Eugene.  Great dictionary today, cyber immunity, Internet interpol which is a bit, as you said historical need for digital or for cooperation across the board.  And in the closing, in the next iteration, you may give us also the answer to the question of what could be curriculum for diplomats and politicians on cybersecurity, three major points.
Now we move to India to Latha, and now Latha you increased the interesting concept of trust bubble and you may reflect briefly on that or any question that has been emerging on let's say geopolitical aspect on question of two camps, and mentioning how there are two camps and how they contribute to the cybersecurity.  Just pick one of these questions and reflect on it, but tell us more about the trust bubble.  This is an interesting concept.
   >> LATHA REDDY:  You know, the question of the trust bubble, Jovan, was you know to build lasting partnerships and deal effectively with cybersecurity issues, we need strategic partnerships.  That's what I call a trust bubble, or in fact we would call it technical bubbles of trust.  What should each country expect from such a partner in a tech bubble?  Firstly, you'll have to have political and strategic convergence.
Secondly, you would have to have trusted each other's legal and jurisprudence systems, and thirdly, you would have to have a broad‑based economic partnership across technology, trade, services, defense, and other key areas.
And lastly, is there broad trust between the peoples of each country, and so I think that that is absolutely necessary if we are to move forward with this idea of technology bubbles of trust or, in fact, for strategic partnerships between countries.
I think that, you know, the ‑‑ there are concerns today about the technology of trade, for instance, or trade technology.  As we saw in 5G, when vendors are o no longer judged only on price and effectiveness but also on location and geopolitical tensions, there are concerns about the country of origin and the prevailing legal systems in that country, and of course the relationships with that country.  Therefore, it's no longer run purely on commercial considerations, and certainly it will present a lot of difficulties for sellers and buyers, and I think that this is where the bubbles of trust will play an even greater role, and I'm sorry, Jovan, I forgot the second question you asked me.  Was there anything else you wanted me to comment on?
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  There was one question which was asked what should be the fora?  Do we need to create one fora to discuss cybersecurity mult blee, or where should that coordination happen on the global level, a policy or geopolitical question, I think that was one of the comments in chat.
   >> LATHA REDDY:  Well, I certainly think that we do need to coordinate our efforts in so many different fora.  You know, there is a huge multiplicity of effort, and we are having dialogues in so many different fora, whether it's the Paris Peace Forum, the IGF, our own global commissions which I've worked own and any number of think tanks and et cetera.  So in one sense it would be good to have a body come together where all of these efforts could be coordinated and classified together, but I think it will be very difficult because at the moment there is not much appetite to create another international mechanism, and certain countries would certainly be opposed to creating a global internationally recognized body to deal with these cyber issues.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Latha.  That was one of the questions of the High‑Level Panel that was probably one of the underlying and most challenging questions, whom to call to address your digital issues, not only cybersecurity, but in general digital issues.  Which is a big challenge in small countries, where big countries have many foras, but we may sphwet to that point through in the next with John.  John, who can businesses call to address their digital issues and all of these concerns?  Or you can pick on any other points from our discussion.
   >> JOHN DENTON:  Well, straight up, I think if anyone said there is one person to call, I think there would be grossly misleading, so I think that's the first point to make.
I might just open this intervention by saying this time 12 months ago I was actually at the IGF and I launched one of the famous ICC Campaigns to make technology work for all, and I did that because we recognize, I think as we all do, the digital divide.  But the point I want to focus on today is there is also a capability divide by we actually need to think about in terms of digital capacity divide as well, and I think that's been touched on a bit by Eugene and also by Latha so far.
Where I'm getting to here is that what we see too often now is the absence of an effective regulatory framework, both at a policy level and legal level to actually encompass and enable the kind of things we want to see on cyber, and that's something that we see as an element which is missing, not everywhere, but in many, many economies, and in many respects even in some surprising economies.
The private sector can do so much, but in the end to create these frameworks, these policy frameworks which are capable of being implemented by regulation and by law, we actually need governments to step up, and bestill see too many governments without that capacity.
And so the private sector simply cannot do the heavy lifting at all on its own, but the point I make there is even in developed countries and partly picks up the comment that Izumi made earlier on, if you want to develop good policy or even policy from developed countries, you can't do it in isolation.  This policy always has a strong business voice in it and Civil Society and in particular when it komtion to issues like digital, and the reason for that is that ultimately we have to implement it, so if you don't involve the end users or the key stakeholders in the development of policy, then you're always end up with difficulties, and that's just in developed country, but in developing countries we also need, and I shouldn't say this is only reserved for developing countries because there are a number of developed countries without I think the requisite framework in place, and we need to work together, and they need to being a knowledge that if we need to call anyone, it's got to be someone who is actually able to encapsulate Civil Society, the private sector, and government and put the sited zen at the sender in order to achieve this, so in a way it's almost the holy Trinity that we actually need to have in place to deliver on this outcome, and so one of the questions or one of the observations made in the chat was that in order to help SMEs and microSMEs to combat cyber, we should look to the wonderful tools from the cyber readiness institute, and please be assured that we're doing so, please be assured that that is something that we see as critical, and you know please be assured that the ICC, we have five years ago we actually preempted this debate by the standards that we created in the guidance we gave out, and that still rings true, and I was just looking at some of the points we made in our guidance five years ago and it actually still, envision the company should adopt, holistic approach, looking at effective risk mitigation, and preparation to breaches, and all the elements we talked about there in a more detailed paper are all still relevant, so I hope that's useful to you, but it's actually ensuring that there is this stakeholder engagement in the formation of policy and regulations and law, but actually governments ultimately need to act but we need to help them act as best as possible with all of those inputs.  Thank you.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, John, for bringing more precision to multistake hold are approach.  Sometimes we stay on the general notion, but you zoomed in in both reasons and practicalities of how multistake hold arer approach can function, and I think this is under researched and underdiscussed issue because if you want multistakeholder approach to flourish, we need to really zoom in and develop a procedure and approach much better.
We will be moving now to Chris, but Chris you can think on the few questions that remain unanswered and there was a question on two comments and a comment from Wolfgang very interesting as always, and UNGG and open‑ended working group are important but probably some progress can be made in next few years, optimistic view, so let's hear if the panelists share the optism from Wolfga in, g but we should also discuss the progress in the laws and ought op mus system group and the reej from Libya caucus are testbed how AI and Internet based devices can be integrated in military operation and there has to be ‑‑ there has to be discussed also m tulty stakeholder environment.  As always, can challenging thoughts from Wolfgang, so Chris a lot on your plate, geopolitics, so go ahead.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I love Wolfgang, but all of these issues are increasingly multistakeholder and increasingly interrelate as well.  I want to pick up on one thing that was just said by John and that is that it is important to have multistakeholders and different stakeholders as we develop policy and this is one of the things that the global Forum on cyber expertise tries to do when we talk to countries, for instance, about having national strategies which is often the document that shows it's a priority for that country and it's the organizing document for that country and that they should create that strategy by talking to a number of stakeholders and not just government stakeholders, but industry, academia, Civil Society, that's the best practice and we try to showcase that.
I'd say a couple of other things too.  I don't agree, using a term I used before, that we need one ring to rule them all.  That we need one giant stooghts that's going to take up all of these issues.  Frankly, it would collapse under its own weight and it would be too complex, too hard to actually have an effective function.  And I think what we need to do is to make the existing dialogues that we have, including in the UN, more effective, rather than trying to create a new one.  You know, I similarly think that, you know, one of the questions was about do we need a new binding cybercrime tree or cybersecurity treaty, and I have the same feeling about that.  We are still in the early throws of this issue and we need to focus on things like what are the expectations, what are the rules of the road, what are the norms and getting countries to follow those.  We could think about something down the line, but a treaty doesn't solve our issues in this space either.  People violate, and countries violate existing treaties, and so that doesn't make ‑‑ you know, you you have a treaty and everything goes away, but we need to think about the rules of road and get consensus around that and go et those implementedded, I think that's criticalla important.
And you know I guess the other ‑‑ the other two issues, one was on cyber and you mentioned someone, the idea about a course for cyber diplomats that is critically important, we did that internally in the state department, trained officers from all over the world, brought them back to DC, had Vint talk to them and people talking about geopolitical issues, so they were involved in that, Estonia is good on that and training diplomats on cyber and they've had several organizations.  Your organization has been working on that, other organizations have been working on that and this is a important issue to get those people involved.
The final question I'll take a swing at is the one of, you know, there are two camps managing conflict and preventing conflict, I don't think that's really true.  I think those things merge, right.  If we think that cyber tools are not going to be used for offensive operations, that may be a fansful way to think of the world, but that's not going to happen, right.  So there is no way that's going to happen.  So how do we just like we do in other areas, control this and make sure conflict doesn't occur.  So part of controlling conflict, having rules of the road, international law and norms is to prevent conflict and we should be working toward that so I don't see those as opposite things and I see those as merging together, so I tried to hit a lot of definitions in that short blurb, but thanks for that.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Chris, and please help me not to become with the IGF Secretariat because of time management, but it is such a unique opportunity to have such good speakers and inspiring speakers and very good questions from then there is a question on the funding and skeptical view about the need for the any sort of centralization in that respect, and it has been elephant in the room, if I say, small and big elephant to use the metaphor, do we need central space and then there was a question, an interesting question from Mark from UK leading digital diplomats and recently retired, should IGF + establish a dedicated observatory for cybersecurity that provides technical advice, education, capacity building, resource, and this is an interesting issue and probably building inputs from GSCE and other existing initiative and great work of Singapore by the way in field of cybersecurity and training, and therefore that's one of the concrete questions and suggestions, and discussion really moving fast in the chat and we have 10 minutes now.
So I will just give a chance to Enrico, and Enrico, so many questions from this discussion, so help me to stay within the next 10 minutes limits of this session with your comment.  Pick on any of the leads in the discussion and comment, please go ahead.
   >> ENRICO CALANDRO:  Yeah.  Thanks, Jovan, I will try to be very brief and I would like then to maybe expand a little bit on this idea of the cyber observatory at the UN, and so as a researcher, I truly believe that, you know, the domain of the Cyberspace and cannot be isolated by unique national and regional contexts.  That somehow can create a distinct set of challenges and it's through research that you can identify then the different maybe priorities and mechanisms for learning cybersecurity within national jurisdiction, and so also to fight against cybercrimes is a complex task that requires multilateral and multistakeholder dialogues, and it's really important to understand, I think through research, the cyber threat landscape and so that the response is really a design in an evidence‑based and informed way.
And I think it's also important then that, you know, once you're able to collect this evidence and identify uninformed responser, some policies somehow have to be human‑centric, and so you know we do want to build more resilience, but the first step is really then to empower the Internet users as a number of speakers have said as well.  And resilience can be seen as a function of capacity, and so Internet resilience, I think it's a function of cyber capacity.  As we've seen, you know, during the COVID‑19 outbreak and I mean during the history of the Internet, the Internet infrastructure actually is a resilient network, you know, and as we keep working and under pressure and also under several attacks, still here up and running, and it works every time better and better and faster.  But for what actually we do need to build is the human resilience because it's actually the human security that is at risk.
And, you know, there is a problem of people's vulnerability, and I don't know for difference in developing countries, the landscape there is that the technology is updated, it's not scrutinized, and there are very low security standards and devices in practice in software, and there are really no measures to mitigate it.  So considering then the people can be the first line of defense against threat, is the most important vulnerable, you know, that we should try to protected and educate, and so cybersecurity policy, I think it should really aim at providing safe and security access and use of the Internet by building these human resilience and protecting, of course, the human rights online.
Just one final comment on these entity, you know, that should somehow I think create trust in Cyberspace, and I think that, you know, in the current landscape of tension, the UN from my perspective is recognized by a number of countries and especially developing countries as this kind of center of gravity, and I'm quoting here Dr. Mashabani from South Africa, developing countries feel they can really sit at the table of the UN and I believe at that level it's important to have global consensus on Cyberspace, but what needs to change from my perspective is the traditionally multilateral mechanism should then encourage a wider participation, both from developing countries that, you know, they're not always xas at a time the to meaningfully participate in this kind of debates, and of course to have also broader dialogue with a number of actors including Civil Society organizations, technical community, and others, so that all together we really can define these principles, norms, and rules for a safe and secure Cyberspace that at the end is truly encluesive and secure.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you.  Enrico, thank you for this.  You have support from Chrystiane on human‑center cybersecurity, and you mentioned human secure in your first intervngs which is somehow forgotten in the international par lance but it's extremely interesting concept and I know it is supported a lot by Switzerland also because of the humanitarian aspect.
Now, Enrico, we will start with you, by asking you to make voluntary commitment, and be very careful because the Secretariat is taking good evidence of whatever we promise, and hopefully next time IGF will be so we have to deliver on that.  30 seconds for your voluntary commitment until the next IGF.
   >> ENRICO CALANDRO:  So my voluntary commitment is to keep growing these needs of data, of evidence, and all information for development of evidence‑based cyber policy‑making, and so I'm committing myself to work more towards that.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Okay.  Cengtai I'm sure you took this note.  Thank you for that.  Chris, what is your voluntary commitment.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I'm going to commit on myself and organization to increase regional focus in Africa and make our efforts more efficient and effective and overall really raise the awareness and level political level of cyber and cyber capacity building.  We hope to hold a conference, but it's still in the planning but I can't announce it now but I can announce what I just announced and we'll do all we can do to that.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thanks.  John, over to you.
   >> JOHN DENTON:  Thanks so much.  We commit to work with members and partners to ensure that access to Internet and digital technology works on free layers of the digital ecosystem, infrastructure, applications, and skills, to work with policymakers to improve their understanding of how ICTs actually work in practice, to co‑create incentives for investment and innovation to develop and rollout and maintain tools and solutions to secure meaningful access for underserved communities and vulnerable groups, and co‑design frameworks that enable connectivity based on light‑touch ICT policy and regulations, encouraging koch tition, and enabling the entry of new players into the ICT ecosystem and mobilize our amazing network of 45 million companies, 12,000 chambers of commerce to get all of this done.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, John.  We will follow line by line next year when we meet at the IGF.  Latha?  What is commitment from your side, in addition to write a good blog post about trust bubble, it requires.lat.  This is commitment of time I'm imposing.  Please go ahead, I'm joking.
   >> LATHA REDDY:  As a cyber peace warrior as I like to call myself, my commitment is to continue my work on increasing international cooperation, more democratic Internet governance frameworks, and on formulating cyber norms.  We need to coordinate and consolidate our national, regional, unilateral and global efforts to achieve this goal of keeping Cyberspace as safe and stable as we can.  That's my commitment.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you, Latha.  Eugene, what can you promise until the next IGF for our community?
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  Cybersecurity trainings for UN cyber diplomats.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Oh, great.
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  And just to answer, actually I think we'll do it in very funny way.  Actually we have a different trainings of cybersecurity, and one of them is like it's a table game, it's like a monopoly game where there is enterprise which is under cyberattack and you are like CEO of the company of this enterprise and you have budget, options, and you have time.  And you must survive.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Wow!
   >> EUGENE KASPERSKY:  We can provide this kind of training for UN cyber diplomats and it's really, really funny game.  Thank you.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  That's great to learn with a bit of fun by playing games.  And I'm sure that I will follow up directly on this voluntary commitment because it's so, so interesting.  Thank you.  Izumi, we're concluding voluntary commitment list from you.  What can we expect from your side, please?
   >> IZUMI NAKAMITSU:  Thank you.  Before that, Eugene, definitely also I would like to follow up on your offer as well.
So, from our perspectives, obviously in line with the Secretary General's agenda and also to the agenda, I will continue to the best of my ability my efforts to promote a global culture of cybersecurity, and that we do by continuing and further increasing our engagements with Member States to help foster a culture of accountability, which is another keyword, and also adherence and implementation of the norms that we talked about, rules and principles on responsible behavior in the use of ICTs.
Also, I commit to further increase our engagement with other stakeholders, including businesses, industries, Civil Society, and tech people in general, and I would like to actually add a second bit of my commitment.  It didn't come up today but I would like to make a commitment to promoting the full and equal and meaningful participation of women in all decision‑making processes related to this extremely important issue of cybersecurity.  We already do have a shortage of, you know, cybersecurity capacity, and in particular female capacities and we need to do all sorts of different kinds of efforts to bring up new capacities and also making sure that women are involved in decision‑making processes as well.
   >> JOVAN KURBALIJA:  Thank you.  Thank you, Izumi for great news, and thank you to all of our panelists to helping me to remain in good bookses of the IGF Secretariat because we're finishing on time, and thank you for a great attendance.  I think the questions were excellent.  I tried to answer a few questions, and I ignored one question by one because he works for my organization, although it was a great question, but he can tolerate me ignoring his question.  It was really great discussion, and we should discuss serious issues also with some fun, and Eugene a commitment to learn on cybersecurity via a game is great, and I would like on this note to thank you for organizing it, thank the special thanks to the IGF Secretariat and UNDESA and all the people that put a lot of efforts behind this session.  And hopefully see you in person next year for a discussion on commitment and for having some fun.  For time being, I will have to ‑‑ I have to share with you virtually this drink, but next year we may develop whatever, beer‑to‑beer network and discuss serious issues in relaxing setting, which is in traditional diplomacy also a way to make breakthroughs.  Have a nice day, evening, late night for Latha, it's almost 1:30, and keep on.  Bye‑bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-nri-main-session-role-of-the-internet-in-emergency-situations^^

 
   >> ANJA GENGO:  Officially, and for the record, good afternoon from Geneva.  Good morning, good evening, depending on where you are.  I want to thank you for joining the NRI's Main Session.  This has been a tradition at every Annual IGF Meeting since 2016 the Annual Meeting in Mexico.  My name is for the record Anja Genco, and I work for the IGF Secretariat, mainly with the colleagues that are running the national, regional, subregional.  This is the main session of the NRIs being organized completely by NRIs in bottom‑up open and collaborative manner.  Focused on the role of the Internet in emergency situations.
Before I give the floor to our dear co‑moderators, Ms. Mary Uduma and Mr. Flavio Wagner.  It is very sad and shocking and unexpected to have to say that happened during this Annual IGF Meeting, makes this meeting different, makes this main session different, sad.  But at the same time, we are moderated by the great legacy that has left behind our dear colleague and friend, Ms. Marilyn Cade.  Many of you know Marilyn and I think she does not need any introduction.  Marilyn was endorsed to actually co‑moderate with Flavio this session, and unfortunately, we were informed during the IGF meeting that Marilyn has passed away.
It's a great loss for not just for the NRI's Community to which she gave just a strong support throughout the collaborative work of throughout the years of the NRIs, but also to the entire Internet governance ecosystem.  She is deeply missed but she will never be forgotten.
In honor of the legacy of Ms. Marilyn Cade in honor of our life, I ask all of you for a minute of silence.
Thank you.  Thank you very much.  With this I would like to give the floor back to our dear co‑moderators, Ms. Mary Uduma will open the session, and Mr. Flavio Wagner will introduce the topic with our distinguished panel today and goals we want to achieve in the next 90 minutes.  Mary, please, you have the floor.  Mary, I don't think we can hear you.  If Mary has issues, she did inform at the beginning, then I'm going to ask Flavio.
   >> MARY UDUMA:  Can you hear me?  Can you hear me?
   >> ANJA GENGO:  We can hear you.
   >> MARY UDUMA:  All right.  Okay.  Good morning, good afternoon, good evening, good night, everywhere, wherever you are joining from.  This is Mary Uduma from West Africa IGF.  I am the Coordinator, and as we have heard from Anja, this is the NRI Main Session that we normally held during the IGF, during every IGF we have this NRI Main Session.
And for this year, I have myself as Co‑Moderator.  As she said, it would have been Marilyn Cade, but in her honor, I'm here standing in.  And the Moderator is Flavio from Brazil.  And the order of the speakers from all of the NRIs from Anja will be showing them, and they will be making interventions as a topic that we have today is the role of Internet in emergency situations, the role of the Internet in emergency situations.
We welcome you all to this Main Session organized by the NRIs in an open, bottom‑up consultative manner across all NRIs and will focus on concrete practices in which digital technologies can help people in emergency situations, such as the COVID‑19 pandemic.
We will hear from NRIs coming from different parts of the world, reflecting good regional balance as well as diversity in views on the session's topic.
We note that the speakers will speak for only three minutes, please.  We have four blocks of this program, and the first one will last, you know, it will start from now and end aren't 16:55, and then Flavio will take up that, my colleagues, Flavio from Brazil IGF, he will do a better introduction of himself, and when you speak, please speak slowly to the moderators and interpreters will be able to interpret and the captioner.
Again, you can raise your hands, you can also type in your questions in the Q&A page or you can chat.  Please, every voice is important and as we share will also learn and take back to our countries.
There will be polling, and when the polling comes up, please make sure you participate.  I think that's what I need to say now, and I hand it over to my Colleague Mr. Flavio Wagner to continue with the program.  Thank you very much.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much, Mary and Anja.  It's an honor to be here Co‑moderating with you the session, and we of course miss very much our dear friend, Marilyn Cade, she should be us in the session because she was important in the NRIs so this session is in her honor also.
So, let's move then to the first block, and we have a poll for you.  We will have a poll at the beginning of each of the four blocks of this Main Session, and the polls will remain there until the end so that you can respond to them when you wish, but please engage with us and respond to the polls.
So, this first session is the first block on the Internet for world resilience, so emergency situations such as the COVID‑19, showed that the Internet place a central role amidst restrictions such as in remote work and study, personal communication, service delivery, and so on.
In situations like this, did the Internet make your communities more resilient, and how?  So, this is the first question we have to our speakers, and we will have here as discussants of this first question, Mr. Lucian from the France IGF, and miss Isabelle from Colombia IGF, and Mr. Kusa will from the IGF.
The first poll on the screen, please.  And then let's start with Mr. Lucien Castex, so please, Lucien, the floor is yours.  Three minutes, please.
   >> LUCIAN CASTEX:  Thank you, Flavio.  Good afternoon, and good mornings, everyone.  Well, I'm Lucian Castex, Co‑Chair of the French Governance Forum and Representative for Public Policy of AFNIC, and Member of the MAG.  As we're in a Plenary Session of Global IGF, I will switch to French.
During this crisis we have heard a very important role and we continue to act in such a way so that we could learn and study.  The situation in France is obviously very tense and it's also very urgent.  We have to take up very serious and sanitary measures and started in March of this year.  As you know, we have a new quarantine which is introduced all over the country.  Digital technologies as well as data play a very important role today in terms of the fight against the pandemic.
It will take place with respect for fundamental human rights and for the preservation of our fundamental values.  What we discussed is certainly a question of following our contracts, contract tracking, as well as checking whether or not it tampered with fundamental personal freedoms and liberties, and at the heart of the French philosopher, he spoke much about the certain approach to human being and this is also something in the center of our attention.  We try to act in such a way so that we could shape the society in a way to where Internet plays a crucial role.
With the occurrence of COVID‑19, the question of Internet as a space which should also be a tool to solve different problems came up.  The French IGF, the French NRI has very important role and makes up with many members and now we have very different problems in France.  For example, how we teach students at the university, how educational programs are being conducted, and how different technologies and programs are conducted and they service the purpose of a number of different communities.  As far as the French NRI is concerned, we really realize that we are going to divide into different segments, and during this session in October, we started to think about the polarization of Internet and workshops organized about their responsibility online and such workshops are also going to be organized in the future.  The idea behind this is to think very deeply about this particular subject.  There are three issues which came up in connection with these discussions.
The first thing is connected with digital sensitivity and it's connected with sanitary emergency.  It is connected with the new forum in which different electronic devices are used.  New services come up, there is a total new manner of communication which is why the spread among, and all of these are very much connected with various environmental challenges, and finally we also cannot forget about the different questions connected with the whole territory around us, and Internet is in the very center of different activities that we're involved in.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  From the Columbian IGF, please, Isabel, the floor is yours.
>> ISABEL:  Hi, everyone.  Hello to fellow families and everyone joining us in the discussion.  I am the Managing Director for Ministry Information Communication Technology of Colombia and thank you to the Internet Governance Forum for this invitation.
It's absolutely true when we say that the information of the Internet is an enabler for the economy and activity in different countries around the world.
In Colombia the 96% of the companies are really small and micro‑small.  And before pandemic, just 12% of the companies had had a digital process for the productivities of the business.  However, the Colombia Government has been public policies and facilitate the different technological tools that allow our companies to be more competitive and they can consolidate throughout the pandemic.
An important example about the public policies are the legal instruments of the digital transformation and the cybersecurity.  The companies without taking into account the size of the organization.  They begin the digitalization of the process and the strategies for increased sales, the customer and the financial results.
In the other hand, about intelligent logical schools from the Ministry of Information Communication and Technology of Colombia, we are giving to the companies that don't have any presence in the Internet, a special kit, one totally free, a hosting of 1 gigabyte, 3 corporate email accounts and a web page for increased the benefits of their business.
In Colombia we understand that the Internet is the most important tools and strategy for overcoming the crisis generated by the COVID‑19.  In Colombia, we are working in this moment to increase the connectivity in all of our territories.
Right now, just 50% of the families in Colombia are connected, and we want to connect 20% more in 2022.  Actually, it is the principle issues about the digital policies in Colombia.  All of our strategies are around achieving that the people in Colombia can use the Internet for education, for business, work among other important things for the society in Colombia, for the citizen in Colombia.  They're very important themes for the government is to get better life for Columbian citizens through the promotion of the access to the Internet.  Thank you, everyone.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you for your intervention, Isabel.  Let's move to the third speaker in the first question, Mr. Quasai from the Arab IGF.
>> QUASAI ALSHATTY:  Let me start the intervention remembering our dear colleague, the late Marilyn Cade, resting her soul to rest in peace.  I'm honored to join this session with this wonderful audience and panelists to talk about such an important issue which is the role of the Internet in emergency situations.
There is no doubt that the Internet proved to be the most critical important tool for us within the unprecedented pandemic that we experienced since the beginning of this year, where we were confined to our geographical location and we were unable, due to health issues, to move around whether for business or leisure or meeting family and colleagues.
There is no doubt that the Internet helped to ease this limitation and to overcome it, whether in having our essential needs, whether it is in logistics, whether in socially interacting with our colleagues and friends and family members, or running our businesses.
Although, we have direct broadcasting like TVs and radios, we were mainly seeking our information from the Internet and the Internet was the main channel for us of communicating and outreaching and to receive information about the pandemic or the situation of let's say the curfews or the situation of our businesses, or hearing the news about it, or the news about the situation of COVID nationally or regionally or globally.
So, the Internet proved to be the main tool for that, and in such case, like in Kuwait.  And because of the important of this tool for government to send its information to view the information and selection to the public or for other businesses and for the communities.  The government, for example, subsidizes the access to the Internet during the months of March and April, whether mobile or fixed lines, for the capacity of 5 gigabytes and that's including 5G access, and this is to give all the access and possibility of access for everyone in order to receive information, whether it's from government, health services, or try to acquire their necessities and run their businesses.
Many trends, the new trends have been set.  We are working remotely right now and we get used to working remotely and running our businesses remotely, and let's say buy and sell remotely, and acquire our main or basic needs remotely, communicating with friends and family members whether they are close or remotely, and some of these trends will not be only during the COVID‑19 pandemic.  Some of these trends will be set as permanent trends because we get used to it and notice how practical it is.
For example, online meetings ‑‑
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Could you please conclude, as we're running out of time, please.
>> QUASAI ALSHATTY:  Some of these trends will remain as main trends and go beyond the COVID‑19 situation.  It will be permanent trends, for example collaboration online, meeting online, and meeting with business partners, or even the logistic services, this will be permanent trends during or which will go passed the pandemic of COVID‑19.
The Internet has proved to be a crucial tool to us, and the most important out beating by far other means of communication like direct broadcasting TVs and radios, and I'll stop there and thank you.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much, Quasai.
The COVID‑19 emergency is exacerbated a number of digital policy issues, so our next question to our speakers is, which issues were particularly relevant in your communities in this regard?  And we have first Ms. Tanara Brazil IGF.  Tanara, please.
   >> TANARA LAUSCHNER:  Good morning, everyone.  I am the coordinate for the Multistakeholder Organizing Committee of the Brazilian IGF, which is held annually since 2011.  The year of 2020 has been a challenging for the Internet in Brazil and for the country as a whole.  And since the beginning of March with the rise of coronavirus cases in Brazil, people began being quarantined and social distancing became common language, and this with more people at home, Internet infrastructure began being pushed more than usual, forcing a rise in traffic.
Several other countries have done, Brazil has also acted and applied measures to mitigate inherent to the period of severe conditions posed by the coronavirus outbreak.
Seeking and leverage the resilience of Internet in network in great demand for traffic.  Government authorities convened several different stakeholders, including big telecommunication providers and task forces to design and apply measures to face the new challenges posed to the national infrastructure.
On a positive note, Brazilian connectivity infrastructure also realized upon a broad ecosystem of Internet exchange points, it spread all over the country, and designed to handle heavy broadband traffic, while the Internet in Brazil faces a traffic increase, the Internet exchange point operated by the Brazilian network information center, have been dealing well with peaks over 11terabytes per second.  And also powered fake news and information, and the pandemic made clear the Internet plays as a central role in situations of tough restrictions.  People need to be well connected to have access to update information mitigation measures, public authority guidance, and so on.  This access also shows the complex issue of dealing with disinformation in a time when citizens need to be oriented to help society overcome challenges.
In this sense, several individuals have been raising lots of concerns about the disinformation crisis in the country.  The Brazilian Congress is now debating a draft bill that tries to mitigate the spread of fake news and misinformation.  Nevertheless, experts and stakeholders have been raising concerns about the risks that this proposal may cause.  Especially with regards to freedom of expression, communication, privacy, and data protection, as well as innovation and business models.
Finally, on behalf of the Brazilian NRI, I would like to share condolences for the passing of Ms. Marilyn Cade, her legacy will not be forgotten.  Thank you.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much.  Let's move to Jennifer Lopez from Panama IGF.  Jenifer, please.
   >> JENIFER LOPEZ:  Hi, everyone.  Thank you, Flavio.  As my colleagues said before the COVID‑19 pandemic has remarked an importance of open and transparent governance, access to information, and ethical standards related to privacy, and data are aspects to consider before, during, and after an emergency.
Panama has made significant progress in the utilization and is in the phase of identifying several challenges and opportunities in things such as infrastructure, Internet penetration, especially human resource, public policies, regulatory framework, update to help close the existing digital divide.  As a result of the impact coronavirus has on the lifestyle we had, we must work from home due to quarantine, however not the entire population has equipment or Internet service required to do so.
Just Law 126 began to apply establishing and regulating teleworking in the Republic in Panama and elements of the labor code.  It is a great achievement from the COVID‑19 pandemic and finally which helped to update our labor code with the use of information and communication, technologies, and international trends in the new digital age.
The state of emergency caused by the pandemic on data resulting in deployment of measures to protect citizen's privacy and prevent attacks on their cybersecurity.  The development of applications focusses on the revolution of the pandemic and security involved in the polling and private sector was high as efforts were mostly directed to the financial sector and telework.  The threat to cybersecurity increased with interactions.  Electronic and administrative site, Panama.gov was established as soul portal for platforms established by public entities for the execution of online procedures.
In addition to their presentation and follow‑up by us users.  And Law 144 of April 15 considers the rules for the protection of personal data and limits public servants’ access to sensitive user information.  The government created agencies such as the national of information privacy and direction of innovation and technological information facilitating in the digital government modernization and responsibility for the formulation and implementation of innovation.
It also provided that public entities should include within their annual budget the funds needed for the fulfillment of the digital agenda.  To solve the economic problems of citizenship the government created Panama solidarity.  It works by using ID card in markets and drug stores around the country.  The credit isn't needed to enter governmental portal where until information of the person is used such as ID and full name.  In this instance, even though it's private data, in order to receive it is required for the person to place the ID number and to confirm their identity by means of other country data that only the person knows.  Focusing on a free or more accessible Internet with less vigilance and grave privacy is essential because information, for example, is a digital right for everyone.
COVID‑19 pandemic has dramatically enhanced the role of digital communication technologies in everyday life.  Although, resolving complications across cybersecurity and privacy will require new norms and policies, the challenges are a lot too.
Considering the short term and long‑term challenges faced by the government, the active data and technology and related applications of digital governments agencies impact, Panama can be expected to pay attention to relevant policy measures.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Ms., Lopez, can you please include.
   >> JENIFER LOPEZ:  Also influences from COVID‑19 pandemic and other emergencies will encourage to take advantage of the power of innovation.  Thank you so much.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you, Jenifer.  We have already signed up for intervention, Mr. Timofey from the Russian Federation.  So, the floor is yours, but please be very quick as we are already over the time of this block, please.
>> TIMOFEY:  First, I thank the organizers for the opportunity to share our experience.  Well, nobody would doubt once a crisis, society claims higher demand for reliable information, but there is a pitfall, reliable information is not enough as long as it is not packed in some views and understandable form and moreover, we have to enhance for peoples a attention and as a matter of fact they have plan to follow staff to look at.  To ensure that a special information convention center has been set up in Russia to manage all the public communication with statements and authorities around the subject of coronavirus.  While doing that, more than even before we're faced over challenges modern technologies could actually raise.  
On the one hand, Internet, social networks and last but not least, instant messengers have become a main entity for spreading fake and misleading information.  Some of them could be about helicopters, I guess you have that flying around citizens, and but also there were fakes that carried and affected people's health and life and such stories regarding treatment of coronavirus disease could lead to denial for fundamental medical care and as a result end in real human death.  Frankly speaking, the pandemic of fakes did not miss our country.  The anxiety and social use in society was quite high.  People rumor different stories from jokes around vodka treating coronavirus to some mystical conspiracy in global state and Bill Gates trying to lead the whole world.  And this transpired different forms of communication in which media users are used to consume and normal Internet behavior.  Forms vary greatly from special media platforms to integration and collaborations, popular bloggers, and influencers, and the big one was when we launched more than 60 official regional telegram channels each corresponding to a state, regional, coronavirus headquarters and came with both distributing official and reliable information and debunking fakes, for example once we found the fake about some criminals turned up to be epidemiological service that were allegedly infiltrating and robbing homes, and in 30 minutes we got a response from the police that there was absolutely no base for that story to be true, but police released an official statement and within a few hours they distributed exposure of the fake across all 835 regions of Russia.  
The social networks we establish a shortcut mechanism removing fake content and in minutes after detection, and to some up, Internet has brought us a serious challenge for social integrity and health but it gave us a direct way to establish trustful communication in between authorities and people where we as a state could provide openness, opportunity, and ability to speak the same language as a result covers a lot of experience and ready to share it without any limitations, and we're planning to actually hold an international conference on September 2021 so I would like to invite all of you, if the epidemic situation is satisfactory, meet in Russia and discuss practices approaches.  Now I would like to drop a message in the chat if you think such an event could be useful or not.  Thank you very much.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you.  So, we are over the time of the first block.  We don't have specific questions in the chat, so we will try to move to the second block of this Main Session, which is ‑‑ which will deal with technologies helping people.
I would ask Anja to launch the second poll for this session, and we will try to look at examples of good practices for combating emergency situations using database technologies and emerging technologies.  Three speakers, first from Italy IGF, Manuela, and Dominion Republic, and from Asia‑Pacific IGF Ms. Jennifer Chung and so let's start with Ms. Manuela from Italy IGF and please all the speakers, no more than three minutes as we need to stick to our time.
   >> EMANUELA:  Hi, everybody.  Thank you for inviting me.  Part of IGF there, part of the committee of IGF Italy, and using technology to tackle the COVID‑19 crisis.  2020 the pandemic is in Italy and Italy, the first European country to face the emergency, and not at all prepared.  But the thrill community of AI researchers and scientists joined together and developed several concrete proposals to government, health institutions, and doctors to face the health emergency.
So today we'll quickly mention three initiatives, very relevant.  The first one on bioinformatics, the second on image analysis, and the third that has already been mentioned by the Russian colleague and also by the Brazilian colleague about infodemic.  So, bioinformatics a group analyze the So, molecular data to provide purposes for drug.  The data from this group is very useful for the scientists looking for existing drugs, drugs that need for further utilization and could be used immediately and director to treat COVID‑19 patients.
Second, image analysis, and so another group of scientists worked together with the radiologists and doctors to collect CT scans and X‑rays of patients with lung infections both with COVID and not COVID infection.  So, they analyzed the data with AI image recognition algorithm and they could provide a tool for making diagnosis faster, cheaper, and more manageable in the hospital process.
The third one infodemic already mentioned by the interview before me.  And during the crisis, we've all been exposed to a huge amount of COVID‑19 information or misinformation, fake news, and as he said, not all of these were reliable information and it was making it very hard for people to find trustworthy sources and reliable guidance when they needed it, so another group of scientists in Italy, they used the AI model to analyze the social media data to identify and monitor the overload of unreliable information, and they built an infodemic index and so this index has been a very useful early‑warning signals for the Italian government to evaluate the impact of the policy that they were developing, and to monitor the emotions and the sentiments of the citizens.
Considering that at the beginning of the pandemic, in Italy this index was at the level of 30 out of 100 and after three weeks of the lockdown, the official communication started and the policy started and the index went down to 3.  So, it reduced the dramatically the disinformation and fake news.
Okay, so since there are, I mean, we developed several initiatives, but I'm also very interested in hearing and learning from the experiences of the other country, so I thank you, Flavio, and I give you back the floor.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much, Emanuela for the relevant contribution to the question here.  So now let's move to Mr. Osvaldo from Dominican Republic and IGF.  Please, the floor is yours.  Three minutes, please.
>> OSVALDO:  Hi, everyone.  Please let me congratulate the previous participants in the flow of Internet and emergency situations.  Looking at the samples of information for combating using database technology.  Researchers from our country, Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, formed an interdisciplinary team to learn about some conditions experienced by elderly after social distance to COVID‑19 and impose things since March 19 in our country in different parts of the world.
The objective was to find out from the pandemic if all people maintain active life, so what is the level of use of ICT to establish relationship learning activities for creation and emotional state.  Some of the research showed that the urgency of these samples remain active to household cores, and they use ICT to communicate with family and friends to learn new knowledge and creation.
We also check out in scenario where no access to technology prevails in this group of age, and so that there was different emotions related to the use of technology and the not use of technology, considering the bonding relationship and new learning at this time as a sanction.
We noticed that all people and the need to creating technology during this space reinforce intergenerational, interpersonal relationships and public policy can make sense in order to improve the group of people in adopting technology.  In another area, the Dominican Government has been working on different digital agenda focus, and they have been providing by providing public services VMware in order to improve the possibility to access the services, certificates, and things like that that creates an opportunity for everybody to reduce timing and to in this moment of the digital COVID emergency, to have access to these different opportunities.  This has proved to be very effective in these moments, and another area where the government has been applying database applications is for tracking or informing people using COVID apps based on Android or iOS platforms to provide services within the mobile, using chatbots or allow people to know and determine if they are infected or not.  This has been a problem being effective since the epidemic authorities can track them based on privacy and data protection policies and complying with these different approaches, and as we know, in the Dominican Republic.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Please conclude.
   >> OSVALDO:  Yes.  This is my final remark.  Different apps to promote those situations have been effective in our country in these emergency times.  Thank you.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much, Osvaldo, for your consideration.  So now we have Ms. Jennifer Chung from Asia‑Pacific IGF.  Please, Jennifer, the floor is yours.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you, Flavio.  Hello colleagues.  My name is Jennifer Chung speaking with the Secretariat of the Asia‑Pacific IGF on right now, and really wanted to applaud colleagues that spoke before me about really effective solutions and innovative solutions that many states and countries have found during this pandemic times, and as we all know, Asia‑Pacific is the home of a really large and diverse region of different economies, developed, developing economies in transition, and the COVID‑19 pandemic itself has originated from in region and lots of different ways of combating and mitigating the impacts felt were seen across the region and in fact three states have been very successful in combating such crises such as New Zealand, South Korea, and Taiwan, and also Vietnam.  And it's really interesting because it turns the assumption on its head that it's only, you know, countries that are very rich in resources or are only successful in combating such crises.  
And, in fact, many developing economies in the Asia‑Pacific have also innovated very much during this period.  And in Taiwan, as an example, as an economy that was very successful in mitigating these risks, many people cited trust in the government and also the very fictive rollout of different measures such as contact tracing that doesn't require revealing information, contact tracing that the users throw away emails and pre‑paid mobile numbers because a lot of people did have concerns of privacy when we're looking at contract‑tracing apps.
Another example that we were discussing during APRIGF was the problems faced by communities that are underserved, people with disabilities.  In normal situations, in non‑emergency situations, many of the information that reaches these communities is already very difficult, and when you see the added pressure of COVID‑19, this actually makes it worse.  
So, we have the case study of Bangladesh governments being very quick to respond to creating a separate channel with real texts and also sign language videos to actually push real information out to communities that are vulnerable to the situation.  And also, in the context of time, I would like to really wrap up on the final point that is very important that was brought up during our discussions this year, which is learning during COVID‑19.  I think previous colleagues have already mentioned that because of everything being digitalized, the access gap of the digital divide is more exacerbated by all of these conditions, and adapting to actually using different infrastructure in the case study of Philippines where we had students who actually had to climb trees to get to better WiFi signals, really highlights the importance of having a very holistic system of looking at access of looking at changing how we look at education for the students that are most vulnerable and least able to continue with their education life.  And I do notice that in our ‑‑
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Would you please conclude.
>> JENNIFER CHUNG:  In the agenda there is a South Korean colleague, so hopefully we'll hear more about the success stories there.  Back to you, Flavio.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you, Jennifer.  So, in discussing good examples of good practices using technology for combating emergency situations let us about vulnerable groups.  We have two speakers here first is Mr. Dustin from IGF USA, and then Ms. Olga from Argentina IGF.  Dustin, the floor is yours, three minutes at most, please.
>> DUSTIN:  On behalf of IGF USA, I first thank everyone in the community for the outpouring of support for Marilyn, it's a great loss and she'll be greatly missed but it's great to see her live on through all of you in your work.
Like many of the NRIs, COVID‑19 has dominated the discussion at the IGF USA 2020.  Four of our nine sessions referenced it in the title, and instead of giving it keynote to a person, we compiled a video from people across the U.S. in different fields sharing their experiences, focusing on issues like connectivity, education, and ultimately the role that the Internet played in everyday life in the way it did not before.
There was a large health care provider that went from 1, 600 virtual encounters in the entire month of February to 60,000 per week in April.  There was quickly expanded visitation for people, and workplaces went remote and so did schools.  The results were a mixed bag but a few themes emerged.
First, both the providers and recipients of virtual services needed to have access to the Internet, devices and know how in order to utilize them.  The best practice here is having infrastructure and technology knowledge in place prior to the spike in demand, although of course this does not always happen.
Second, governments and other large decision‑making institutions needed to understand the importance of the solution and respond accordingly, and this could mean doing more or less.  Telehealth provides a case for demonstrating this, health care providers rapidly scaled their virtual offerings, and in some cases, practices went 100% virtual, continuing to provide much needed care to their patients.
So, what did it take for this to happen and where did it fall short?  One thing we found is that the technology and functionality already existed, but there were economic and institutional and regulatory barriers hindering this rollout.  In response we saw national and local governments take steps to quickly make necessary policy changes, some temporary, to pave the way for health care providers.  With technology already in place and governmental decisions to relax privacy regulation, allow cross‑jurisdictional medical care, and shift policies around insurance coverage for remote visits, providers were able to deploy solutions rapidly.
However, as mentioned, virtual solutions require things to be in place on the recipient's end as well and here is where we saw gaps as the digital divide exposed itself to the entire nation.  We cannot provide virtual solutions during emergencies if the infrastructure and the broad sense of the word, is not in place.  Thankfully, there was a widespread movement by companies, including ISPs as well as local, public, and private institutions that moved quickly to meet the connectivity needs and get people online to access the services they needed.
What has become readily relevant is that we need to develop sustainable solutions that are ready for the next emergency instead of rolling out temporary solutions each time and so that the services can reach everyone when they're needed and they don't have to wait on the technology to reach them.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much, Dustin.  Thank you for sticking to the three minutes.  So, Olga, from Argentina IGF.
   >> OLGA:  Hello everyone from Argentina.  My name is Olga, representing the Argentina IGF, and I will share some interesting things about some rural activities that we had in the country.  First of all, let me remind our dear Marilyn Cade, I'm sure she's with us in this moment because she was very active and she will always be with us.
Congratulations to IGF Secretariat and this very good session organized by colleagues.  Argentina has 23 provinces and 1 Federal capital with a vast geography, and so in normal time we have no formal borders in between the provinces, but during COVID there is no way to move along the provinces, there were restrictions to move along the roads and crossing provinces.  This may mean nothing to many of us that we can work from home, but it represented a big problem, especially for very small agricultural producers, so Argentina is a ‑‑ its economy is based on agriculture mainly, and so the small producers had very, very bad time because they couldn't sell their products and that harmed deeply their sustainability, their economic sustainability, and also this part of the economy is very informal, they're usually not very related with banks and they pay everything in cash, and face‑to‑face.
So, that represented to them a very challenging situation, and usually their products are being sold in cities nearby, but that represents that they have to move from one province to the other province and they could not do that, so the National Institute for Agriculture Technology what we call in Spanish the INTA, had a very interesting idea and thanks to my dear colleague, Matius, who works there, he has been telling us about this initiative and they developed a network called commercial solidarity network, and so it does ‑‑ they create this system which included several online workshops using different social networks and other connectivity tools, so and the communications were mainly made by mobile phones and data with mobile with this small producers.
So what they allowed them to sell their products and they got also the authorization from the government to move from province to the other provinces, and so these small producers could be sustainable with this crisis, and the interesting thing is that the international institute of agriculture technology was working with them to promote the use of technology and the use of formal payment methods, and that was before.  But now this accelerated a lot with the pandemic, and so then this has been ‑‑ I think it's a good experience of how this critical situation developed into a very good development using technology and formal payment methods.
If you're interested, the website of this initiative copied and pasted, the link is copied and pasted in the chat.  Thank you very much for inviting me.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you, Olga ‑‑ (no audio).
>> OLGA:  Flavio, you're muted.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  I'm sorry.  I'm muted.  So, thank you, Olga.  And let's move to the discussion on this second block.  We have Mr. Eun Chang from South Korean IGF that signed up for intervention, so please Mr. Chang, you have up to two minute for your intervention, please.
>> EUN CHANG:  This control is widely claimed by the worldwide medias, and successful saves citizens more life.  The strategy can be summarized into three parts.  First of all ‑‑ (audio feedback) ‑‑ ensuring database technology and contact tracing ‑‑ contact tracing COVID‑19.
The interesting picture of the strategy is that instead of enforcing Draconian rules in emergency institution, South Korean Government adopted some database contact‑tracing practice comprising of the ranking mobile phone GPS data and critical transactions and public transportation records.
Most of all, policymakers took account of the balance between public health and investigation and ensuring the media and personal data.
Such base practice study has meaningful implication to us.  We should learn that it would be important in fighting coronavirus to dispel on necessary privacy risk concerns.  When government successfully satisfied the concern or dispelled the concern, more people will welcome this measure.
Moreover, the database technology should be used in compliance with due process law and preserving another media of the individual identities is very important.
Admittedly, some critics have raised concern about too much disclosure of personal data and that immediately South Korean Government changed the data disclosed guideline to Patient Pat because to dispel that the concern of the privacy, they changed it twice about the guideline there down in the range of data closure and in the process, all in all, database contact tracing technology has been widely accepted by Korean citizens without consider backlash, and it's very important.  And it is because the entire purpose of data gathering is precisely focused on investigation for the public safety and not other kind of investigation or something.  Why is Korean citizens hold a strong sense of privacy, they are admitting that the deployment of the database technology with region for public safety.  Thank you.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much.  So, we move then quickly to the third block of our Main Session and this will ‑‑ it is entitled, No One Left Behind, and so we have also a poll here.  If, Anja, could you please share the poll with us on the screen and it will be there left for you, attendees, to respond to the poll.
So, the first question in this third block of our session is how to secure the deployment of online tools and services for combating emergency situation, and for responding to the first question, we have three speakers invited, Mr. from West African IGF and Mr. Roberto from Bolivia IGF, and Mr. Felix from Spain IGF.  So, you are first and please all the speakers, three minutes each, and I will have to interrupt you because we are over our time, so please, the floor is yours.
>> I don't see him currently on the call so maybe you can move to another speaker.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Yeah.  Yeah.  Okay.  Let's move to Roberto from Bolivia.  So please, Roberto.
   >> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA:  Thank you very much, Flavio.  Nice to be here with all of you colleagues.  I would like to start saying that as we all have in our countries, when most of us started a lockdown in March and in our case we started on 23 of March and of course most of the services were affected, particularly the ones like education, very critical one, and also the public services for the citizens, all their paperwork, all of the kind of things that were free set during that time because they wouldn't be able to continue doing those that are very important for them.
Of course, no ones with prepared, and despite the many advances that many of these offices in the public sector, particularly, despite of them, it takes years to be prepared for a crisis like this, and it takes years to prepare all the technological infrastructure that is needed to overcome this kind of situation.
And I want to share a very interesting experience coming from the local government in Bolivia, and from the very first moment, actually, they continue working using technology as a main way, and not only working with mobile applications and where they have published all of their services, but also using a contact center in a very clever way.  And I mean, combining IP telephony and making this available for these workers, and enabling them to work from their homes, so that was very important thing to share that allowed all the people to concur using this context and in order to not only receive information but to receive services, actually.
Just a key example of what happened regarding the amount of people that was attended.  Before the pandemic there were registered about 40,000 to 50,000 people that were using this kind of services, but after the pandemic, the recent measure was about 250,000 people and of course this pandemic brought very much sadness for everyone in a global way, but if we can think about positive things that this pandemic can bring to us and to everyone, it was the spirit or the boost that it provided to all of these technological services using Internet as main channel of communication.  Thank you very much, Flavio.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much, Roberto.  Thank you for sticking to three minutes.  Very timely.  So, now we move to Mr. Felix from the Spain IGF, so Felix, the floor is yours.
   >> FELIX HERNANDEZ-GIL:  Okay.  Thank you very much Flavio.  In Spain, the availability of high-speed Internet as network has been key in emergency situations, allowing the continuity of activities of remote working or education or the provision of public services.  So, it has been crucial to put in place measures to answer the deployment of good Internet access network and the relation place a very important role in this.  And from a relation framework, made possible that several telecom operators invested in network and that produced a high viability of wideband Internet access.
Now the fiber coverage in is around 80% of the homes.  There is also universal service regulations that is a great coverage of multigeographical areas and enough is for the Internet access and is now the plan to establish a minimum speed of 30 megabytes per second, and a new regulation is also being introduced to answer the availability of low‑cost offer for people with limited resources.
During the pandemic, it is also very helpful, the offering of free additional resources by telecom operators that are especially used for people with few economic resources, and this includes free additional capacity for subscriptions and the provision of free Internet access for from use users.
Another key issue has been the availability of public online services that are used to help people that have been seriously affected by the pandemic.  The conventional face‑to‑face services are totally saturated due to the high demand, so the online services played a key role in this situation.
Well, that is all from my side.  Thank you very much for your attention.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much, Felix.  Thank you very much.  So, another question related to this block is how to tailor our policies and actions to support the most vulnerable ones?
And addressing this question, we have speaker Ms. Zana from Lebanon IGF, so please, the floor is yours.  Three minutes.
>> ZEINA:  Hello, everyone.  While I fully agree with all that has been said from my colleagues, but we should not underestimate also the risks that children might face when using technology.  In the current COVID situation where young people are connected online for longer time and where the Internet is providing limitless opportunities for them to learn, to communicate, to socialize, to share their views, this same Internet might cause significant challenges also to their safety, so keeping them safe online has become an increasingly urgent matter.
And in Lebanon, we urgently need to review what has been done to protect them in, and the Main Session during the digital IGF was dedicated to safer Internet for children during crisis, and it highlighted the missing required actions and invited all stakeholders to collaborate before it's too late for our society.
The biggest challenge in the current situation is to rapidly create essential environment for children on the Internet and this is not only a national challenge but also a global one.  Knowing that harmful content can psychologically and morally affect our children, we need to accelerate our mission, and in fact the high‑level council for childhood within the ministry of social affairs has played a key role in establishing a national committee that works to coordinate efforts between all parties concerned with the issue, or with this issue.
We also ‑‑ the same committee is now working on preparing materials for teachers, and handbook for parents in order to educate them how to protect their children from the dangers that they might face on the Internet.
She also has ‑‑ also in the safety of children online and their activities are headed out either solely or in partnership with government agencies and these activities are based on interactive techniques and focus on child protection and life skills such as building self‑confidence and teaching them when to say, no.
This cooperation is also taking place with cybercrime office as Lebanon witnessed an increased reporting cases during the lockdown and it reached around 9 complaints per days by minors, and so as a result of the closure the public prosecution offices stopped receiving complaints and the mechanisms adopted for reporting were the web page vendors or in English, it's report.  And in addition to the social media pages and the phone number of the cybercrime bureau.  Parents were urged to immediately report any criminal attempt.  With corona, the number of complaints related to threats increased, are as criminals used the name of health organizations to request private information with the aim of stealing as well as hacking smart phones, request an amount of money in exchange for reactivating for forms, and then the public security forces ‑‑
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Please wrap up, please.
>> ZEINA:  Many lessons were learned from this pandemic and the most important one is that we need to coordinate efforts to spreading awareness and to work together on updating the relevant laws and policies to include strict measures that protect our society and our children when exposed to the dangers on the Internet.  Thank you, Flavio.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you, Zeina.  Thank you very much.  Yeah.  Protecting the children is indeed a very important issue especially in such emergency situations.
So, going into the discussion we have Mr. from the IGF signed up for intervention, so Mahen, the floor is yours.  Two minutes at most, please.
>> MAHEN:  Thank you, everybody.  I am Mahen Busgopaul from Mauritius.  We've heard about how to tailor our policies to support the most vulnerable ones and actually we are seeing that emerging situations and new threats are arising and we need to look for appropriate measures to circumvent the adverse effects, and as NRIs we work with communities to ensure that everyone has access to emerging tools, and in so doing keeping our promise not to leave anyone behind.
The goals that we want to achieve in this part of Africa is that no one is left behind.  I will take this opportunity to highlight what Mauritius IGF is proposing to do.  We embarked on recent study with main aim to encompass all communities to everyone.
This research study is looking at connecting the Internet community, bridging gaps, and eliminating digital inequality.  The main objectives of the study can be summarized as follows and we want to start and collect information from the marginalized and difficult‑to‑reach population on the Internet usage to develop evidence‑based solutions, to open accessible and rights‑based Internet for all, and to come up with solutions of helping everyone to the process of Internet and also to acquaint participants and audiences on digital literacy and the African Union Declaration on Internet Governance.
What will be the impact?  In short, the recommendations will secure the deployment of tools and services, and the expected outcomes will, among other things, look at African citizens tracking progress on digital literacy penetration and African Union Declaration or Internet Governance Agenda 2063 and participants will also be acquainted on the concept of Internet governance and how they can be producers and not just consumers in this ecosystem.
We also want to go forward for empowerment of disadvantaged and disabled children using Internet to meet their needs.  And, finally, the rural communities taking up and harnessing opportunities that come with Internet access.
In Mauritius, we want no one to be left behind with a main target and we expect to encompass the following communities out‑of‑school use, home stay mothers, rural community leaders, disabled children, among others, and in conclusion I would like to say that in order to secure the deployment of online tools and services for combating any situation linked with the Internet, people need to be educated and have the ability to have their personal safety while accessing Internet.  As NRIs, we need to allow individuals to decide what is actually happening at Internet level and empower them to have their personal choice.  Education is a starting point and we can do it now, pooling citizens all together with educational tools is a public action‑oriented pledge from Mauritius IGF.  Thank you.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much.  So, let's move now to the fourth block of this Main Session and let's talk about the economies in emerging situations.  So, one of the main issues caused by this pandemic is the negative economic effects for families and individuals in our communities, considering long lockdowns that make it impossible to continue working or doing regular activities, particularly for those self‑employed.
And so you see on the screen a poll regarding this economic question with regard to the emergency situation that we are facing.  So, the question here is, what are good policy practices from stakeholders around the world taking advantage of Internet services to support the economies in those times?  And we have four speakers for this fourth block.  Let's start with Mr. Nick from the United Kingdom IGF, and so please, Nick, three minutes and the floor is yours.
>> NICK WEBAN‑SMITH:  Good morning wherever you are in the world.  I'm speaking on behalf of the United Kingdom Internet Governance Forum and part of the Secretariat which I support.  The committee held a full program this year mirrored United Nations global IGF but did it in the lens at the time held over three‑day period of 15 to 17 of September and we pretty current and we did it specifically with the timing of this meeting in mind.
We focused on the same core themes, trust, particularly protecting digital rights during the pandemic, inclusion, and with a particular focus on the skills gaps and access which has been exacerbated by the pandemic, data and algorithmic transparency, which is obviously increasingly important, and last but not least, the Internet and the environment.
So, the first thing to point out would be that overnight with the pandemic, it resulted in a remote working arrangement.  I'm currently speaking to you from the second national lockdown, and so pretty much we went through maybe several years of economic digitization in the space of a few weeks.
Coming to support the good policy practices that have been essential for our economy, I think we all knew how important digital was to our national economy and also to the global economy, but this is only emphasized just how important it has been to be able to have a strong resilient digital economy.
Our Internet infrastructure came under significant pressure and scrutiny, but proved highly resilient and absolutely crucial for our economic survival, so one of the investments that had made in it paid good dividends when it came to the overnight digitization and remote working that we had to go through.
And I suppose my main point is that the acceleration of these existing trends, resulting in some step changes and I specifically wanted to call out a couple of important points of policy, which have helped us through this and will continue to guide us as we go through this process.  Firstly, our government launched in partnership with business a digital national strategy around what are we doing as a nation and how we strategically are approaching the digital world, and already we're thinking about post‑pandemic and the phrase we use is to build back better, to build back into something which is more acceptable to a low‑carbon environment, for smarter work, and would be more sustainable for our future and for our future generations.
But with everything, there is a very pro‑business and pro‑innovation focus, so it's a very ambitious national data strategy also launched in order to how do we maximize use for national data and not just for health but for all business purpose, and it's very pro‑innovation and heavily relies on industry partnership not with digital tech companies but small and medium‑size enterprises.  We also have a very strong focus on the risks of an increasing digitized business environment, and the fact that online harms do need to be addressed and that has become a higher priority and the government is bringing out national legislation in the last quarter of this year.
But finally, it's been an immense success story because as we had the digital minister announce at IGF, that 85,000 new online stores created in the first four months of the pandemic as we moved rapidly over it a digital economy.
And that's it for me.  Thank you very much for the opportunity.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much, Nick.  Let's move quickly to Mr. Makane from African IGF.  The floor is yours, three minutes, please, try to stick to the time.
>> MAKANE:  Good afternoon to everybody from Senegal.  We paid tribute to and thank the IGF Secretariat for organizing this panel.  Speaking about the digital for us mission strategy for Africa of the African union, it was developed in cooperation with Commission for Africa, the original committees, Smart Africa who support using the Internet to support African countries.
So, the overall objective is to harness the technology and innovation to transform African societies and communities to promote Africa's integration, generate inclusive growth, simulate job creation, from the digital divide.
The specifics objectives are to build a secure digital market in Africa by 2030, and digitally impose African population to safe and secure connectivity using affordable devices (?) of which particular developed in Africa.  We build an inclusive digital skill and capacity across in education and offer online skills development program to provide basic knowledge and skills in security and privacy in digital environment 100 Africans a year by 2020 and 2021 and 300 million per year by 2025.  We build a viable sector approach, digitalization of the health sector, and make sure that by 2030, 99% of people in Africa have digital legal identity adds part of civil legislation portion.
The digital transformation strategy for Africa is based on foundation pillar and critical sectors, including the health.  Corresponding skills also we have digital content and applications and research and development.  The digital strategy includes policy recommendations and actions on each foundation critical to cross‑cutting themes.  The strategy is further guided by the solidarity and cooperation.  Solidarity of African union member states and cooperation between the Africa union regs and African organizations and finally encourages to Agenda of African union and Sustainable Development Goals and the digital strategy is being implemented by Member States starting by the year 2020.  Thank you very much.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much, Makane, for your nice conclusion.  Let's move quickly to the third speaker which is Mr. Carlos from Ecuador IGF.  Please, Carlos, three minutes, please.
>> CARLOS:  Hello?  (audio breaking up).
>> My apologies, the quality of the connection is too low to understand the speaker.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Carlos, we are very sorry but we cannot hear you.
(audio breaking up ‑‑ no interpretation).
>> CARLOS:   We have multiple difficulties to launch it in the global market.  What we learned during the pandemic is that it is crucial to have a community‑based economy.  Unfortunately, we can only hear isolated words from the speaker.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  We can't hear you so we'll have to ‑‑
>> I think he's speaking in Spanish.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  So, I'm sorry, Carlos.  We have to move on.  We cannot hear you.  We are already well over time, so let's try to move to our last speakers from EuroDIG the European IGF, Ms. Meri and Marcel, so you have both together three minutes at both.  Please try to stick to the time.  Please, Mary.
>> MERI:  Thank you, Flavio.  We'll try to be as brief as possible.  EuroDIG took place as virtual event in June just a few months after the pandemic started and the meeting was launched with a plenary on European digital economy and COVID‑19 pandemic, and initial decision had different focus, but as the session planning process coincided with the emergence of the pandemic, it was decided to refocus the session to allow for more timely and important discussions at the EuroDIG upon European Internet governance initiative.  It was all about the unique state of affairs for the European Digital Economy enforcement in the context of COVID‑19 pandemic.  So, the multistakeholder panel reflected on different aspects of the pandemic's impact on the digital economy including security, economic human rights, and innovation dimensions.  We had the opportunity to have very lively discussions with speakers from OECD, Council of Europe, ETNA and science park and thereby setting up the scene for the discussions at the virtual EuroDIG meeting, and I had a pleasure to serve as co‑focal point for the plenary and now I would like to give the floor to the colleague and co‑focal point Marcel to share with you the brief recap of the key takeaway from our discussions.  Marcel, you have the floor.
>> MARCEL:  We focused on developments that were presented and asked if they were present after the pandemic in digital paradigm shift.  Right now, we need to think about the sustainable society that we want to create and what role digital technology will play in the society.  But we did not only deal with long‑term issues but also talked about how we can master the current situation with the use of science, solidarity and mutual support.
Therefore, we need to tackle among other things the gap of digital divide stakeholders and need a forward‑looking approach that promotes investment and co‑investment.
At the same time, we need to invest in the upskilling on ICT matters in order to facilitate improvements as the Internet has been the main channel of communication.
The corona pandemic created a certain dynamic in the economic and academic environment which makes it necessary to always assess the current situation retrospectively and with a forward‑looking approach, so to make things short thanks a lot for all of you to make this come through and please take a look at the messages posted by Ricardo in the chat already.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Thank you very much Meri and Marcel.  So, we are arriving at the end of the session, and unfortunately, we do not have time to discussion anymore as we have to close.
I would ask, Anja, please share with us the results from the four polls so that people can see because this will be posted also to the list of the NRIs so people can share with their communities.
   >> ANJA GENGO:  Can you see them, Flavio?
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  It's flashing, yeah.  Oh.  Results are ‑‑ the screen is not stable.  It flashes.  Oh, it's fine now.
   >> ANJA GENGO:  Okay.  Well, I mean, in general in the interest of time, Flavio, let me just say because I've seen these polls and I had more time to spend with them than you, is that it seems that our participants indeed see that digital technologies have a huge potential to support people in emergencies, and what's even more good is that on the questions where we ask whether there were any actions or policies already taken to combat emergencies, there were much more positive responses than negative.
So, it poses a good, I think, foundation for the NRIs to further work on exploring which policies, which actions, what has been done and what needs to be done for the next IGF cycle.  Thank you.
   >> FLAVIO WAGNER:  Yes.  Yeah.  Thank you very much, Anja.  So, as you know all main sessions are producing messages, and these are being prepared by the organizing committee of this Main Session and this will be available to the community in two weeks from now, and has been done also in the most other sessions in this IGF.  At the end of the session, the participants, the speakers make their commitments to the IGF and to the future of the IGF, and the commitment we propose for the whole NRI community, at the end of this session is that all of the participating NRIs, the 131 NRIs commit to continue facilitating open, inclusive, transparent, bottom‑up, and multistakeholder dialogue on Internet governance matters of people's priority.
And this is the commitment we would like that all of our community of IGF of NRIs to take as their responsibility for the following months and years to come.
So, thank you very much all of you to be present here and leave to Anja to complete the session.  Anja, last word?
   >> ANJA GENGO:  I conclude with a huge thank you to you Flavio, to you Mary, and it's been challenging to focus and organize the session for so many reasons this week and you've done a remarkable job from experience, I know, it's not easy to moderate this session especially because ‑‑ see that's my alarm for the next session.  It's not easy to moderate this session because the NRIs always have a lot to say and we're always interested to hear about the NRIs and the good practices and work that exists there.
But I want to thank everyone, I want to thank all the NRIs for tireless work throughout the year, all the speakers, coordinators, co‑organizers, all the stakeholders that were supporting the network throughout this year.
As somebody mentioned in the chat, it is true that the next session, the High-Level Leaders Session on Securities will be in this room so you do not need to leave the room so that's good and can you stay, but we still need to conclude and give time for transition to the other session.
With that, thank you very much, excellent commitment, the forum will definitely benefit from it, and everything that you heard and have seen from slides on this session, messages, will be shortly shared through the NRI's mailing list and posted also on the IGF website.  Flavio, Mary, thank you so much for this because it was an excellent session.  Thank you for always reminding me.
   >> MARY UDUMA:  Everyone put on your video, let's go, everybody, including myself, for a photo.  Anja, can you take ‑‑ Anja, you're still there and we need to see everybody.
   >> ANJA GENGO:  I've just done.  I took a photo.  Thank you, Mary.
   >> MARY UDUMA:  Thank you everyone.  Thank you very much, Flavio for good moderation.  Thank you, Anja.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-ws168-capacity-building-in-the-age-of-convergence^^

   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  With that being said we'll go ahead and kick off our workshop here this morning.  Thank you so much to all of our panelists, especially for joining this session.  I am happy to introduce you.  And we have attendees here in the room.  Just for everyone's information, you know, we really welcome people to take the floor when there is an opportunity to ask questions to our panelists.  And also the second half of this workshop will be interactive.  And due to the digital format of this session, we have shortened it slightly.  So you all get 15 minutes back to your morning.  So the first part will be a panel.  The second half will be a short exercise.  And you can participate if you are in the audience via the chat.  We will be moderating the chat to make sure that, you know, we get input from as many people as possible.  And again if you would like to take the floor and speak, we can also make that happen.      So I will go ahead and share my screen here just to start the workshop.  Okay.  Let's see, okay.  Wonderful.  So I'll go ahead and kick us off here this morning.  Welcome to the capacity building in the age of convergence workshop.  My name is Rachel Azafrani.  I am a security strategist with Microsoft's digital diplomacy team.  I wanted to recap a little bit about what this workshop is all about, some of the issues that will be exploring here this morning.  So capacity building in the age of convergence, what do we mean by this?  Well, we are talking about the net new capacity building challenges that we face in a world of converging technologies.  So as we are already facing challenges in capacity building for cybersecurity in general what are the new challenges that we are facing when we have a convergence of sophisticated, high tech technologies such as Artificial Intelligence and cloud or Internet of Things and cloud and 5G.  And how do we equip governments and industry and Civil Society to come together to address these challenges in the near term as these technologies kind of continue to advance.  
So it is my pleasure to introduce to you a little bit about the order of the workshop and then I will be happy to also introduce our esteemed panelists here.  So without further ado again the first part of this work will be a brief panel.  And there will be the opportunity for question and answer with our panelists.  And then there will be a policy exercise with everyone involved, including the panelists to try and elaborate and map out some of these recommendations.  And then we can share this information, what we gather from this workshop in a report.      Our panelists here this morning, very, very, very delighted to have you with us.  We have Verena Weber from the OECD.  We have 'Gbenga Sesan from the Paradigm Initiative; Dr. Andrea Calderaro from the Cardif University and Prateek Sibal from UNESCO.  Very excited.  You should all be able to unmute yourselves hopefully when I pose questions to you, but if not, please let me know.      And with that I wanted to go ahead and start off with some questions for each of you.  So what I'll do is I will go ahead and walk through a set of questions.  And I would love for you all to sort of respond and reflect on each of them.  And, of course, if you would like to make another intervention and respond to the comment of a fellow panelist, that's very welcome as well.  
So just to get us started and open here today, I wanted to ask each of you, starting with Dr. Andrea Calderaro, because you are first on my screen here, what are some of the main governance challenges of converging technologies at the national level?  So again we are talking about the intersection of Artificial Intelligence, Internet of Things, cloud, AI.  So at the national level.  Can you touch upon some of the main governance challenges that you are seeing?  
   >> ANDREA CALDERARO:  Hi.  Hi Rachel.  Hi everyone.  Thanks for organizing this panel that is on cyber capacity building.  This does not focus only on cybersecurity which is pretty important already.  It is a good start.  My impression, my experience is that I mean we are all aware that technology was quicker than our capacity to understand the impact that technologies have on society.  And this struggle is reflected in our ‑‑ yeah.  Struggle to identify what is the legal framework or policy framework that makes that technology development as much as sustainable as possible for that specific context, whether it is a political or societal context.      And this is true.  I mean it is particularly pressure issue in countries that are more recently exposed to these technologies.  And the lack of ‑‑ and the main challenge which is a straightforward answer to your question, is the difficulty, it is translated in to the difficulty to coordinate a policy response.  Or better to say it is in defining a cyber governance structure.  Cyber governance capacity that makes possible the coordination among the various actors that are supposed to offer an answer to this struggle.  Talking about multi‑stakeholder, which is one of the usual key words that we discuss in these cases, the lack of a cyber governance capacity doesn't make possible to implement a multi‑stakeholder approach.      And I mean a multi‑stakeholder is not a usual model at IGF that we tend to use.  A lack of a multi‑stakeholder is a possibility to implement the multi‑stakeholder approach in reacting to these challenges.  It does not enable to integrate expertise and as a result we ‑‑ my experience is that we witness a lot of fragmentation of communities.  And the fermentation of communities does not allow countries to provide a coordinated response to those challenges.      So this is the case, for example, back to the cybersecurity domain, which is the domain where cyber capacity has been mostly implemented in the last years.  I can see there that the main interlocutor in the cybersecurity is governments.  For me it is kind of impossible to develop national cybersecurity without having established clear dialogues with private sector and Civil Society.  Each actor has different expertise and capacity to react to these challenges.  So the point here and I'd probably stop here, is the main challenge is to identify, develop capacities to frame a cyber governance structure in each context that ensures that dialogues is maintained among the various communities and integrated this way expertise and make the multi‑stakeholder approach effective and useful for this ‑‑ for the challenges.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much.  And I would like to just, you know, touch on your really interesting point that you made at the very beginning.  We are focused on cybersecurity challenges for converging technologies, but the fact that there has to be more of a wholistic approach, that won't just involve security is very important to keep in mind as well.  Thank you very much for your response.      Prateek, I have you next on my screen.  If you would like to touch on some of the main governance challenges that you see with converging technologies.  
   >> PRATEEK SIBAL:  Thanks, Rachel.  Thanks for organizing this discussion.  Thanks to all the other panelists.  It is lovely to be here.  The very nature of the technology governance is something that we need to understand.  When we are governing technology, it is not just a technology for the sake of the technology itself that we are governing.  What we are regulating is the social impact that technologies have, whether it is positive or negative based on whatever is society's acceptable standard of the impact that technologies can have.  Now this is often called what in academic literature is called rich dilemma.  How can you regulate a technology or govern a technology when its social impact is unknown.  Or at best it is contested.  The example of AI, we have two strands of discussions.  One is academics, doing a survey about artificial and general intelligence and find out, what would be the consequences.  That's pretty far away.  
And there is basically no consensus what is going to happen.  So we don't really know.  It is in the realm of what we can call unknown.  There is, of course, a second part where we are trying to understand the social implications of technology, like AI on jobs, on education, on cultural diversity.  We see since we started using social media about 10, 12, 13 years ago, our understanding has evolved where the regulation has not.  If we see in 2008 the Obama campaign because using social media to micro target voters.  And now we see social media rights for disinformation.  So it is sometimes really hard for policymakers to foresee as to what is going to happen at the intersection of technology and society.  And this I think is one of the kind of intrinsic technologies and policy governance.  But this doesn't mean that we cannot do anything.  That's not the point.  We definitely can.  But the process of policy making becomes complex.  And herein lies the challenge when we talk about complicated policy making processes and when Professor Andrea Calderaro was talking about, you know, lack of capacities.  I would even go further and say there is a lot of lack of awareness in a lot of Developing Countries as to the impact of these technologies.      Sometimes you often see policy documents coming from a lot of countries which can be a direct copy/paste.  So when we are talking about policy transfer and stuff like that, we need to think about capacity.  Just to give you a small example, at UNESCO we did a survey of basically countries in Africa on the needs with respect to Artificial Intelligence.  And in the survey we found 32 countries responded to that survey; that out of the 32 only five countries reported having initiatives to strengthen knowledge and capacities within the Government.  Only one country has done something for training its legislature, and two have taken initiatives through strength and capacities.  
So I think there is this long gap that we need to address and as Professor Andrea Calderaro said it is also a time consuming long horizon process.  It is about building capacities for multi‑stakeholder policy making.  And that takes a lot of time.  Yeah.  Thank you.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Great.  Thank you so much.  That was really informative findings there about capacity building for policymakers, in particular which I feel like often sometimes get left out of this discussion when we are thinking about infrastructure, and we are thinking about technology in general.  So very interesting.      Verena Weber, would you like to respond to the question?  Thank you.  
   >> VERENA WEBER:  Sure.  And good morning, everyone, and thank you very much for having me here at this very interesting panel.  Maybe taking a step back to ask basically what are the main Government's challenges of converging technologies.  And we heard we need to have a wholistic approach.  If we think about converging technologies such as AI, the IoT cloud and data, there is one main foundation.  That foundation is connectivity.  So if we don't connect countries well, so not only we need to connect them and we need to connect them well.  Then all those converging technologies and digital transformation of countries won't happen.  My first point is what we need is a very robust, legal and regulatory framework to connectivity.  So that would be my first point.      And then maybe I totally agree with the other panelists that we do need a wholistic whole of Government approach.  So what we see at the moment is we see a lot of countries have some sort of a national digital strategy for some equivalent policy that's in place.  But most of them are still quite narrow in scope.  So we really need like coordination between the different entities within Government.  But also coordination with the different groups of communities, but we really need truly the multi‑stakeholder approach.  And then when we think about establishing policies at a national level because we are talking about the IoT, because we are talking about cloud, we also need to take the international level in to account.  Because if you want to do national policies, for instance, on the IoT, you need to be sure to have a legal framework that is allowing for things such as permanent roaming because otherwise you won't make the society system happen.  And I think I will stop there for the moment.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you so much.  I think that's actually something that I would like to return to in the exercise actually to sort of the rule of international cooperation even though often we do need to think about capacity building at the national level as well.  Thank you so much.      And 'Gbenga Sesan, would you like to respond to the question?  
   >> 'GBENGA SESAN:  Sure.  Thank you.  The conversation around convergence is always, you know, always a challenge for many reasons.  And I would like to highlight maybe three quick challenges that we have seen.  And I speak not just at the national level in my own country but also a few of the other African countries where we work as part of the initiative.  I think the first would be prioritization in terms of priorities.      You know, it is difficult for you to begin to talk about, you know, convergence of AI, IoT and other things when policymakers are still discussing basic issues.  You know, we talked about the need to train policymakers.  But how on earth do you want policymakers to pay attention to AI when they are still talking about power supply, stable electricity.  I think that prioritization is a major challenge.  Through our Digital Africa report every year we monitor the progress.  And there are people who will choose not to prioritize progress and tech because it could mean a threat to their political survival.  They are still struggling to undue the conversations that happen on social media.  The priority is not to discuss convergence but thinking of how to count down in terms of priority.  That's one.  
The second is in terms of playing catchup.  And it is not just playing catchup in terms of expertise alone but also for political will.  So there are people within, you know, various limits of Government who already have an idea of what's going on.  Some who even work with us in Civil Society on these issues.  But if there is no political will, unfortunately policy will always be a catch up to innovation.  Not because policy doesn't have any idea what's going on but at times because there is just no political will to make it happen.  And a third which may actually be the bigger problem or the biggest of the three problems, is policy incoherence.  So you have different elements of Government focusing on different things.  I can give you different examples from different countries.  You have a unit working on communication, on development.  You have another unit working on IT.  When you mention AI everyone wants to own the top.  When you talk about convergence it means that we are also meeting the different tasks that we own to this bigger pie.  And what has happened many times when government eventually decides to talk about convergence there is a new entity in charge, and nobody wants to lose their stuff.  But I think the good news there is some progress.  Maybe foster progress in terms of economy interest.  
There are countries that are facing the reality, maybe not just even, you know, what having conversations about now because we are forced to talk about post COVID recovery, and if you are going to recover you cannot but look at the opportunities that exist.  And this is where we begin to have some progress in some countries deciding to have this conversation, even though it is not something that they would normally prioritize.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much for your insight there.  I think that actually, you know, queues up perfectly this next discussion I want to have based on prioritization.  So while especially in a post COVID recovery world where the digital transformation has been kind of a signal as a key to global economy recovery and converging technologies are perhaps a large part of that.  I wanted to go through and ask each of you, you know, what is at stake here.  So what do you see, you know, often cited are privacy, safety security and economic opportunity and if Governments are sort of unprepared to address these capacity building challenges for converging technologies, what do you see as perhaps the largest element there among those that is at stake?  Or maybe it is multiple.  Maybe it is security and economic opportunity.  But if you were to rank some issues for at the national level, Governments to think about what would they be.  So going back, going back to Professor Andrea Calderaro here.  
   >> ANDREA CALDERARO:  Because this is really depends on the context.  And that's why it is so important.  I mean we are talking about transnational challenges.  Transnational challenges means that each country is involved in this ‑‑ they do have ‑‑ they experience a different topology of connectivity and different challenges, specifically in their political or societal economic context.  So sorry, there is no answer there.  And the answer is that we need to be aware, it is difficult.  We cannot push a challenge that is a case for.  We need to establish a clear line on dialogues in order to be able to see what are their own challenges.  And this is why it is so important for each country to develop their unique cyber governance capacities that enable them to connect with the local various actors in order to coordinate what they really need.      Sorry.  I hope ‑‑ but that's what I really think is the problem.  It is not to pretend to get an answer for everything.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  No, no, absolutely.  I think that's very interesting how the localized context needs to be taken in to account and how Governments must prioritize at a level ‑‑ a cybersecurity strategy as well.  So Prateek, would you like to take a stab at that one?  
   >> PRATEEK SIBAL:  So I think it is true that this is really context dependent and it is ‑‑ it also depends a lot on political will.  So we need to also think about what are the drivers for that political will.  And one of the things that is quite obvious and we also saw in our survey is that economic growth is one of the biggest drivers.  Challenges of jobs, challenges of training the youth, these are one of the biggest drivers that push Governments to move in the direction of governance.      So just kind of pointing out to the macro level what can happen if Governments are not prepared.  It is kind of obvious that these are rule of law concerns, if you don't have a properly functioning democracy and so on and so forth.  There is a link if you don't have rule of law.  And hence you need some kind of governance around these technologies.  We are already seeing deep fakes that are being used that are affecting elections in different countries.  These are kind of real challenges that Governments may be driven to address because it also impinges on their very existence.  
Then the second aspect is a discussion that we have about trustworthy AI.  And that's kind of underpinned by a strong economic project.  If we don't have proper governance frameworks for these technologies, then even may not trust them, may not use them.  And hence that may limit the growth and development of these technologies in the country.      So that's another driver to kind of govern and develop capacities so that they can be economic or trust based.  The third and final aspect that I wanted to briefly touch upon is kind of what we call street level bureaucracies.  Oftentimes we ‑‑ we talk about policy making at the level of the Parliament, legislatures.  But we also need to talk about the street level bureaucracy, the local police person.  The health care workers who are actually a lot of times using these technologies and implementing them.  I can give you an example about digital I.D. systems.  Now, for instance, in a country like India, the law says that if you want to go and access Russians at a public distribution shop, if your digital I.D. does not work, if your fingerprint is not detected you should actually ‑‑ the shop keeper should be able to override that call and give you still some rations.  But a lot of times what ends up happening they don't.  So even if there is a law, but there is lack of respect for rule of law, or these Human Rights concerns within the street level bureaucracies or the last mile.  We need to bring to the discussion and focus a bit more about.  Thank you.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much.  I think the ‑‑ the social consequences are really interesting to highlight here and also something that we can consider later on in this workshop.  So thank you.      Verena Weber, would you like to answer that question?  
   >> VERENA WEBER:  Sure.  And I would say a lot is at stake.  And so basically I mean our members are great.  We have 37 member countries and they are at different stages of development.  They have different areas they focus on.  But basically to go back to my first point, so if we don't have connectivity basically there is no digital transformation.  So basically that means the entire digital transformation is at stake.  And at the OECD we are often looking at economic impact.  So what this basically means is that people in countries will have fewer economic opportunities.  And what we do see this is also translating in to lower productivity.  And this is something that worries us a lot, especially with COVID‑19.  So what we see is that we might get widening gap between countries which is something that's quite concerning.  And then I would say the third main area which is at stake is basically social inclusion.  So and this is especially relevant for people, they are not living in the big cities, that are living more in rural and remote areas.  And this is true across member countries and especially for the more vulnerable groups because then ‑‑ just certain extent kind of excluded from social discussions.  Not only at the national level but also at the regional level.    
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you.  I think it is very interesting to consider sort of macro and more societal level consequences, and understanding how that might affect the digital transformation moving forward and what it might look like in various scenarios depending on how we address it perhaps at the regional or international level.  And thank you.      Finally, 'Gbenga Sesan, would you like to answer the question, what you see at stake if these governance challenges are not addressed in a comprehensive way?  
   >> 'GBENGA SESAN:  Yeah.  Thanks.  So there is too much at stake actually.  And I say that because I'm thinking of two key things.  One is trust.  And the other is livelihoods sz  trust is supposed to be at the center of digital experience.  When we talk about privacy it all boils down to trust.  The entire digital ecosystem is built on trust because if I don't trust you with my data which is literally my life then I will pool my services.  This is not just speaking for Africa right now.  This is speaking generally is we have much topdown approach to policy making that the people who claim to build all these experiences forward are not even involved in the process.  So we are making decisions for people who are not in the room.  A famous late politician who won the Presidential elections in Nigeria but never allowed by the Parliamentary used to say you can never shape a man's head in his absence.  And I think that's what we are doing when we have these conversations.  We are shaving the heads of people in their absence which is weird, because you can't make decisions for people if, you know, you don't have the buy‑in.  We are doing that all the time.  And it is the reason why many of the final things are defective.  That's why we are designing digital I.D. and the people say we don't want it.  And we spend millions of dollars designing these whole things and people say they don't want it.  
I don't know if you remember the popular drawing of the consultant who was asked to make a swing and they made different versions of it.  They were all rejected.  And what the person really wanted was just put a rope on two branches of a tree and a tire and let the kids swing.  We have gone all the way in the other direction.  
The second is livelihoods and I say this with all sense of the evidence that I feel when I look at the additional gaps that we are creating with this new opportunity.  We already have a digital divide, Global North, Global South.  And I always give the example of education.  Education is the one thing that can give opportunities and take away from the bottom of the pyramid.  That's what happened to me.  Now education is almost impossible because of the COVID‑19 experiences for kids who don't have access.  Not only do they not have access to quality education, they do not have access to how they can access education.  And the challenge with that is that we are going to leave so many of this bottom 40% behind.  This is a whole new world.  This is a thief industrial revolution.  But we are going to say at the detriment of 40% of people who have no idea what we are talking about and whose reactions we may not like.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you for your very poignant comments.  And for the ‑‑ for emphasizing the gravity of the situation and how it might affect the already existing digital divide.  As we have kind of heard from a couple of the panelists now that some of the underlying challenges that we are facing in capacity building that are extremely fundamental such as connectivity are still there and will be exacerbated.  And this will have increasing impact as the global economy becomes increasingly digitized.      Thank you very much for your comments there.  And, you know, just so we have ‑‑ just so we have some time for question and answer from our attendees as well I would like to do a couple of things here.  So I want to pose to each of the panelists as a question since we are in the Internet Governance Forum, we are talking about multi‑stakeholderism.  And perhaps the new mandate for an IGF+ perhaps.  So in that context, how do you see international institutions being leveraged to support capacity building for converging technologies?  Do you see any really distinct barriers to multi‑stakeholder cooperation in this area as perhaps international institutions exist as they are right now?  And so that's the question.  
And then also if you have any closing remarks that you would like to make on this subject before we go in to our question and answer and our policy exercise.  So first how can international institutions be leveraged.  And are there any barriers and any final thoughts that you have.  
   >> ANDREA CALDERARO:  I will start this first.  So the impression here is that the main challenge for developing capacity building is a kind of the lack of local interlocutors which is, of course ‑‑ this is a result of lack of national capacity building.  We are talking about how it is crucial to develop a wholistic approach to capacity building.  The problem is that every time international organizations go on the ground and are trying to develop national capacities the only interlocutor that can react to this call are Governments which is not a bad thing.  That's a good thing.  But the problem is that the narrative on the need expressed by Governments is different.  I guess necessarily different, when we talk about the variety of political context in the south.  It is different from the needs that Civil Society might have.  'Gbenga made a fantastic point here that it is crucial for Civil Society to develop a critical understanding of the countries.  To develop the capacity to intervene in policy making processes imposed and enforced by the Governments and tell the Governments no, we are not happy with this.  
Thinking about the case and ‑‑ thinking about what happened in Myanmar when we had Facebook went underground and offered zero rating approach.  The local private actors, they were happy to offer Facebook these opportunities because it was a win‑win solution for both of them.  Civil Society was not prepared to that economic models.  And they were not prepared to have ‑‑ they didn't have a critical understanding of how social media works.  The result was spread of hate speech and we know the consequences that they experienced within their community.      So yes.  So that's the thing, it is about the main challenge is to identify the right interlocutors and try to develop capacity across communities and not only Government.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much.  Prateek, would you like to respond?  
   >> PRATEEK SIBAL:  Yep.  So I think first we should also kind of frame as to what do international institutions broadly do.  For instance, if we talk about Intergovernmental Organizations, we can say it is more about delivery of global public goods and management of global trust.  So once we have this understanding we can align our expectations as to what they can realistically do because they can't go and implement policies on the ground or national policies.  So coming to that, I think one of the ‑‑ one of the good things about international organizations is that they can help set standards.  So when we talk about AI, a lot of international organizations are working on articulating principles.  One of the questions in the chat is about how do we get the realities from the Global South to where ‑‑ to where technology has been created in some instances.  
So these kind of international standard setting processes facilitated by international organizations can be quite inclusive.  UNESCO with 193 Member States has experts from all regions of the world from different professions, from different academic background, different experiences.  So that kind of builds in, you know, the perspective of different stakeholders.  And what we need at the international level is to strengthen this multi‑stakeholderism more so that there is greater legitimacy of the standards which are produced.  When I say standards I also want to add that once these standards are set, they also have a pressure that they put on national Governments.  For instance, if a Government is implemented ‑‑ is working on AI in a positive or less positive way vis‑a‑vi the national standards, then the Civil Society or other stakeholders can monitor and can also, you know, vouch for some changes.  And can say okay, this is what the world has agreed.  This is the global standard.  And you need to do better.  Or you are doing a fantastic job.  And we appreciate the work.  And the global standards need to be further strengthened.  International organizations I think are there to play an important role here.      Just one more point about capacity building per se, it is also in terms of taking these standards to practice is also another aspect which international organizations can work at a macro level.  So, for instance, we at UNESCO have been working on freedom of expression access to information laws since a very long time, since about 2014 with judicial operators who uphold the rule of law.  And about 17,000 judicial operators, judges, prosecutors have been trained.  We are working on similarly with AI.  So there is strengthening capacities at a macro level also at this top level policymakers through international cooperation taking these standards and implementing them in some ways.  Yeah.  Thank you.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much for your intervention there.  Verena. 
   >> VERENA WEBER:  Thank you.  So I would say maybe four main points.  First of all, we can use international institutions to gather the knowledge from different parts of the world for being a knowledge analytical hub.  Then based on this identify best practices and as Prateek said, help setting standards.  But then also the next step how do we go about implementing these standards and principles.  Let me just give you like a real world example of what we did on these three areas for AI.  So we had a process of nearly two years where we get a lot of intelligence from different groups.  So it was a real multi‑stakeholder approach together with our member countries but also beyond.  So we had this group basically discussing what kind of principles we should come up with.      Then I think we were the first international organization to publish AI principles.  So basically ‑‑ and this is really based on this effort of talking to each other, gathering the knowledge from everywhere.  And now we are in the phase where we are thinking how can we implement the principles better and how can we bring them back to the national regional and local levels.  So we set up the AI observatory.  So if you type that in to Google AI observatory you will find a digital platform that is bringing all the knowledge together.  So you can see what is going on in terms of research.  You can see what are the countries doing, what are the policy initiatives.  You can search by your country, et cetera.  What we want to have one platform that people can reach, it doesn't need to be duplicated elsewhere.  To use it and implement it more at the national and local level.  So I would say this is an example.  We certainly could do better is exchanging between the different international organizations and do better about communication, what we are doing so that we reach more people.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much.  It is interesting that we have both representation from UNESCO and OECD here just to understand different perspectives on the functions that international organizations can have in this space.  So thank you.      And 'Gbenga, would you like to respond to that as well, role of international institutions, cooperation and any final remarks that you have?  
   >> 'GBENGA SESAN:  Considering how bad practices spread between countries, like I said earlier, so the Digital Africa report we see that once one bad policy is in place it is very quick, the takeup is very quick.  So I think that one advantage of international ‑‑ the international organizations have is they can showcase best practices.  So in this data privacy, for example, maybe only 27 countries in Africa have, you know, the laws, only about 8 to 10 have interpretation of authorities.  It would be good to highlight, you know, one or two of those countries that they have had interactions with.  And ‑‑ something that we can learn from a best practice that can be adopted.  But the challenge and this is, you know, just a quick note of warning is that while doing this, we need to realize there must be room left for context.  So no matter how generic because many times, so things that don't happen in Geneva and London and D.C., there is a natural temptation for you to miss out some of the layers just bubbling below the surface.  So we have to be careful in identifying best practices not to forget there might be varying context if we call something global.  If it is called international, should definitely be international in nature.  Representation and in forces.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much.  That is a very interesting consideration and very important to understand that international is not always representative in reality.  And that's how can we take that in to account.  So thank you so much to all of our wonderful panelists.  It has been incredibly insightful to hear from you and to learn from your expertise in this field.  And I would like to give the opportunity to our participants to ask you any further questions.  I saw there was one question in the chat that Prateek had responded to about how, you know ‑‑ how insights in to how we can better govern converging technologies can actually be fed back in to technology providers.  Like Microsoft, so that's one question I saw.  If anyone would like ‑‑ anyone else would like to respond or if any of our attendees have any other questions that they would like to pose to our panel before we get in to the exercise.  And you can type in the chat or happy to unmute anyone that would like to speak.      Did any of our ‑‑ any other panelists want to respond to the question about making sure that, you know, what is ‑‑ what are the real ‑‑ how the real challenges of governance, particularly as it is experienced by developing countries, how that information can be fed back to technology providers?  And what ‑‑ how technology providers like Microsoft can actually think about developing their technologies to better facilitate perhaps capacity building or build in elements like privacy and security by design and hear that feedback?  
   >> ANDREA CALDERARO:  I can try.  I didn't want to respond because I think we ‑‑ most of our discussions have tried to address that question.  And I feel like I'm going to repeat myself.  I apologize for that.  But I believe that the countries need to develop their own ‑‑ I mean we are talking about an institution of physical structure that enable to coordinate cyber governance efforts because by doing that, then it is going to be possible for them to interact, to have a coordinated approach in their interaction with either international organization, either private sector.  And also at the national level with the local communities.  I think this is actually what is happening.  This is what we experience in most countries where we do have either a national cyber strategy or an institution that coordinates these efforts in terms of education, research and so on as well.  And this is a really ‑‑ I am convinced this is the answer to your challenges.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you.  Edgar, I see you have your hand raised.  I gave you permissions if you are unable to unmute your mic or there we go.  
   >> EDGAR RAMOS:  I lost audio.  So I don't hear you right now.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  We can hear you.  
   >> EDGAR RAMOS:  Sorry, I lost the audio.  So I don't hear you.  I will try to go out and come back.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Okay.  Perfect.  Well, in that case thank you again for your participation in this panel.  Really looking forward to the next part of this exercise and again thank you so much for your insights.      So ‑‑ 
   >> PRATEEK SIBAL:  Sorry, if I may just add on this question.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Yes.  
   >> PRATEEK SIBAL:  One important issue that can also ‑‑ so apart from having inclusive multi‑stakeholder processes I think what we also need is the technology places are more inclusive.  That people from the Global South, Developing Countries, different gender identities have a possibility to be involved in technology development.  I think that also improves a lot.  And for this there are different opportunities.  It should start at the school, at the University level.  We need to undo a lot of gender biases.  We need to undo a lot of these practices, for instance.  A lot of times researchers from in Africa and other Developing Countries don't get visas to attend big global conferences.  This has been documented online.  A lot of people have talked about it.  So we need to also think about these issues when we talk about development of technology.  So that the places, the companies or wherever it is happening is also more inclusive.  Yeah.  Thank you.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you.  Thank you.  Edgar, I see you are back.  Hopefully you can hear us now.  
   >> EDGAR RAMOS:  Now I can hear you.  Sorry, I don't know what happened.  Some technical glitch.  Thank you very much for this opportunity to give my opinion.  One.  Things that I consider very important to keep in the conversation and to understand is that technology is about ecosystems.  So there is not a single player or a single company who can push everything through.  So we have to understand there are multiple and more today with an infrastructure that we are creating where we have devices, we have computer capabilities.  Then we have the users, and then we have the industries and then we have all the use cases that generates this.  The way to bring things forward has ‑‑ have an ecosystem approach where motivations and incentives for the ecosystem to chip in and then bring their share to the development has to be considered.      This many times, this is the where we fail.  We think that if we take one or two companies and then we boost their let's say their participation or the incentive for those two key companies, everything will be working by magic.  And then we realize like oh, we didn't thought that we needed certain electronics that has to be manufactured and naturally they are manufactured in another country.  And then we are actually with our own politics closing down the ‑‑ closing down the possibility to acquire those electronics that are key for us.  And these things are kind of realized afterwards because we let the market, because everything is about the market, market dynamics.  Let the market to expose those when it is too late.  So I think thinking about how the equilibrium and balance between all the players in a ecosystem is something that has to be strategically thought from the beginning and see what the incentives that this ecosystem gains, this ecosystem is change, require in order to work better to avoid frictions that today we have.  For example, frictions in order to exchange data.  Today everyone wants to keep their data because they think that it is very profitable.  It is something they are sleeping in basically in a mattress of money.  The problem is they don't know how to get that money out of the mattress.  But know that the money is in the mattress.  Therefore thinking in how these assets can be exposed and developed so that everyone has the ‑‑ gain a value out of the whole ecosystem game is a very key thing to consider.      And in the ‑‑ and in the state level, so in the Government level and also in the companies themselves level.  Thank you very much.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much for that intervention.  I think that is actually a really fantastic transition to the beginning of our policy exercise, thinking about both policy and nonpolicy tools that can help facilitate this capacity building for converging technologies.  And also emphasizing that, you know, while industry can play a greater role, it cannot just be left up to a few large players such as Microsoft, such as Google as well.  So really appreciate your intervention there.  And with that, in the interest of time I will go ahead and transition us to the next part of this workshop.  Looking forward to anyone's participation whether through verbal participation or posting something in the chat.  I want to begin with a quick mapping exercise, and I want to generate as many ideas as possible whether from the audience, from the panelists, I will throw a couple of thoughts out there as well.  When we think about capacity building challenges for converging technologies, I want to understand are there any net new capacity building challenges?  
So we have mentioned a few.  We have mentioned connectivity as an example of one that is sort of perhaps pre‑existing for other technologies.  But what do we see as some of the new problems or issues.  And actually one that I think has been brought up several times through this discussion, for example, is interoperability.  And I don't think that that's an entirely, entirely new challenge, but it is really characteristic of the high level of connectivity that we see in technology such as cloud.  So I would certainly name that one and all of these are ‑‑ we are going to be capturing all of these.  So if anyone would like to throw out net new challenges that they see in capacity building perhaps different from previous challenges that they have seen.   
   >> VERENA WEBER:  Maybe if I may, I would say two things.  So interoperability is definitely an issue on the technology side but also on the policy side.  So sometimes we ‑‑ we are not quite good in kind of designing interoperable policies from different policy areas.  And this is often because, you know, different people, different groups work on different subjects.  So, you know, we are currently thinking about how to best secure communication networks.  So we basically have the security group.  So these people have like, you know, they often like from Governments coming from Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Defense.  We have one perspective on the world.  And then we try to link them to the community of communications people and regulatory entities.  And when we ‑‑ we are currently setting up this project and we see that one challenge is already, you know, to try to talk the same language to get a common understanding of the terms, what we are talking about.  
So bringing different communities together to me like especially for converging technologies is a challenge that we need ‑‑ that we definitely need to work on.  And the second issue I would say is that we need to be faster when it comes to policy making and when it comes to reviewing the current regulatory frameworks that we have because we often see that policy making Governments is kind of behind the technological development.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much.  In response to the challenges that you just raised, Theresa here in the chat also raised that it is really critical to understand how some of these really more complex systems such as AI actually work and how explainability can actually come in to play there.  And you mentioned interpretable policies.  I think by the same token interpretable policy is a challenge as well and making that accessible in the various context.  And that reminds me of something that, 'Gbenga, you raised earlier about how Governments are very or different departments or ‑‑ entities within government can perhaps be very interested in the economic or other opportunity raised by converging technologies.  And there may actually be some fragmentation or lack of cooperation at the national level because each entity wants to own the issue of AI because of its promise perhaps or visibility.      So perhaps fragmentation, internal fragmentation is something that might be elevated.  Any other perhaps kind of responses to this question of net new challenges here?      
   >> ANDREA CALDERARO:  My impression is that especially in this cyber domain one of the challenges that we ‑‑ is that we tend to have lots of key words.  Lots of time it is not really necessary.  This creates lots of challenges for us in the policy community.  Because every time we do have a new key word, we have a new community popping up and trying to find solutions for that.  And then we again we have a fragmentation of approaches.  So we need to be careful to use the right key words properly.  I mean, for example, talking about Artificial Intelligence, for example, I mean until a few years ago we were talking about algorithms.  Now we are talking about Artificial Intelligence.  It is the hardware component that creates new layers of the problem but at the end of the day we are still talking about algorithms software.  
The same story happened with the Big Data.  Five years ago we were talking about Big Data and IGF was full of panels talking about Big Data.  And now we are talking about the same thing but we are using new key words.  Just to say yeah, this is a challenge that I see.  Because technology evolves quicker than our capacity to understand what's going on and because of that we keep creating new key words.  Otherwise we are going to make our lives more complicated.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you.  I think speed is definitely a new challenge here.  And the fact that as Verena mentioned the need to review regulatory frameworks faster or gain consensus or understanding to make that happen and a divergence of terms.  And there are perhaps some interesting, interesting rules that the international community can play.  To Prateek's point earlier, what is the role of standards in that as a rhetorical question.  But any other responses here?     >> PRATEEK SIBAL:  If I may very quickly add, I feel that while we are trying to talk about fragmentation, we should also, also keep in mind that this fragmentation may also come from different understanding that people in different cultures and societies have.  So we ‑‑ while we are moving forward with standards and all these things, we also need to keep in mind that there is a lot of linguistic diversity.  The way that you use a particular language will help you conceive an issue in a slightly different way.  So there should be room for that kind of fragmentation to first thrive and then we can develop standards with or whatever kind of policy frameworks that we are working on at the international level by bringing all these actors and agreeing on some common terms.  But it is having fragmented views or different ideas.  It is per se not at all a bad thing.  It should be even encouraged and then we will have more legitimacy for what we are talking about it.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  That's a very interesting subject.  A point of view that we don't often hear when we are trying to come to consensus on terms and we can perhaps think about how mutual recognition or how those linguistics differences speak to each other rather than trying to just agree on one particular term.  So that's very interesting.  Thank you.      So with some of these challenges in mind we spoke about ‑‑ we spoke about the speed.  We spoke about agreement on terms between different communities, designing interpretable policies for very complex technologies.  We spoke about complex technology processes.  With that I want to turn to something that perhaps many of you are quite familiar with which would be a sort of cybersecurity maturity model.  And this model has been used to identify activities in different stakeholder communities that can actually develop capacity for cybersecurity.  And what I would like to do is again kind of a similar idea, mapping exercise for thinking about perhaps new activities that Governments, industry and international organizations can undertake in some of these different categories.  I wanted to touch upon some of the issues that were raised earlier in the panel about social inclusion perhaps.  
And, you know, what could be done in those areas.  And I want to pose as well that these don't always have to be policy tools.  They can be nonpolicy tools.  And so I would like to think about first with any participant who would like to intervene and any panelist as well, if we think about Governments and at the national level.  So we already have cybersecurity policy and strategy.  Is there something, some exercise or prioritization that should be made for converging technologies or can these be expanded in any way in the converging technologies context?  And so, you know, again here specifically we are talking about cybersecurity just to narrow the field a little bit.  We could talk more about safety.  We could talk about privacy.  But again kind of elevating security.  Do we see any new activities or additional activities that Governments can undertake in sort of a national strategic level to help facilitate capacity building.    
   >> ANDREA CALDERARO:  If I may, my ‑‑ from what I see it seems that the research component is missing or at least it does not pop up as a key word.  And probably is hidden behind sublayers of this initiative.  But research is, of course, is crucial.  And that is all the initiatives that we are working on in the context of the global formal expertise and member of research Committee there.      And yeah.  But this is an initiative taken by international organizations but also research initiatives taken at the national level.  I think it is important.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you.  And I think that can also have a dual purpose as well.  Research could have a dual purpose.  It can be sort of a skills ‑‑ a skill building element in addition to technological development.      Any other thoughts on ‑‑ I was curious about whether anyone had any thoughts on changes to education, training and skills or anything that Governments should look at in particular with culture and society and trying to understand.  Again perhaps in a context of post COVID digital transformation, how at the perhaps organizational or individual level Governments can support capacity building?     
   >> PRATEEK SIBAL:  If I may, very quickly.  I think education, training and skills is something which a lot of Governments, if you look at the national AI strategies and policies, it is an area where they are heavily focusing on.  And again there are different ideas.  And this is one of the roles of international organizations to get the best practices and share them around.      So in some countries people are ‑‑ they have targets of training, 1% or making 1% of their population literate about the context of AI and its impact on society.  Now this may work in Western European countries.  But it is potentially not a priority when you have a population of 100 million people and you are also thinking about basic education.  So there are a lot of ideas.  There are ideas about training, you know, providing research grants, providing local rescaling programs.  I think all those things have a place.  But everything needs to be contextualized.  It needs to be understood in each society's context.  And that's where we need more work in building capacities as well, to take these ideas and then tailor them, modify them and also have a bottom‑up flow of ideas.  So I think it is like a two‑way street on education, training and skills.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you.  Yeah, that bottom‑up approach is something that can certainly be ‑‑ certainly be elaborated upon.  'Gbenga. 
   >> 'GBENGA SESAN:  Yes.  In terms of education I see that many times education is post crisis.  We get a lot more serious post crisis or post incident when something goes wrong.  We suddenly start realizing education initiatives.  We need to get more proactive.  There is a reason why we have fire drills.  Fire drills, you know, are not after there is a fire incident that prepare you for when this fire.  So I think we are to take that sort of fire drill approach to cybersecurity education.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much.  Interesting on the point of education, I wanted to flag that one stakeholder that I did not list here for the purposes of this exercise is Civil Society is very sort of evidently missing from this chart.  But it is not missing from the capacity building exercise.  But certainly especially because representing a technology provider very interested in how industry can play a greater role.  So perhaps just in the interest of time, thinking about moving on to perhaps an increased role or different role for industry in some of these different areas and there have been some industry led initiatives for skill building and things like that.  But is there, you know, is there something else that industries should be looking to do to perhaps play a greater role in supporting capacity building.  And I think one point that I would like to capture for our report is certainly industry role in legitimating and implementing standards as well.  And how do we get industry to sort of adopt and take on standards.  So if there is any intervention on further role that industry can play.      
   >> PRATEEK SIBAL:  I think just one small point, industry at the international level is involved in to standard setting organizations, like ISO, IEEE and they develop a lot of standards.  And these organizations they are also part of a discussion in standard setting and rule making.  So that's one area where they influence.  And where ‑‑ which is kind of bringing the technical expertise and matching the whole technical and policy community together.  That's one more.  One more thing that I wanted to point out when we talk about industries, we a lot of times imagine big tech companies.  But there is also a very important role that small and medium enterprises play.  And their involvement should also be facilitated and, you know, training and scaling for these small and medium enterprises is super important as well.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Yeah, that's very important.  Especially as these standards get developed and, you know, if they are going to be implemented you would miss a very large audience of small and medium enterprises that are not part of that picture.  I see Edgar, I see your hand.  I just unmuted you.  
   >> EDGAR RAMOS:  Thank you.  Yeah.  I think additionally to the standards, I think we have to bring other harmonization ways like, for example, the open source movement is bringing now a very interesting way to harmonize things.  For example, Linux operating system is something that we find now everywhere.  And it has allowed the growth of these computational capacity everywhere.  In the same way I would like to stress a bit the role of the IPR.  So the patent's portfolio that industries have.  Because that ‑‑ in one sense it is an enabler for standards and bringing up best practices from the state of the art.  But in the other hand then you have the misuse of them for basically blocking the progress of other companies or trying to limit how much it can be let's say include the power of this kind of growth of technology by the competitors.  So there is a very thin balance on how these can be treated.  So that we are not damaging the society, but at the same time we are, of course, protecting a business that the company has and it has invested R&D.  So just two points I wanted to bring to the conversation.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much.  In addition to that I would also like to highlight a comment from Kiya in the chat here.  A very important issue, in particular once we increase capacity at a technical level, how do we ensure that that capacity, that skill, that ‑‑ those ‑‑ those human resources do not escape to industry.  How do we keep them ‑‑ how do we keep them in Government.  How do we keep them in Civil Society where their participation is very, very crucial.  So thinking about efforts to ensure that not all ‑‑ no skill goes directly to industry in the sense.  So that's a very interesting point.      Thank you for that.  
   >> ANDREA CALDERARO:  Two points.  I mean this is a comment that I wanted to make as well.  Because when we talk about developing a cyber capacity especially we are talking about education.  It is kind of a catchall concept even there.  Developing education.  In my experience is that we do have lots of trainings in ‑‑ for developing technical community.  And I see also lots of initiatives supporting local startups to develop new Digital Economy.  This happens pretty much in most countries in the Global South and so on.  But I don't see an equivalent effort, I mean all these efforts are crucial.  I'm not saying that they are not important.  But I don't see an equivalent effort to develop policy communities.  And the point is in answer to Kiya's point, Kiya, the points that Kiya made is if we have a fairly limited policy capacity, national capacities the few actors that do have those skills it is going to be absorbed by the industry.  Because that happens, industry has resources that the Government cannot have.  But if we do have a bigger policy community, by developing again education in governance and policy challenges for in the digital domain, then that point we do have, of course, a few people will be ‑‑ but some others might stay in Government.  And that is ‑‑ I see that is crucial.  It is a crucial challenge.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much for your response.  For everyone's awareness, Kiya shared MasterCards is an entity that has tried to protect against a talent drained industry.      So thank you very much.  And finally here simply in the interest of time this has been a really interesting discussion.  I would like to ‑‑ if anyone would like to make any final comment on perhaps the role of international organizations.  We have highlighted some interesting ones such as standards, such as gathering and publication of principles and national strategies and making those available.  Trying as we are increasing our understanding of converging technologies themselves, also sharing best practices for governing them in that way.      So that is ‑‑ that's one role that I see.  And again if anyone else would like to highlight any final points there.  
   >> 'GBENGA SESAN:  If I could just quickly jump in, 30 seconds, it is important for us to make learning a two‑way street because I see in a need to develop conversation around convergence, many times we have, you know, a topdown approach.  We define what we want and then we teach other people.  And I think it is important for it to be two‑way because we can never understand the context and nuances of, you know, of groups and, you know, unusual suspects.  We have usual suspects always part of the conversation.  Unusual suspects play a major role in shaping the desired feature we want in terms of convergence of audience we have.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  Thank you very much.  With that I would simply like to close and add a couple of reflections.  Thank you so much to our panelists and for your participation throughout the exercise as well.  It is incredibly insightful and very much appreciated.  And looking forward to capturing the insights that you shared in a report that will be published and made available to everyone as part of the webinar or not.  Thank you to all of our participants.  I think some of the key points that I learned is that or captured here that there are some net new challenges of capacity building for converging technologies that mean that we need to perhaps think of how we structure capacity building efforts to accommodate perhaps the speed and lack of understanding of the technology itself.  And that will be ‑‑ that will be a major challenge that can be overcome by perhaps greater liaising in multi‑stakeholder Forums.  
There was a role brought up between interloctoring between Governments and expertise to help facilitate this.  While Governments might not have been able to overhaul technical infrastructure at this point in time, they can perhaps start by creating those sort of liaising roles that will help and create, facilitate better collaboration across Government and industry.  
Another point I heard of is the importance of contextualization and localization.  We talk about a digital transformation for a post COVID world.  These solutions really need to be based at a local level.  And often we think about perhaps a topdown approach to cybersecurity and capacity building organized from Governments or at the regional level, but how can we flip that model on its head and why might that be important to trying to mitigate the digital divide that's created in particular by these rapidly transformative technologies.  
So those were a few ‑‑ a few of the points that I picked up.  As well I would also like to highlight that there are still existing, very, very base challenges that need to be addressed concurrently.  So, for example, connectivity was one that was brought up.  So again thank you very, very much for your participation.  
Quickly I'd also just like to highlight that thank you Theresa.  The Geneva dialogue and the Geneva Internet platforms is covering all sessions at the IGF.  You can rewatch the session if you would like.  And thank you so much for your participation and look forward to sharing the report with you all.  But again thank you.  And have a great rest of your day.  
   >> Thank you.  
   >> Thank you. 
   >> Thank you. 
   >> Bye.  
   >> Bye‑bye.  
   >> RACHEL AZAFRANI:  I will hang around if any participants or any panelists have any further questions.  Bye‑bye.  Thank you so much. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-ws204-internet-data-protection-under-different-jurisdictions^^

 
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  This session is being recorded and hosted under IGF Code of Conduct and UN Rules and Regulations and you have also this information put in the chat.  Just a quick reminder that the chat is supposed to be used for the social purposes only and we kindly request everyone to look at the Q&A Box for any questions that may arise from the audience.  You can share your initial presentation when the session is starting if you have it ready, and can you also take a snapshot, the print screen of the session and attach it to your report later on, and my colleague, Peter, will just put you a link to the possible questions from the audience, another link, under which you can receive questions, so please also kindly pay attention to this as well.
So welcome, everyone.  Enjoy your session.  If you need any support, if you need any help, we are here to assist you.  Enjoy the session.  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you very much.  Nadira, are you ready to start?  We will start now.  Nadira?  Okay.  Thank you.  We will start now.
Okay.  Good morning, good afternoon, and good evening, everyone.  Welcome to this IGF 2020 workshop number 204 about Internet data protection and multiple different jurisdictions.  My name is Tijani Ben Jemaa, and I'm one of the organizers of this and I will moderate it.  My co‑organizer Nadira Al‑Araj will act as remote moderator and will give you some housekeeping information before we start.  Nadira, please.  We don't hear you, Nadira.  We don't hear you.
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  Yeah.  Hello, all.  Thank you for those who accepted our proposal to be part of this schedule.  For housekeeping, again, as you notice the selected format of this workshop is designed to be a roundtable, circular discussion format.  Hence, we would like to hear not only from the esteemed speakers but also the participant.  Therefore, we are allocating 3 minutes for each, and please excuse me when I'm trying to provide a hard stop, you will be hearing from me, informing you have only 15 seconds to end your session.  I will moderate the Q&A port for the discussion and I try to bring whatever points you have to the floor for more discussions, and we are looking forward for you to share discussions because it will be part ‑‑ hopefully it will be part of the discussion and considered in the report, the two reports that we are generating.
Finally, those participants will take the floor to speak and will be promoted with us as part of the speaker, and we hope that they will accept to be on until the end so we can take a group photo.
Just a reminder, this session is recorded, and you can access to it at the end.  So, thank you all for being here, and happy to have you and have all of our speakers.  Back to you, Tijani.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you very much, Nadira.  Nadira, we say not 15 minutes before the end of the slot, it will be 15 seconds before the end of your slot since the whole slot is 3 minutes.  Thank you.
So, now, for reporting we have two wonderful reports who are Natalia Filina, can you open your camera, please.
   >> NATALIA FILINA:  Hello, everyone.  I'm here.  Thank you very much.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  And, also, Victoria Al Araj.
   >> VICTORIA AL ARAJ:  Hello.  Everybody.  Looking forward to the session.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you very much.  As you know, the global nature of the Internet and transfer of digital information across borders brings an international dimension to the debate around data.  The generation, connection, processing, storage, transfer and disclosure of data, including personal provide economic opportunities than ever imagined.  At the same time, the massive use of data through the application of data‑driven technologies by public and private entities poses challenges around privacy, freedom of expression, and even business sustainability.
The protection of data on the Internet is today one of the most important concerns of the Internet users because of the repetitive breaches.  Several attempts to put regulations for protection of users' data under the net have been done for 15 years now, and today we have some regulations that in some countries and some regions, but how can the user's data be protected under different jurisdictions?  How can any regulation be applied for the Internet which is a cross‑border good?  As I just said, data use is today's subject regulation here and there, but more significant coordinated efforts are done to make these regulations harmonious to ease their application worldwide for questions related to the Internet.
Should there be an international regulation replacing the various existing ones?  This roundtable will explore the existing regulations and discuss the way to make the users' data better protected wherever they are based and make recommendations there upon.
On the table we have speakers from different regions and stakeholders, gender balanced, and with various perspectives.  The first speaker is my friend, Farzaneh Badii and social scholar and author of at social school and tell us how social differences are linked for yes or more regulation for domain name recipients.  You have the floor for 3 minutes.
   >> FARZANEH BADII:  Thank you, Tijani.  Hello, everybody.  So, sometimes during Internet governance, so we need to consider when we talk about data protection of the Internet user that we need to consider what sort of data protection laws and practices majorly affect the Internet globally, how do they interplay with the Internet institutional landscape?  Because Internet users' global data protection or lack thereof is dependent on Internet governance's institutional landscape and not only the jurisdictions that the users are in.  And while the jurisdictional differences have a role, they may not be global, so we need to ‑‑ we need to find out in this landscape what sort of jurisdictions actually affect the Internet and the data users globally.  Sometimes the data protection law suit of one region or one country can affect the whole world on the Internet, and sometimes the data protection laws of a country doesn't even have an effect on the global Internet.
As well as, sometimes there are data protection policies of transnational Internet governance institutions that can affect data protection on the Internet.  Now, the Internet governance institution that I'm talking about is, of course, Internet Corporation for Assign Names and Numbers.  For many years the ICANN decided domain name registrant’s data, such as physical, address, email and phone number should be published and publicly available globally, and it did not consider any sort of law and did not have to consider any kind of data protection law until the general data protection regulation came into effect.  ICANN had to comply and told the registries and registrars to redact sensitive data, but it said that it should only ‑‑ they're only obliged to redact the data of the residents of Europe and not the whole world, so it is not compulsory to protect the data of people around the world, and we need to consider that this brings a major problem to the data protection of users globally because ICANN is a global quasi‑regulator on the Internet and decisions affect the world.
And then another example that I want to make, and these tech corporations also have ‑‑ they do affect our Internet globally, but also, they can protect our data globally.  So, for example, when you look at private corporations, the adoption of the NS over HTTP or called Do, that in a nutshell encrypts your DNS traffic.  Since actors that want to adopt are major actors such as FireFox it's likely that these global corporations bring global data protection, and all I'm saying is that it is not a square box.  We need to look at the institutional landscape, we need to look at the jurisdiction be and the jurisdictions that matter and that actually affect us, and also the constitutions that react and play with those laws.  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you so much, Farzaneh.  Thank you.  Our second speaker is not here so we will go to the third one.  Our next speaker is Leon Sanchez, my friend who is a partner at Fulton and Fulton and who is a Board Vice‑Chair of ICANN.  And ICANN is the Internet Corporation for Assign Names and Numbers.  Leon, we speak about the difference between GDPR and Mexican Data Protection Law and how this has affected it.  Leon, please, you have the floor.  3 minutes.
   >> LEON SANCHEZ:  Thank you very much.  Hello, everyone.  Greetings from Mexico City, and Farzaneh has made some valid points and I just want to clarify that I am speaking in my capacity of private practicing lawyer and not the Vice‑Chair of the ICANN Board.
So, one of the differences that I see in approaches to data protection regulations, in this case particularly between GDPR and the Mexican Data Protection Law is a difference that the data protection law makes in Mexico to process personal data that are linked to professional activities or that are part of a legal person’s activity.
So, for example, when you see an email like mine, which is [email protected], the GDPR would classify that as personal data because it is a piece of data that can identify me and that can get a link to me, but the Mexican Law approaches in a different way.  The Mexican Law states that when you have personal data that is linked to professional activity or to corporate activity, those data are not considered as personal data and they can be treated as, again, data that are not under the scope of protection of the Personal Data Protection Law, and I think that is something that we are lacking in GDPR, for example.  We have seen how GDPR has affected different parts of our ecosystem, and part of it is exactly these lack of differentiation between how personal data that is linked to either personal or legal personal or natural person or legal person, to be handled by those controlling or processing data.
So, I see that as far as we continue to have regulations that approach differently how different kinds of data are to be controlled and processed, then we will continue to face these challenges that we see today.
I am not sure if the right way to address is this is to try to build an international framework for data protection.  I don't know if this is ‑‑ if maybe establishing data protection agreements between different countries could be also an approach to these to establish exceptions and trying to avoid extra territoriality into the applications of law.
So, these many pieces into this, right.  So, when we look at how cross‑jurisdictional data is treated and protected in different ways, well of course, when you translate this to the Internet ecosystem, of course, we have many problems that we are currently experiencing.
So, again, I don't want to go past my name.
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  Thank you, Leon.
   >> LEON SANCHEZ:  This is my point.  Thanks.
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  Thanks, Leon.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you very much, Leon.  Thank you for the intervention.  I'm sorry for the time.  Because it is a roundtable and we need people from the floor to discuss.  Thank you so much.
And now to my other friend, Joanna Kulesza.  Joanna is Professor of International Law at Lut's University in Poland and also the Vice Chair of the Advisory Committee at ICANN and Member of the European organization, at large organization.  Her intervention will be about the European approach to privacy and data protection, including both the GDPR and the COE108 +.  Joanna, you have the floor.
   >> JOANNA KULESZA:  Thank you very much, Tijani.  I'm going to speak in bullet points and leave you with links in the chat, and I hope that is acceptable because 3 minutes is not very much.
We do have an international treaty that protected personal data universal declaration of human rights and treaties that make that commitment or domain on binding human rights commitment binding, so I'm just going to post the Declaration of Human Rights and if you look into Article 12 there is indeed an international binding consensus on the protection of privacy.  How do we protect privacy?  Well, we protect through personal data protection.
Now, there is, again, a framework that dates back to 1980s, and again I'm going to leave you with a link right there.  This would be the OECD Guidelines that deal with how we protect privacy through personal data.  The European perspective is unique, so we here in Europe have been dealing with implementing that right and that framework since the 1950s.  The Second World War left us with traumatic experiences of situations where personal data was not adequately protected, so we had that experience founded in human rights law, and you could even argue that it was the very result of the traumatic experiences of the Second World War and we've been dealing with this since the 1950s.
So, since the 1950s, Europe has developed, one could argue, the most comprehensive personal data protection framework.  The GDPR is nothing new.  We have been at this for at least 70 years.  We've supported the work that has been done in 1980s in the Council of Europe adds Tijani rightfully mentioned the Convention 108 is now updated is the international law for personal data and privacy protection.  I'm happy to elaborate the link but I assume since you joined this session, you're well aware between personal and data privacy protection.
The latest, the GDPR is strongly rooted, tightly rooted in the experiences of personal data protection in Europe and elsewhere dating back to the 1950s or 198 0s, if you will when personal data became an element of globalization and trade.
The reason why GDPR was designed to have that extra territorial impact is again based on lessons we learned since the 1990s.  I'm going to leave you with a link to the Safe Harbor Agreement that Europe concluded with the U.S. that failed predominantly because there was no trans‑boundary effect.
So, the if the purpose of the session is to figure out a framework for effective privacy protection online, I would argue we already have that.  Now, as every lawyer will tell you, the problem, the devil is in the details, so it depends on how we apply that framework.  I want to stop here.  I can see Nadira getting impatient so I'm just going to stop here and I'm looking forward to questions.  This is just a flag that there is a comprehensive framework we can fall back on.  Thank you very much.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Exactly, Joanna.  This is what was intended.  You have 3 minutes only to introduce this aspect of the topic and the discussion will make you give more information and more perhaps to elaborate on some aspects that people will ask for and that you want to elaborate on.  Thank you very much.
Now, the next speaker will be Dr. Sam Lanfranco.  Sam is Economics Professor Emeritus and senior scholar at York University and engaged in Internet ecosystem issues and development in ICANN, and also in global digital citizenship.  He's an Executive Committee Members of Society for Advancement of Science in Africa, and also an advisor to the Ambedkar Center for Justice and Peace.  He will introduce the global Internet citizenship practice and behavior, integrity, and universal access.  Excuse me.  Sam, you have the floor.
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  We need to promote him as a speaker.  Please, Norman, can you do that?  Thank you.
   >> NORMAN:  Yes, of course, I can.  Could you please repeat the person's name?
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  Sam Lanfranco.  I could see him among the participants.
   >> NORMAN:  Yes.  I have already made him a panelist.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Sam, do you hear me?  Sam?
   >> SAM LANFRANCO:  Okay?  Can you see me?
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  Yeah.  We can hear you, Sam.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Yes.  We can see you and hear you.  Go ahead, Sam, please.
   >> SAM LANFRANCO:  Thank you.  The background was not the one I planned for this, but it's the one we have and I don't have time to change it.
Thank you very much for this opportunity.  I'm very happy to follow the previous speaker because the theme is very similar.  2,500 years ago, when Diaganies was asked who was he, his answer was I am a citizen of the world.  If he were alive today, he would say I'm a citizen of the global Internet as well.
We're all residents of the Internet now from before we're born.  Our birth data gets recorded, we are there but we have no defined rights or obligations at the level of the global Internet ‑‑ legislation and national legislation is covering this and pieces of this, but it's the kind of piece approach it tries to protect the integrity and privacy of the individual.  I view privacy as part of integrity here.
The legislative concerns are a bit selective until we get to a point of having some definition of what it means to be a global citizen of the Internet and a national citizen of the Internet.  National citizenship is always operated in various ways, but since World War II since the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we've evaluated how nations treat citizenship against those norms.  We need a similar process with respect to the way in which we deal with the Internet ecosystem.
We need the equivalent of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we need the principles that are embodied there in literal space to be extended to virtual space so that the well‑being of humans, the well‑being of society, the well‑being of nature is equally protected under that virtual jurisdiction as it is under the literal jurisdiction.
What rights and obligations should we have as citizens of the Internet?  That needs to be defined, not just by the well‑intended GDPR and other efforts, which operate one step below that.  We need to get the principles defined, we need to bring in ‑‑ we need to use those to define the integrity of business practices, social practices, government practices, integrity in the Internet ecosystem.
And if you're going to be a global digital citizen, and I'll finish with this because we're opening up later, we need universal Internet access.  You can't be a citizen if you don't have a voice, if you don't have agency, if you can't speak, if you can't participate, so I would go beyond saying we need the regulation.  We need universal Internet access as a way of building a digital citizenship on the rights and duties of global and national digital citizens.  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you, Sam.  Thank you very much.  And now the last speaker but not the least is Mohamed El Bekri.  Mohamed is a Researcher in Civil Security on Privacy and in charge of studies in the National Commission for Personal Data Protection in Morocco.  Mohamed will focus on data protection in North Africa and impact of emergencies related to COVID‑19.  Mohamed, you have the floor.
   >> MOHAMED EL BEKRI:  Thank you, Mr. Tijani.  Thank you for having me.  I'm very happy.  I'll try to be brief, so North African countries enjoyed and enjoy an extraordinary strategy position and are seen as gateways for both Europe and Africa, and they are also influenced by their host continent of Africa and as well as Europe.
So, if you go back historically, Europe is considered as having greatly and positively influenced data protection development in the North African Region.  If you take, for example, Morocco and Tunisia, the relatively two leading countries in the North African Region, you notice that they have been largely inspired by the European Data Protection Standards, both the two countries have ratified the 108 Convention and they are working on the work of 8 + ratification, which is the modernized version of the 108 Convention.
Another example of influence is Egypt, which has recently adopted the republic first data protection law that has entered into force in October 2020.  So, if you see the provisions of this law, you will notice that to a big extent is modeled in the EU GDPR, the General Data Protection Regulations since it adopts similar concepts and definitions.
Regarding other countries, they have enacted the personal data protection law respectively in 2017 and 2018, but since then there have been minimal developments, and so in my opinion, even if the landscape today is quite disparate, since we have countries that entered the second decade of law like Tunisia and Morocco and while others have just recently enacted the privacy data protection laws, I think that there will be more incentives now to see a convergence in the north direction, meaning that the North African countries will upgrade their laws to be in line with the GDPR.
There is a mutual interest now because of both sides of the Mediterranean Sea are struggling with the impact of the human and impact of COVID‑19 and regional need to integration and complimentary.  The majority of the North African countries entertain a good relationship with the European countries and are close enough to Europe to host investment and to serve as a platform for goods exchange. 
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  Can you, thank you, Mohamed.
   >> MOHAMED EL BEKRI:  Okay.  I can go further in the conversation.
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  The discussion, yes, we appreciate that.  Yes.  Great.  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you so much.  Thank you, Mohamed.  And thank you to all the speakers.  Now, as you know it is a roundtable, and I need the floor to interact and I see Dima Samaro to wants to take the floor.  Dima, please, the floor is yours.
  DIMA SAMARO:  Hi, Tijani and everyone.  Can you hear me well?
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Open your camera, and we do hear you.
  DIMA SAMARO:  Okay.  Just one minute.  Okay.  I am good now?  Perfect.  Okay.  Thank you so much.  This has been a great discussion and I'm really enjoying it.
So, I wanted just to pick up on some of the points that the speakers have addressed, and just introduce myself, I'm sorry.  My name is Dima Samaro and Policy Analyst, so thanks again.
So, Mohamed mentioned something about Morocco and Tunisia and North Africa in general and since I'm also working on Middle East and North Africa, we have also noticed that even during this virus special circumstances and the health crisis of COVID‑19, we have noticed that our data is still being collected and being exploited either by public or private sector.  We have seen the deployment of contract tracing apps, for example, or publishing of names and addresses, home address and phone numbers of those infected with COVID, for example.  And this is ‑‑ this is alarming because we need to urgently implement data protection laws in our region, because also of the different contexts that we have and that we can, for example, take the experience of the GDPR and implement some provisions in our laws in the region.
However, we need also to process the special complex of our region and how data protection laws also might be introduced because some of the laws, for example, in Tunisia, when we want to look at the definition of personal data and what it means, the current law, doesn't provide any definition for or any information related to the digital space or Internet ecosystem, so your email address, your ID address, your coordinate is not personal data in the data framework in Tunisia and this is a problematic issue.
Another thing that I wanted to highlight is in general, in the laws and in North Africa, I couldn't find any provision about having the right ‑‑ the right to remedy or any venue for, you know, people if they want the right to conversation when their personal data is being protected, so there is no venue for that whosoever, and this would also leave the door wide open for lack of accountability and there would be no liability, and we need to you can at that about these issues especially in our region.
There are also some other points that I would like to add, but specifically when it comes to having these laws, so we need to have a global effort, but when we look at the laws and how they're being implemented in the region, we can also see that there is a huge discrepancy between the implementation of the law and the text, and so that's why I'm trying to think of ‑‑ (audio dropped).  I'm sorry for the long time.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you.  Thank you.  It was interesting, and I think that you made a very good intervention.  Mohamed, do you want to continue on this?
   >> MOHAMED EL BEKRI:  Yes.  Thank you, Ms. Samaro.  In fact, when it comes to GDPR, what I noticed is that the countries are seeking to comply, to converge.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  We don't hear you, Mohamed.  You are muted.
   >> MOHAMED EL BEKRI:  I'm sorry.  Can you hear me now?  I'm sorry.  Can you hear me now?
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Now it is okay.
   >> MOHAMED EL BEKRI:  Okay.  Thank you.  In fact, thank you Ms. Samaro for your intervention.  So, when it comes to GDPR, what we noticed in the region is that there is a willingness to comply with the data, with the GDPR.  But the problem it is a very high standard.
Data protection authorities need more resources and the markets and the both public and private sectors need adaptations and need ‑‑ they need awareness to comply to such a very high standard.  So, it is true that some countries are willing to comply but they are lacking resources.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you, Mohamed.  Thank you very much.  Joanna, I heard you, I heard you saying that there is already a framework established.  I have a big problem with that because there is a general, if you want, a general framework but as you know, the GDPR came with specific ‑‑ specific measures to protect the personal data.  This is something that we have of other jurisdictions in the world, and I know in Canada they have a very good regulation but the problem is they don't have fines; and since they don't have fines, nobody will care.  The GDPR put very strong fines that make everyone take care and everyone tried to comply with the GDPR.
   >> JOANNA KULESZA:  Thank you, Tijani.  This is like an introduction for me to respond?  Did I read that correctly?  Thank you.  Yes, indeed.  I agree that the GDPR has made a significant difference, and that difference largely lies in the fact that there is money involved.  And this is one of the reasons that the critics have been complaining about the regime we've had, details in data protection, whereas they had no threat, no one really cared about them and so we could argue that the signs are the very element that made data protection relevant.
GDPR is very specific, but as I already said, it builds on decades of experience, so to Europeans, largely, it is nothing new and we've lived with this for decades and we've adjusted our law accordingly so the European experience might serve, as Mohamed rightly emphasized as an example for other countries whether they want to follow it or not is an interesting discussion.  And I, particularly, enjoy these discussions around the African Region and you have different jurisdictions looking at this from different angles.
Now, you could argue that data protection is the price you might be willing to pay for a certain service.  Now, we've all heard that if a service is free, you are the good that is being sold and you're paying with your data.
Whether this is something the global NGOs or Internet user wants community wants to decide on and comply with remains to be seen that being based in Europe there is no doubt your privacy is the value to be protected and we do it through personal data.  And should that choice be made differently, Europe and different regions look at the U.S. and that's the reason why the Europe and U.S. still cannot agree on what personal data or privacy protection is.  You look at Asia with enhanced surveillance, Africa is about to make that choice of which way they want to go, and so I would say, just to summarize this very brief response, Europe has an experience it's willing to share.  If this is something that other regions want to share, we have specific answers and just to briefly link on Leon's intervention, we have public interest queries.  In for your region, your email is not protected because there is access to public information so it's a comprehensive framework that we offer to the world and where other regions wants to use it is yet to be seen.  I'm going to stop here, but I do have more in F that would be useful.  Thank you very much.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you.  Thank you so much.  The topic of this session is how can we protect the user's data, why we have different and multiple jurisdictions, multiple regulations, and as you know there is a real fight between U.S. and Europe regarding the data protection and a lot of issues with, I think with Google and the other.  And so, I made the question, and I gave a question and I said it is ‑‑ it is a good opportunity ‑‑ it is a good decision to try to make a single, one single jurisdiction for the whole world.  I know that the answer will be it is impossible because the interests are opposite and people ‑‑ that is there is interest here which is not accepted there and so this is the problem, but I know and I think that there is several good principles on which everyone will agree, and so if we start by having these principles and try to build on them, try to make something which is accepted by everyone, even if we don't have everything addressed by this something, it will be in my point of view, at least a beginning, something to begin with.  Leon, yes, please.  Leon?
   >> LEON SANCHEZ:  Thank you very much, Tijani.  I very much agree with what you said, and I agree with what Joanna has posed in the table, there is already a framework that can guide us to try to harmonize the different regulations across jurisdictions.  However, I think that in the same fashion, that it happens with other frameworks that intend to harmonize regulations in different scenarios.  The fact that these frameworks leave the liberty or freedom to national laws to have different approaches to different issues, of course, which is part of each country's sovereignty, poses the real problem here.  Right.  We do have a framework, but we have different approaches.  We have different understandings.  We have different ways of protecting personal data from different sources, and yes, data is very valuable these days and it is an economic part to many economies, but nevertheless, we do need to ‑‑ we do need to protect user’s privacy rights and data protection rights.  And the only way that I see that we could approach this across jurisdictions in the fashion that Internet exchanges and data flows need to be addressed, is by creating this single framework in which we have not only the principles that you were saying but also some base definitions and understandings on how different data may be approached and processed and controlled, et cetera, et cetera.  Otherwise, we will continue to have these differences, and of course we'll continue to face challenges across jurisdictions as a consequence of these different approaches.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you so much, Leon.  Thank you.  Is there any question from the floor?  I am waiting for you.  Do you have, yes, go ahead.
   >> FARZANEH BADII:  Tijani, I just wanted to mention something and I'm sorry if I had to drop off a little bit, but I listened to Joanna and Leon's interventions and I think that there might be a framework for data protection; however, it is not a data protection legal regime that can have an affect globally.  So why am I saying that?  Basically, you can have like various laws in different parts of the world and they can be harmonious.  However, if the laws that ‑‑ if where the major dominant tech corporations are incorporated and subjected to those laws, those laws that actually shape it, why does the GDPR works now?  Why does ICANN have to comply with it?  Obviously, because there is a big chunk of market, and there are many registries and registrars there that, you know, that are affected, as well as it has a transnational ‑‑ it has a transnational mandate.  However, if we come up with ‑‑ if we ‑‑ when I say that we don't have a legal regime, I mean that ‑‑ I mean that when people are affected around the world by the practices and laws of the specific regions and countries, and maybe we should address that, and maybe we should ‑‑ this is not necessarily a bad thing.  However, we need to, if we want to have ‑‑ if we want to globally protect data ‑‑ protect Internet users' data, we need to focus on a global framework that actually can, you know, can like extend and doesn't rely on one national law.  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you very much.  Thank you, Farzaneh.
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  We have a question?
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Dima?  Yes.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  One moment, please, Dima.  Nadira?
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  Yeah.  I just want to ‑‑ yeah, this is from ‑‑ excuse me for the spelling, from a participant and I'm sorry for the spelling.  I guess we may select some provision from for personal data protection which is most common across the country and create some basement recommendation or something like this.  On what level and which UN body can elaborate such work?  End of the question.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Is it a question?  I think it is a question.
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  In the end they're asking about the body of that reflection.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Okay.  Someone to answer it if it is a question?
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  Go ahead, Joanna.
   >> JOANNA KULESZA:  I'm happy to pick that one up.  Again, I'm fascinating by the discussion and I think it's very useful for us to have it because looking from my perspective, I would say that we actually have quite a few frameworks to choose from.  The GDPR has caught most of the attention because as Tijani rightfully noted, there is money involved.  But the Council of Europe 108, similarly to a treaty that they have produced, the Council of Europe has produced on cybercrime has an interesting spillover effect, and I appreciate the links that were shared to Professor Greenly's work and bases the countries that have unified the laws as far as they've indicated based on the same principles exactly on reach of the Council of Europe and OECD.  I think we have quite a few frameworks we can fall back on.  The GDPR is exactly the same thing that the Council of Europe 108 + Convention does and those two instruments are based on the OECD framework, and so I would be cautious in creating another forum or another instrument that would kind of repeat the same thing.  Trying to answer that question, I would say that we do have the basis.  It could be the UN as you indicate here or the Human Rights Commission, if you will.  We could have places to locate that discussion, and I would however be inclined for us to use the experiences that are already there.  So, they give you a specific answer, the UN Human Rights Commission could look into this, but I would be inclined to go back to the Council of Europe and see the spillover aspect of the Convention that they have provided to the specific framework has had.  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you very much, Joanna.  Dima and then Sam.  Dima, please.
  DIMA SAMARO:  Yes.  Hi, again.  Okay, so since now that we are talking about the GDPR and maybe you know like when we want to implement these provisions on different contexts or different versions, so there is more like a question or a comment that I have.  So, for example with customization where you need ‑‑ you know like to collect information to the extent that is needed ‑‑ can you hear me?
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  I hear you.
  DIMA SAMARO:  Okay.  It says my Internet connection is a bit disrupted.  So, for if we want to have a law for the business model specifically that we are talking about here and since they rely on us, for example, so if we want to have a clear definition or concept for data minimization to collect data to the extent that is needed, but I think there is still a loophole in this definition because at some point they may collect, you know, like the data more than required or more than needed, but it also the data might be important for them, you know, like or for Civil Society even to ‑‑ to be able to identify the bias of the algorithms or AI in general, and so I think the issue is a bit complicated because when we want to have like a global framework for all of those countries, I think this could happen and by now we are seeing, you know, like when new laws are introduced that is following GDPR, it's good, but I don't think it really fits.
So, I think there are some other points or details that we have to discuss when we want to talk about whether we want to have a global approach or effort on this or not.  But I'm happy to see from others what they think about these details.  Thanks.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you, Dima.  It is sure that if we manage to have a global framework, it would be the best.  But the problem is that in my point of view, it would be almost impossible because the interests are really opposite, so this is the issue, in fact, but I think everyone wants to have this global framework regulation.  Thank you, again, and now Sam, please.  Sam?
   >> SAM LANFRANCO:  Okay.  I have to get unmuted.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Go ahead.  No.  Now you are muted.
   >> SAM LANFRANCO:  Okay.  Now.  There we are.  Okay.  Thank you.  Thank you.  Yes.  I want to first endorse what has been said in the past few minutes about the need to build on what we have, and then address Tijani's comment about difficulties.  Difficulties are difficult if you try to reach an agreement on legislation and policies that are to be implemented directly, but there are two points I would like to make.  The universal declaration of human rights did not specify policies, and it specified principles.  And for a global digital citizenship and as that impacts on national digital citizenship, we can work at that level, we can talk about principles.  The GDPR and related stuff is like looking at the problem through a microscope rather than a telescope, and we need to look through a telescope and we need to look forward.
We've been talking about the kind of data that technically was legally private but that the Internet has evaded, but coming down the pipeline with the Cloud, with massive computing, with artificial intelligence, with the Internet of Things, is a tsunamis of data that is not collected under these regulations, and is all tagged to individuals as being used by artificial intelligence algorithms to construct a whole variety of personas of you and me for good, bad, nefarious, commercial, political purposes, and I think at some point, we have to come back to the point that I am a resident of the Internet ecosystem.  I need some citizenship there, I need some rights, and I need some duties.  I mean, I need to know what it is that I shouldn't be doing in principle, and if I get really bad at that, maybe my national government should say, you don't do that anymore.
In terms of international agreements, I would point to the particular multistakeholder organization structure of the international labor organization, and the ILO has to deal with a lot of issues that take place in the seas, in the global seas, working conditions, all kinds of stuff.  Use it as basically a tripartite multistakeholder model and then produces recommendations that go back to become a multilateral agreement.  There are ways in doing that for a century.  We could learn from these processes, so we should learn not just about dealing with the problem but how parallel processes worked elsewhere.  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you, Sam.  Thank you very much.  Of course, building on the principles.  We need, as I said before, there are principles on which everyone is agreeing now, but this will not make people have certain regulations or certain law that will solve the problems that happen about data transfer and data use.  It will be ‑‑ it won't solve the problem.  We are constructing on principles, that's good, and I think that there are some ‑‑ there are some principles on which everyone agrees on, so we try first to have these and to agree on them officially, and then try to construct on them because now we don't have something for everyone, and I don't think we will have something for everyone very soon.  Joanna?
   >> JOANNA KULESZA:  Thank you, Tijani.  Just to provide feedback on those interventions.  I agree that the definition of personal data is one of the most ambiguous and contested issues we might have to look into, so this is just a second intervention on the whole scope of data that is used for providing online services within which we would need to define what personal data is and then apply those principles, so this is just to support that.
And I also agree with Leon that we might want to be creative, and I work on international law, and I love the UN and I'm a strong believer in a treaty, and let's get a treater and get it right.  But this might not be the best way to do it for the online environment, so it is about reshaping the multistakeholder model as we have it to better meet those needs as Tijani indicates, the principles that we agree on, and at the same time here in Europe we talk about co‑regulation, and so I hear those same things, it comes down to the ‑‑ like Tijani said, it comes down to the big companies that need to put those principles in their very specific policies, so I just wanted to emphasize, and you guys asked me to talk about Europe so I'm kind of giving the European experience that we've had, and this is just to say as an academic, I strongly support the need to have a more feasible approach, right, one that facilitates the multistakeholder model and gives us a workable response rather than a very rigid and legal framework.  So that was just that.  Thank you very much.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you so much, Joanna.  And I'm sorry that the time is running.  We have to close the session, so thank you all.  Thank you for your participation.  Thank you for your input.  I think that we will the report that will show that we had some agreement on some points, but we still have to find a way to solve this problem because it is not solved and it will not be solved tomorrow.  I would like to thank all the speakers, the five speakers, the two reporters, and I would like to thank particularly Nadira and I give her the floor for the last words.  Nadira?
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  Thank you.  Yeah.  Thanks, Tijani and thanks, everybody.  And even that it's not my area of specialty, I really gained a lot of knowledge from it, and some of that I have to I a poll guys that the people from the Q&A, I couldn't reply to all of them, and I'll end up here and hope that we have a few minutes for one word from each one of our speakers, I think we can have.  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Okay.  So, go ahead we will start with Farzaneh.
   >> FARZANEH BADII:  Yes, so as just like a ‑‑ so my point really was that the laws and are not on their own and jurisdictional indifferences are not on their own bringing data protection to us globally and international framework cannot bring us protection globally if we do not concentrate on where the actual data, where the actual personal data is being affected and by what policies and by what laws, and then we can fix them either through private corporations or through laws, but I don't think an international framework can be an answer now.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you.  Sam?  Sam, please.
   >> SAM LANFRANCO:  Thank you, Tijani.  Just a very short one sentence.  A viable multistakeholder model of bottom‑up helping to educate and both build the policy requires universal Internet access.  Without that substantial portions of the stakeholders are disenfranchised.  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you.  Thank you very much.  Leon?
   >> LEON SANCHEZ:  Thank you, Tijani.  Just to say thank you.  Just to say thank you for organizing this session and I think it's been very productive, and of course let's keep the conversation rolling because as I said on the chat, I think approaching this in a multistakeholder way is what we actually forgot to address during the session.  Thanks.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you very much.  Joanna.
   >> JOANNA KULESZA:  Just a thank you from me.  Thank you for setting this up.  Fascinating discussion.  Thank you, everyone.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you, Joanna.  And Mohamed?  Are you still there?  Homo?
   >> MOHAMED EL BEKRI:  Yes.  Yes.  Do you hear me?  Yes.  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  I hear you.
   >> MOHAMED EL BEKRI:  I think it's not feasible to push toward a binding international instrument.  It will always depend on the specificity.  Thank you very much.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you.  Thank you so much.  We are on top of the hour so the session is over.  Thank you all.  I would like to thank the technical staff from the UN.
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  And I would like to add, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, the screen capture, if possible, to open your videos who are here, we would appreciate to have a Dima, if possible, to even have our technical staff, ICANN reports, it would be good to have you.  Yeah.  Thank you.  It will be captured.  Thank you.
   >> NATALIA FILINA:  Nadira, I would like to be the photographer today, please smile for me.  We didn't see Farzaneh, unfortunately.
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  She's in, yeah.
   >> NATALIA FILINA:  Oh, thank you.  Beautiful girls.  So, please, smile for me.  Uh‑huh.  Thank you so much.
   >> NADIRA AL-ARAJ:  Thank you.
   >> TIJANI BEN JEMAA:  Thank you.  Thank you very much.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-ws213%E2%80%8Ebridging%E2%80%8Ethe%E2%80%8Edata%E2%80%8Edivide%E2%80%8E%E2%80%93%E2%80%8Efor-planet-people-and-prosperity^^

 
   >> The chat feature is for social chat only and only the question and answer feature used to ask questions for attendees.  And the session is recorded live streamed and hosted under the IGF code of conduct and UN rules and regulations.  Have a great session.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I think we are welcoming our attendees at the moment so we will just give people a few minutes to dial in, and we are just past 8:00.  
     We will just give people a couple of minutes to settle in and then we will kick off in a few minutes.  
     I will give a little introduction and we will then have four speakers giving a little roundtable and giving their opinions and followed by questions.  So we look forward to a good session so just we will be starting in just a couple of minutes in case there are any slightly late comers.
     >> MODERATOR: All right.  I think given the numbers are staying stable, I think we will probably just get started and other people if they are joining late, it will be great they can just join in.  Thanks, everybody, for joining this session as part of the virtual IGF.
     My name is Duncan McCann.  And I'm a Senior Researcher and I lead the digital economy program for a think tank in London called the New Economics Foundation.  And our kind of mission is to rethink economics as if people on the planet mattered.  And my job at the foundation is looking at the digital economy and especially putting people and social values at the center of that.
     So today we are going to have a really interesting session on how we start to bridge the data divide around the world.  We heard a lot, obviously about the digital divide.  But there also remains a data divide, not just between countries but also within countries.  
     And in fact, what we have seen is the data value chain be monopolized by just an ever-more concentrating fashion by fewer and fewer players.  This workshop is going to bring together a few different people, and we will hear some interesting talks to debate and think through how we might start to de-concentrate some of these data value chains so the wealth resources are not captured at the top and by a few large multinational players.
     And we're going to understand how to shape a more equitable digital economy, so it is not all concentrated in just a few countries and allows us to maximize the potential available to us through the kind of advance of digital technology.  
     So we're going to have four talks today.  I'm going to let the speakers introduce themselves in a little bit.  So first of all, our first speaker will be Nicole.  And she is going to talk through really some really exciting kind of concrete examples of how we might build some of this platform and data infrastructure to really support the platform cooperative business model.  
     And so Nicole has got some really exciting information about real-world examples of people actually going out and doing this which is just so exciting.
     And our second speaker will then be Obasegun, who is going to be talking to us about his learnings from using data science and civic technologies to support public and private sector organizations in Africa.  I'm excited to learn about the work he is doing.
     Our third speaker will be Deepti from IT for Change in India.  And she will be telling us a little bit about kind of policy challenges around governing data value chains.  And outline a really exciting vision for what they are calling a global to local data governance framework that promotes equal democracy.  Really looking forward to hearing about that.  
     I will finish off talking a little bit about my work in the United Kingdom and around Europe, and I will be talking a little bit about some principles around the part of de-concentrating is turning off the tap for the data platforms.  How do we start to minimize the data they collect?  
     As we go through, feel free to request questions.  There is a Q&A part in Zoom where we will collect questions and put them to our speakers.  Hopefully we will have between 15 minutes and half an hour at the end for questions, and I will wrap up to close.  With that long introduction, we are now going to start the presentations.
     And so I'm going to ask Nicole to unmute herself.  And you have 15 minutes, Nicole.  And I will try and give you a little bit of a warning when we are getting close to the time.
     >> NICOLE ALIX: Thank you.  Can you see my screen?
     >> MODERATOR: I can, yes, looks great.
     >> NICOLE ALIX: Is it okay for everyone?  Do you hear me?
     >> DEEPTI BHARTHUR: Yes.
     >> NICOLE ALIX: Thank you for the invitation, and thank you for your presentation, Duncan.  
     I'm very happy to present what we are doing here in the EU, and especially in France.  I hope I wouldn't be too long.  So I'm listening to what you say, Duncan.  My English is not completely fluent, so I have to look at my presentation.  I won't say everything that is in the presentation, but you can go back to it because I will, of course, leave it here.
     As far as you explained, I will give you some examples of what you call de-concentrated value chain.
     And this is the examples of platform co-ops.  I will show you some concrete experience.  And I'm just looking at how I can, yeah, this is it.
     Concrete experience especially in the context for COVID-19.  Because now national governments, cities and regions put digitalization at the top of their investment priorities.  This is the case on the national level, and this is the case here in the European level.
     At the same time, as you know, there are concerns about how digital platforms monetize and platform wise this is a term we use here, almost any aspect of our people's life, including the most sensitive ones.  
     And the crisis has shown it's an increasing phenomenon.  There is a lot of protests here against Amazon.  I would say about platform developers based on Democratic governments and links to the territory and try to share the created value to take care of the users' well-being.  And I will say a word about data.  And, of course, the turn to social activity and environmental protection.  
     So, where are we?  I have created four years ago sort of, well, association, a think tank.
     We are making links between the practitioners and researchers as far as we could here, social economy and research and practices of the comments are linked.
     We try to promote working groups.  And one of our projects, one of our working groups is platforms, it which means platforms in common, three years ago. And the idea was to bring together French speaking with open digital platforms.  
     We saw that between collaborative economy and free software and social and digital economy, there was something to do.  Someone is telling me something.  Shall I have a look to the conversation or is it fine, Duncan, I can just --
     >> MODERATOR: You focus on your presentation, and we will take care of what everything is going on around.
     >> NICOLE ALIX: I'm also used to looking at the presentation.
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, of course.  Don't worry about it.
     >> NICOLE ALIX: Platform des Commons is a working community.  And we have links connections with the other people, other organization at the EU level.  They are French, you know, because they are small, and we are trained to use the proximity.  
     We are working with the network for cities and organizations of social economy, SMARS, which is cooperative organization trying to promote the idea of freelance cooperative workers.  
     DIMMONS, a research group in Barcelona and companion in Sweden.  The idea is to build and ecosystem of platform and create comments and cooperation.
     So what are platform co-ops?  As we all know, sharing economy is needed because we can connect people and projects and we can do a lot for territories.  But building startups is not the only way to do it because it create negative externality and as this workshop and this session is showing, the question of ownership and use of data is one of the main question.  And tendency to monopoly and degradation of the value and centralized government.
     We have proposed two different kinds of platforms to create a network based on a charter with five principles.  You can have a look.  This is five principles.  
     The first one is inclusive governance.  Of course, we don't have time to describe what it means but, of course, we try not only to give explanation in the charter of what are under this, you know, expressions.  And we are trying through the different platforms La Coop des Communs to feed the definition of each area.  
     The first, inclusive governance.  The second, fair distribution of value.  And third, data ethics.  Fourth, production of commons.  And commons and especially on the digital level with the question of intra-operability between the platforms.  And if you have question, we can go back to that afterwards.  And the fourth is cooperation between members, cooperation between the different platforms.
     You may now know that there is a global movement.  We created the La Coop des Communs three years ago, but we have four years ago organized a meeting in the economic and social economy in Brussels in order to -- because we have seen that some people in the States have launched a movement around fair internet, internet of ownership.  
     So afterwards we call that platform cooperativism.  So we are working here in the EU, but we have launched in connection with this international movement, platform cooperatives and consortium.  I don't have time to present all here the platforms, of course.
     But I just show you a few examples in order to demonstrate that you can have different types of activities.  Here you have Smart x Pwiic.  This is the idea that helping in your neighborhood and helping in a peer to peer relation.  They are based in France and Italy.
     Another is Coop Cycle, a digital delivery for bikes and proposed delivering services.  They are a community of local co-ops that share the experience and resources and, of course, during the pandemic they have proved that they were very, very useful.  
     And the idea as far as data is concerned that they have created free software, free only for the co-op and they can provide the software and all of the program to local communities.
     Another example is on supply chain for food distribution Open Food Network, and this is an open source digital platform, and they share their data.  And also France Barter, another type of platform.  Because it allow marketplaces, non-profit marketplaces between companies.  For instance, if you don't use completely one novel type of goods you have in your company, you can share with others.  
     So you can set up your own community, you can join the global barter.  And it is mentioned here that the City of Paris offered the subscription fees for companies during the COVID in order to promote France barter.
     Of course, what we tried to do is to prepare new models because the feeling we have with all these things, you know, about data, about platforms, about new type of works and of jobs, it is that we try to address new type of issues with some institutions which were built in the past and we have which are not completely prepared to face this new type of issues.
     So what we would like is learning from the crisis.  And we like feedbacks, you know, in order to see how the different let's say at least local authorities and the companies and citizens have been faced to send questions using dominant and capitalist platforms.
     And we would like to promote solutions with decentralized platforms specialized in their fields and operable because they have centralized system.  So how to prepare new models, this is a real question.  And obviously not just to promote this idea.  Of course, as far as the platforms don't sell the data, don't share the data with people who are going to make profit with the data.  
     They are not in a level playing field with the dominant platforms.  And they are not a level playing field with the dominant platform because also they take care of the users and take care of the workers on the platform.
     So to create the ecosystem with the platform, it is challenge for the next months and for the next years.  So we have, you will have the reference in the next slide.  
     So we want to prove that platform co-ops are new territory infrastructures for cooperation.  Not only new economic models but also services and devices for the local authorities and for the government, in order to promote another way to work with collaborative economy.
     So here I give you some reference.  We are not a research organization, but we are working with researchers and we also are able to promote studies.  So we have just finished a study which is in French.  So you will find this report on platforms on our website.  
     We have a forum on the beginning of December, it is also in French but maybe there are some French-speaking participants here.  Of course, it is at distance.  And this is the second forum for platform co-ops we organized with the City of Paris.  And you are all welcome.
     And at the EU level, we have collaborated with the partners at the beginning of my presentation, a position paper.  This position paper tried to show that to find a place for platform cooperatives in the context of recovery because you may know that the EU is preparing EU recovery plan.  And we would like that talking about digitalization and whatever the EU could find place for decentralized solutions.  
     And our job is to try to establish networks and connections with -- between all of the decentralized solution.  And also, of course, to find the way to have a level playing fields for them.
     And we will participate in the next European social economic summit in Mannheim in Germany in next May.  And, of course, everyone more than welcome to this event.
     I hope I answered to your request by presenting this concrete example.  And I'm listening to your questions if you have some.
     >> MODERATOR: Brilliant.  Thank you so much, Nicole.  Not only really, really interesting presentation but also absolutely perfectly to time.  I know that the work that Nicole and the co-ops de commun have been doing is great.  
     I spent a whole year trying to set a platform cooperative for drivers so to compete against Uber.  I know many of the challenges make it difficult and having an organization like this that can help by providing the technology that has already gone through the journey is just hugely valuable.  
     And I know from many cycle co-ops here in the UK, I mean CoopCycle I know best and they are great at spreading this infrastructure.  Absolutely fantastic stuff.  It was nice to hear about it.  
     I think we will take everybody's talk and then bring together questions at the end.  Attendees, please put questions in the Q&A, otherwise it will just be my questions at the end.  Thanks very much, Nicole.
     Now we will go on to the second speaker today so I would like to welcome Obasegun for his presentation.  Nicole, you might want to stop sharing your screen.
     >> NICOLE ALIX: I'm sorry.
     >> MODERATOR: That's okay.  So, please, Obasegun, you have the floor.  Please introduce yourself, and then 15 minutes.  If I see us going a lot over, I will just let you know that we are over time.  Thanks so much for joining us.
     >> OBASEGUN AYODELE: Thank you very much, Duncan.  My name is Obasegun Ayodele, a co-founder and CTO at Vilsquare.  
     We are a research and development center in Nigeria focused on develop Africa and the goal is to connect digital strategy and technology to transform African communities.  Vilsquare Africa.  
     When you look at the economies of the countries, they are segmented into cluster communities.  And we tried to work with the cluster communities, helping them with technology, with strategy such that they are able to connect to whole digital economy and move away from the analog processes to more digital driven processes.
     So what we usually do is we intersect between government agencies and the private sector.  And today I will be sharing a lot about our work.  Basically helping bridge that data divide, and how we basically take local communities, local businesses SMEs, microscale enterprises, how we take all of those different people that are disconnect and connect them to the data value chains that are valuable either through the government or through private sectors.
     A very good practical example is what we did with the seasonal rain for prediction in January.  This was way before the whole COVID pandemic happened.  We were doing research with the government, and then we realized that most government agencies if you look at the data value chain, which are 12 stages, most government agencies only have four.  They only identify, collect and process and analyze and stops there.  
     It is not released or submitted or given to the people, and they can't organize it.  With the data meteorological agency, they had research of weather forecasts for the all of 2020.
     And they have done all this throughout 2019.  And they have published this particular research in a hard copy journal which was sitting somewhere.  So what we did was to work with them to be able to retrieve that data, put it in a form that is indexable, and then plug it into an existing system which we had built for local farmers to get SMS notifications of weather forecasts of tips, of advice and recommendations how to plant and all those kind of things.
     And at the time we didn't know the pandemic was going to happen.  The data alone in a country like Nigeria will have most of the south, southeast and States in flooding and half of their lands were going to be lost to floods.
     So we did this, we reached out to the community which we already built.  We have -- in one of our cluster communities for agriculture, we have over 50,000 farmers who are local farmers who contribute to the food basket of the nation.  And we reached out to them.  We created a broadcast stream to them.  And we are sending them this information from January up until August.
     And then the floods came.  And then we realized how powerful this information we were giving them was because they were able to preempt that the flood is going to happen and have an early harvest rather than wait until the floods happen.  You have crops like onions which is now really expensive in Nigeria.  It is a depleted flood so if you have the flood you cannot get to harvest.  
     It was interesting how we work hand in hand with the government and get this important information and pass that on to the farmers.
     Another interesting thing which we realized which I will be talking later on, is how we are able to empower not just people in Nigeria but people in nine other countries across Africa with quality education.
     So when COVID happened, we realized that -- not realized, we all saw that we had to go on lockdown, and we had 9 million children out of school immediately.  We were looking at what that will do five years in the economy.  If you look across Africa as a whole, we had over millions and millions of children who are out of school.
     So what we tried to do was to create an alternative for them for learning.  But we wanted to fill up existing infrastructures that had already been developed in the past.  And then it was difficult because we realized that most of the high-end private sector positions had built the interesting online learning resources but they are really expensive that low income communities, areas with zero internet connection couldn't have access to that.  
     We decided to break that digital divide whereby we tried to match high-end learning materials with people who are, you know, put out in low purchasing power economies and bridge that all together and make it available for free.
     We have sustainable planning and we basically made a bunch of the resources which before would have been so expensive to have access to, make it available for people to use.  And this was really exciting for us.  
     After launching in June, between June and now we have grown to 10,000 users across nine countries.  And these are students who wake up every day and log on and they are able to take their schools and studies without having to worry about the disadvantaged economy or I don't have access to the right resources.
     We also tried to incorporate some high-end technology where we use AI and analytics to understand the learning paths and do recommendations on topics and other paths they can do and other interests.  
     We took the high-end technology which was not really developed and opened and brought it down and made it for all whereby there is inclusiveness where someone who doesn't even have access to clean water, who doesn't even have access to a comfortable shelter can have access to learning at an affordable rate.
     And when we look at all of the different things which we were doing, we realized the key thing we needed was the system of how information has been shared.  We have interrogated so many processes using the FOI Act which is the Freedom of Information Act and tried to look at by the angle if only we could make government, if only we could make private sectors and make it a source and transparent in the kind of information shared.  
     If every platform which has been created is provided with an easy entry, a business model in whatever solution they are trying to offer.  If you are trying to offer a solution, we understand and you can offer an easy entry business model, probably something like what Zoom has.  Zoom provides 40 minutes free and you can make calls for 40 minutes.
     Those kind of things are tools or models that bridge that barrier that is in their wherever people of low income cannot have access to.
     We also tried to work with the OGP, the Open Government Process to look at how citizens can properly engage with governments and private sectors and there can be proper two-way feedback system whereby the government can have like town hall platforms where they listen to the citizens talk, you know, and get those feedback.  And then they are able to iterate how they engage with their citizens.
     So this is some of the things which we have done.  And I'm open to questions as we go along.  And share more light on some of the interesting case studies which we have done across the continent.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you so much for that.  That was really, really interesting.  And always fascinating to hear real stories of people really trying to take this abstract thing, data, and actually make it useful for people in their day-to-day lives.  So yeah, some really powerful stories there.  And so thank you very much for sharing.
     So again, yes, please do keep those questions coming in.  And as I say, once all of the speakers have gone, I will try to manage a sort of interactive conversation with us all.  Thank you for that.  We will move on to the third speaker.
     Our third speaker is Deepti Bharthur from IT for Change.  Deepti, I'm going to let you introduce yourself a bit further and then 15 minutes.  If you are getting close to the time, I will let you know.
     >> DEEPTI BHARTHUR: Thank you so much, Duncan.  Hello, everyone.  Pleasure to be here.  
     My name is Deepti Bharthur, and I'm from IT for Change.  We are a research and advocacy organization based out of India.  And we essentially work at the -- in the intersections of technology and development and all things that fall in between.
     A major part of our work has been advocacy around democratizing data and the value of data and framing adequate global to local policies around that particular topic.
     And I think I have a very hard act to follow because we have had some standout examples of what is really, really working well.  And I'm so happy to hear about the positives that exist in the world.  
     I will drag you back to a little bit of a dark place because I want to talk about what is not working.  And I want to point out the issues that I think we have been investigating in the course of our research and advocacy here at IT for Change.
     Coming to the topic that, you know, today's session is about the data divide.  I want to start by saying that the data divide is not a divide in the way we conceptualize the idea in the digital realm, as a lack of something like, for instance, lack of access to connectivity.  At IT for Change, we long recognized the problem of the data divide is really two problems.  
     One, the problem of data concentration in the hands of a few very large interests.  And on the -- and what we have seen is the once open network of the internet transmute into a privatized economic structure controlled by very large technology corporations.  The term big tech, which is used in common parlance today to refer to these companies which go by a variety of alphabet soups depending on what is involved at the moment.  But Gaffa, and it something else earlier, et cetera, et cetera.  
     This has become an easy placeholder to signify the phenomenon of corporate control of data value.  And the inordinate power that accrues to corporations the way they are able to exercise ownership and control over the network and the various economic stakes and the data value chain.
     Big techs are the saleable market power while through hoarding data and using digital intelligence as a factor of production is manifesting itself in different forms of databases control.  The Amazon-ification of the world.  What started as the online sale for books is today the world's marketplace for everything.  
     Over the past two decades, Amazon has followed a strategy of data value capture and consolidation and all acquisitions in retail, media streaming, health, more.  It's ventured into offline services like Whole Foods, the grocery chain.  And the movie theater most recently, AMC.  It's been working in the finance layer integrating various kinds of customer and merchant payment infrastructure.  
     And perhaps most significant, and what doesn't get talked about, is its data-driven strategy through Amazon Web Sources.  Its cloud storage and cloud computing services layer which controls 14% of the world's cloud computing market.  That's a very big number.
     It hosts the backend not on for major tech companies like Pinterest, but also SMEs, startups, state and public institutions and agencies, including notably the Pentagon.  
     So it means that Amazon's control over this particular layer of the data that even its competitor, Amazon Prime, the video streaming, its competitor Netflix is also relying on AWS for its cloud services.
     We see the stakes both in terms of across different verticals as well as different layers of the same vertical.  That is one of the ways in which we have been noticing big tech acquire database control across different sectors.
     We also see the tech companies use intelligence as a way to competition and empty the playing field all together.  I want to give the example of India's large flood platform.  Big tech in India and not known abroad yet, but not too far, I guess.  And it has substantial funding from SoftBank.  
     And what the company has been able to do is harness data from users and partner reference on orders and consumer preferences to develop its own line of cloud kitchens which are today outpricing and outcompeting the very restaurants from whose data they were able to build the intelligence infrastructure in the first place.
     Both my colleagues and previous panelists did speak about the COVID context, and I want to mention that COVID-19 has really I think thrown light on a phenomenon that was happening already, but has I think accelerated in the past few months which is the ways in which large technology corporations like Microsoft, like Google, like Amazon, et cetera, have been able to venture into very critical development sectors like education, like healthcare, like logistics.
     You know, you have governments in Australia and Canada that tied up with Amazon for contact tracing and for delivery of medical equipment.  You have Microsoft advising I think everywhere, the UN system as well as like different governments on how do we pivot to online education in the case that onsite schooling and learning is not going to be part of the plan for a long time.  We are seeing a lot of these different types of moves happening.
     And what happens as a result of this is that the wholesale capture of data and digital intelligence and the course of deployment by big tech has resulted in a highly skilled global digital economy.  It is about data concentration on one hand, and it's about data disposition on the other hand.  And the statistic probably really spells it out as to how that happens.
     90% of the market capitalization of the world's 70 largest big tech companies is today in the U.S. or in China.
     The EU, its closest next, has a share of 4%.  And Africa and Latin America put together account for about 1%.  We can see just in this sort of numbers how very vast these gulfs are, you know, amongst the private interests, amongst certain geographies and amongst the peel.  
     This is not a result of standout innovation, there's usually narrative goals or some kind of extraordinary business management.  It has been the result of a governance vacuum. Though there are many, many different layers to this and many aspects to this, what we have concentrated on are four critical areas which we believe have created this governance vacuum.
     One being the fact that traditional competition love frameworks which have traditionally focused on consumer protection rather than structure and health of the marketplace have really failed to check horizontal and vertical integration practices.  
     It has not taken how digital intelligence is part of the game and captured and accumulated and allow for the cannibalization of data into the ecosystems of big tech.  
     It was only in 2019 that the Department of Justice in the U.S. actually started to look at a decade of acquisitions made by these very large companies, the Apples and Googles of the world.  And started looking at the fact that smaller startups which never meet the bar for regulatory reporting anyway were being bought out essentially for the data to amass the data and bring into the larger system and enclose it in the large proprietary system.
     Second, competition is a large part. while data is recognized as the most valuable resource of our times, there is no appropriate global government regulation that can regulate data flow.  What we have seen in the past few years, we had some attempts to build global regional initiatives such as GD20 and OECD, et cetera, have been trying to leverage data as an economic resource.  
     But what this translated into is largely a noncritical push for freedom of data flows.  The idea of single markets is seen as digitally persistent and again, these are moves that again benefit the strongest players in these power blocs and not necessarily aimed at creating equitable uniform gains for the region as a whole.
     And then third, cross-border digital services increasingly constitute a major share of transnational value chains, but we find that our international taxation frameworks are based on physical presence and they are ineffective in curbing the profit-shifting practices if big tech corporations. 
     The fact that we yet don't have a way of thinking about revenues, which is sort of how we think about tax, and how that is stemming from this enormous data power that is being captured by large technology corporations.
     One important sort of legacy law that currently exists is the W2 moratorium on digital transactions which impedes companies from effectively taxing revenues, sort of increasing taxes on big tech companies.  To look at new technologies like 3D printing which when we thought about the internet in 1998-1999 when this law came out, we were looking at images, very low tech, low data sort of flows and now we are looking at essentially all commercial activity.  
     And the fact that a moratorium extends to this is something that has really been a big sort of talking point in the international trade and taxation advocacy.
     And lastly, and this is I think the point that, you know, obviously Obasegun made earlier, it is just not enough to have access to data, you know.  The fact that not only are you having the sort of outflows of data by large technology corporations, but that nationally systems in many developing countries are still very, very weak.  They are not really up for the task of building the digital infrastructure capabilities which is a very complex resource intensive task.  
     You know, that really needs a lot of -- there are some countries that have the data, but don't have the ability yet to transition into a digital complex like large scale statistics and systems, et cetera.  How do we transition that?  
     Other countries are not even at step one.  There are countries that don't have the ability to converge different kinds of databases and look at that.  And there are others where there are no leader frameworks and incentives that allow for something like a public data infrastructure to arise that could help startups and help innovators and cooperatives and non-market initiatives like what Nicole was spoken about.  
     The fact is we really don't have the last step as well.  So when you think about it, we are looking at inadequate competition frameworks.  We're looking at inadequate global data frameworks for governance.  We are looking at taxation regimes that are inadequate.  And we are looking at lack of really national digital infrastructure and database policies.
     So what can be done?  I'm just going to quickly take another few minute and talk about the work we have been doing and what are some of the structures we forwarded as IT for Change.
     One, recognizing that the data value chain is critical to the regulation of technology itself is an important step.
     And for this, we need data to be probed as a source of value and not just in acquisitions.  Introducing data sharing as a form of connecting data disruption.  This is something that Germany is contemplating, for example.
     We could think about structural rules for big tech companies that prevent this kind of consolidation between cloud and consumer and other layers like what Amazon has been able to do.  
     And this is something that India is working on, and so is the EU recently, which brought out its strategy, that we establish ownership frameworks for nonpersonal data that actually allows sovereign interests of nations and communities to be adopted.  
     Second, we need to reduce unequal digital dependencies, and this could take on different forms depending on the national context, context-appropriate localization as needed.
     Demanding mandatory data sharing by big tech with public agencies and producers of data such as producers and workers. Preserving sovereign rights within trade agreements and the policy space to regulate data and public interest. 
     Investing in data and digital infrastructure.  And really building the capacities of small economic actors to leverage digital opportunities on their own terms.  These are really important steps as well.
     At the global level, when you think about it, what we really need is global data constitutionalism which centers the human rights framework.  We need to think about how mechanisms such as the UN Binding Treaty, for example, can start looking at tech corporations and at data like a concept and object of governance and extend current regulations and frameworks and thought process to the system.
     And finally, what we do need, going go back to Nicole's fabulous presentation, we actually need new pathways, commons and cooperatives.  We need public goods and digital infrastructure and well-designed incentives for worker-produced platform enterprises.  
     And finally, we do need pathways for digitalization and capacity building for traditional small businesses to follow into the digital.  Not just about countering the presence of big tech, but when we think about de-consolidating the data value, chain it is really about expanding opportunity for the small guys as well.
     In this context, IT for Change has started a new project.  It's called unskewing the data value chain.  And over the next two years, we will be looking at these four areas and looking at what kinds of models and pathways we really need to attack this concentration and diffuse it and democratize the chains of the digital data economy.  So I'll stop here.  Thanks so much.  Back to you, Duncan.
     >> MODERATOR: That was so much to think about there, so much content.  
     Yeah, I do urge everybody to look at the work of IT for Change, it is really some fantastic stuff.  And I have really learned so much from them since we first kind of got to know each other a year or two ago.
     All right.  I am going to take the last of the presentations.  So I will be talking for, you know, 10-15 minutes at the most.  And panelists have already covered so much material.
     I'm going to just try and add to the conversation with bits that my other co-panelists haven't spoken.  I'm in agreement of so much what has been said.  I will try and cover a few different areas.
     One of the big things, so my work is really about examining the new kind of centers of power that data is bringing into our economy.  And, indeed, I think of data power as a kind of new form of power in the economy.  
     If you can think of the traditionally we had strong concepts around economic power, military power, political power, I think data power is a new form of power.  And like energy, it can shift from one to another.  You can use your data power to assert economic power or political power obviously as the platforms are now doing.  Even with the likes of Palantir and others potentially turning data power also into military power.
     When I am thinking about how to address some of these new power centers in the economy and if we accept the notion that that power is drawn at least in part from their ability to, the huge datastores that they have, then in trying to think about how we address the root cause is really about turning off that tap, that initial tap that all of the platforms do which is rapacious data gathering at all points.  
     We are very, very lucky in the EU in that we have, you know, for all its faults, the General Data Protection Regulation is still one of the best pieces of data regulation out there in the world.
     Organizations like mine certainly think it could be improved, but that is not to say it doesn't provide a really useful foundation.  And within the regulation the two principles I think that have been kind of forgotten but are actually I think critical to the future of the digital economy.  And there -- and it might sound technical, so I'll explain it a little bit.  
     So data minimization and purpose limitation.  So these re two principles that the GDPR was supposed to kind of enshrine in our European kind of data economy.  
     And data minimization is a principle that says really only the data which is absolutely required to be gathered should be collected at all.  This is powerful.  The data economy works in absolutely the opposite dynamic at the moment.
     It's a kind of data maximization.  Platforms, apps, all of the free games on your phone, every bit of the digital and data economy is trying to gather every single piece of data about you, about your interactions.  Much of it with no direct purpose today.
     But fueled by the general belief that more data is always better.  And that data ultimately does bring them benefits.  And it also brings, you know, huge risks to us as well.  
     So and I think there is a really interesting thinking by a kind of tech activist who I have a lot of time for called Errol Belcom who says that really the General Data Protection Regulation, all of its problems could be solved by calling it the Data Minimization Regulation.  If the ultimate purpose of the regulation was to minimize the data collected, that would probably be the biggest fix that we could put today, just to turn off that data tap to these big platforms.
     The second item is then purpose limitation.  The other thing that big tech does is it gathers data from one of its ends of its platforms, so we can think about the Google ecosystem, maybe you pop on to YouTube or you do a search on Google Maps or you are engaging in Google shopping or something like that.  
     And what it does is pulls that data in to it, but it doesn't just use that data for that platform or to serve you an ad in that particular world.  In hundreds of ways, it shares it not only within the hundreds of companies within kind of the Google structure, but it also then seeks to use that for purposes way beyond what we may have consented to gather.
     So I think really working at enforcing these is going to be really, really important.  And obviously that is difficult.  
     And so one of the things that I have done in my personal capacity is taken -- I'm in the process of taking YouTube to court in the UK on behalf of five million children who have accessed YouTube in the last two years.  Who we allege have had their data illegally collected by the site without proper consent, without seeking to minimize the data they collect, and without limiting the purpose for which that data is used.  
     So if our case is successful, we expect damages that YouTube will have to pay to be in the order of 2.5 to 3 billion pounds.
     But that is not the most important thing.  The most important thing that it actually changes their policy and the way that these platforms work ultimately by forcing them to kind of just gather less data at the first point.  
     I think that is the really important thing is we mustn't accept the status quo, which is that all of these platforms and these digital economy players are free to take our data at all purposes and all of the kinds of data we have.  So that is kind of my first point is that we need to start at that real root cause of the problem, which is the data gathering.
     The second thing that I want to talk about a little bit is some of the exciting developments we are seeing around collectivized responses to this kind of data concentration.  And so I'm going to talk quickly about three competing kind of ideas that are being kind of tested out in the data world.
     And so, first of all, kind of data unions.  And I think data unions are a really fascinating idea.  And it really has two flavors, kind of the data union debate.  
     First of all, it is about engaging with unions themselves.  So representing workers to expand the concept of what the union does to not only fight for workplace rights, discrimination, you know, the stuff that has been the bread and butter of unions since they started, but also start to fight for data rights for workers and make this the start of a kind of new era of demands that unions can make on behalf of workers.
     And we have seen some exciting developments in the UK where you started to see the first kind of major unions start to think about what demands look like, what kind of visibility, what access, what rights should workers have both individually, but more importantly collectively over the data.  
     On one hand there is the traditional union world bringing data into the battle between workers and businesses to ensure that workers are not, you know, dispossessed of their data.  And I think that was a really important point Deepti made earlier.
     The other thing that unions are really, really interesting and this is more nascent to think of ourselves as data producers.
     And, in fact, you going on to Facebook and commenting, liking -- I don't spend much time on Facebook, but I waste a lot of my time on Twitter doing the same thing.  We are engaged, yes, in stuff that is meaningful for us.  But we are also engaged in labor for the platforms.  We are producing value for the platforms in our engagement.
     And so this idea then if our online work is really a labor, maybe we should be grouping together and demanding some kind of rights for the work that we do for the value that we create on these platforms.
     And so I think here there are some really interesting, you know, ideas that are starting again, very, very nascent at the moment.  
     For instance, there is one attempt, you know, think the one that is always talked about is imagine what we could do if we formed a Facebook that uses union.
     So there is a huge amount of people but as individuals in an ecosystem with more than a billion users, individuals could never really have a huge impact on the operations of the platform.  What about if we coalesced in unions of hundreds of thousands, of millions?  Of tens of millions?  And started to make demands of the platform and in the same way that, you know, traditional labor unions that wealth held their labor.  
     What about if we were a union of tens of millions, hundreds of millions in a real ideal world and we all withheld our labor in the sense of going onto the platform and engaging it with for a month, you know?  No ad revenue.  This is again the power that we actually have as users.  And the difficulty there is really mobilizing as a collective.
     The digital world is replicating many of the same challenges that we faced in the physical world.  With additional challenges.  Obviously, scale. No physical union mobilization is talking about mobilizing in the tens or hundreds of millions, at least not -- at least that's very, very challenging.  
     And also the kind of the disparate nature of each other.  We don't, once, recognize ourselves necessarily as digital workers.  And second, we don't necessarily have the solidarity that we have in physical workplaces with other data laborers, if you want.  I think both of those are really, really exciting options that are kind of just at the cusp of being explored.
     The second area I want to talk about is data trusts.  And anybody involved in kind of data governance work in the last couple of years, at least on the slightly alternative side, data trust has been talked about as one of the really exciting ways of being able to share data beyond the confines of single companies whilst retaining some of that safety and some of those protections.
     Now where I think it is a hugely promising kind of idea, this idea of enveloping data in the kind of a trust model where you have beneficiaries and that data can then only be used for the benefit of these beneficiaries.  
     So you create a kind of positive model for the use of this data.  However, the challenges, and I know this partly because I spent, you know, kind of six months trying to set one up in the UK, is that they are hugely expensive to set up.  Trust law is complicated.
     Trust law mainly evolved or very much involved in the U.S. and UK legal system to enable the wealth to hide assets beyond the reach of the State.  
     So we should have a certain amount of skepticism that a system that has evolved to ultimately keep things protected from visibility and democratic accountability that we can somehow turn that into a positive structure.
     I think the data trust model is one that I'm following closely, but for the moment I haven't seen any uses beyond like big -- I haven't seen the community application or real applications that would work for the social economy.  It costs hundreds of thousands of pounds to set that up.  That already puts it out of reach of the real grassroots projects we would like to see more of.
     The last kind of model I will talk about quickly is the kind of data co-ops.  So just as Nicole is talking about, the platform co-ops and actually putting the cooperative model around the cooperative model.  Takes away the negative issues that the normal platform model kind of has.
     It is very much the same with the data.  So rather than, again, having a data that is owned by a company externally, what about if we all collectively owned this data.  And not only that, because the cooperative model is more than just about ownership.
     It is also about that ongoing notion of management and being in control, which is so empowering and really, really important for the model.  So the exciting example in the data co-ops world that is mentioned is a Swiss data co-ops called MyData.  
     And they pull sensitive data from members.  They take medical history data from the members.  Members voluntarily share their medical history with the co-ops and the MyData co-ops goes out and actively engages with medical researchers around the world to say hey, I have got this really, really useful dataset.  If you commit to promising to publish the results of the survey and commit to doing research on a disease that is maybe less well known or less clarity for the existing pharmaceutical industry.
     It is giving holders of data, valuable data a real say in how that data is used.  And again, what is also really encouraging about the MyData co-ops model, it isn't monetary.  People aren't sharing for the monetary gain as the data as labor or data as value initiatives have.  This is about using your data to really generate more public good.  
     And that is I think one of the reasons why again it is so exciting and why co-ops and other alternative models can preface and data is so, so important.  
     I have already gone over time and want to ensure there is time for questions.  I will finish with reinforcing the point that some of the other panelists have said that de-concentration of data actually involves de-concentrating more than just data.  
     And we need to think about the infrastructure.  I think Deepti made all of these points very, very well.  If everybody is storing in one or two services, that is still not going to be a de-concentrated model.  We need to think about cloud and AI.  We need to think about internet connectivity and things like that.  All very, very important.
     The last thing that I would say just, which is another area I'm starting to work on now and hopefully we can maybe take into the discussion a little bit, is I find there are areas where the platform co-ops model is very challenging.  
     In the world of Uber, for a co-ops to compete against one of the most aggressive, well-capitalized companies in the world like Uber is very challenging.  I'm interested in where the role of the public sector is and is there a role for like public platforms because scale is really important for some of the platforms.  
     Is there a role for the public sector in creating some of these neutral marketplaces where people can then engage on fair terms and work and so on.
     So I'm going to stop there.  Thank you all so much for taking the time to listen.  
     So I have -- I have a couple of questions in the Q&A.  Please continue to pose questions.  Nicole, I see your hand.  Do you want a response?
     >> NICOLE ALIX: If you have Q&A, I think it would be an opportunity for people who don't have any possibility to speak to, you know, to intervene now.  
     But I just want to react, Duncan, about what you said because before you talked about the idea of data co-ops.  
     I wrote in the chat that we, this is on data cooperatives and with practitioners including companies like cooperative banks and mutual insurance because you don't know what to do differently than the capitalist companies.
     And but they are not able to create a data highway, how could I say, an area of trust.  If there is only one company promoting the idea of data co-ops, it doesn't work.  And you need to find a sort of neutral group to go further.  
     So we launch at the end of November with experts.  And I put in the chat at least one reference.  I'm sorry because it is -- I shouldn't be sorry -- it is in French, it is in French because we have the model is now in charge of open science within the big public institution here, resort public institution in France.  
     And the global idea is that there is no -- there is no really personal data.  We only have collection data and we should promote this idea.
     What we are not completely clear with is the idea for monetizing the data in cooperatives because how could we promote the idea of cooperatives without the idea of monetization.  
     And so my proposal, but sometimes I see too large and too pushy, and I think it would be really interesting to have an international or at least a European connection on data co-ops and this is really a proposal.
     >> MODERATOR: I think that would be great.  And I think really where a lot of the ideas are is we need to be sharing.
     Nobody can do all of this on their own.  And so absolutely building these international networks is really important.  I would love to learn more and see how we could be part of it.
     So in the remaining 15 minutes, I will try and take some questions.  So there have been -- there are two questions in the Q&A., which will I try and translate.  
     I'm going to take the second kind of question first.  And I will kind of distill the paragraph there.
     And I think what is really the key question is there is that we talked a lot about needing to create a kind of alternative infrastructure, one that says we can do all of this in a way that is completely parallel with the kind of existing platform economy.  
     And I think the question brings really interesting ideas which is should we not also be thinking and are there always possibly ways in which we can really start to constrain the activities of the platform, the major platforms so that in fact we guide them into doing the public good that we really believe they should be doing?
     So, yes, I was wondering if anybody wants to try and take that.  You know, how much can we really bring the existing platforms with us?  Are we not all on the same team as some of the comments.  I don't know if anybody wants to take that.
     >> OBASEGUN AYODELE: I think so.  I just joined, the open access movement is kind of in a way trying to solve that.  It is to a way from --
     >> MODERATOR: We can't hear you.  Oh, I think we might have lost Obasegun there.
     But Deepti or Nicole, do you want to try and come in on how we tackle big tech not to exclude them but more to bring them in?
     >> NICOLE ALIX: It is impossible to bring them in.
     (Laughter)
     >> NICOLE ALIX: It is impossible to bring them in, but we need more regulation.  This is the first part.  
     What we tried to do as far as because what is very complicated is to convince our public partners that the alternative can really be operational because to say well, it is too small, I need to have the same solution everywhere so it is complicated.
     And now and they don't favor any regulation because there is no alternative.  There is no global alternative.  And as well as we just have to promote global solutions and there is no alternative.  
     So I think we have to promote a sort of education in order for people to understand what they are doing, as our colleague from Africa said.  
     I don't know whether he is back.  To work with people, that they are concerned about that.  And the second thing we tried to do is working with some local authorities which put money within the alternatives to promote not only to small and local solutions but territorial solutions.  This is what I presented, platform co-ops not only as startups or cooperatives but as solutions for those working within the local authorities.  
     We need even for the models to be able to have sustainable business model because they are -- their business model is not sustainable because the other, the capitalist platforms are sustainable because they are selling data and working with the data.
     And it is more, or it is more profitable for them than selling goods and services.  This is one part.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Nicole.  And instead the question has come in and been a misinterpretation of mine.  
     Shows how much bias you bring when you are reading text.  He was talking less about constraining big tech more than about, you know, freeing them up with kind of clever market incentives like carbon taxes and credits.  Our apologies for misreading the question there.  
     Obasegun, I see you joined us again.  You were just talking before you dropped.  Do you want to come back in, or?  You are still on mute.  Deepti, do you want to take any of this question or otherwise we can --
     >> DEEPTI BHARTHUR: So the question about like so am I supposed to answer your question for the clarification?  I just wanted to --
     >> MODERATOR: You can either go really -- I think just what do you think?  Where is our role and the role of established big tech?  What are we supposed to do with them in the world that we would like to see?
     >> DEEPTI BHARTHUR: Sure.  I think the problem is not so much about constraining or freeing in that sense.  
     What we are witnessing is the costs of having had a very free rein of technology companies.  When they came in, nobody knew what to do with them.  They were garage enterprises coming out of Silicon Valley and everybody thought they were benign little entities providing free maps and free search and free everything.  Of course, there was no reason to think about that.
     As we have seen them progress, and I think I share concerns that Nicole mentioned about sustainability, none of the companies except one or two have actually made profits to now.  They are very overvalued and overinflated and constantly move and rapidly growing.  And when there is blowback, it is not they who suffer.  This is an unsustainable model that we look up to as saviors of the world.  
     Not a problem of reining them in now.  It's really the fact that we should have reined them in probably 10 years ago.  With adequate -- I'm not necessarily making a case for saying that we must strangle innovation and tech must die and go back to the pre-digital lives.  
     I certainly think that all players and market interests have a role to play in sort of the company.  But what I would argue for is the fact that somewhere the government missteps that have happened because of our inability to see what we know now.  And the fact that data became an important resource, and we need to direct because our markets are headed into dangerous distorted territories otherwise.
     They are as sustainable or big tech as they are nor the other guys otherwise, we are staring at a second dot-com bubble soon.  That is very important.
     And to answer whether we can work together.  I think we can as long as I think we have regulation that is really thoughtful.  A lot of it sometimes seems to be like throttling and coming in through the harsh standard consequences.  There is an accident, let's ban Uber or a problem, throw the drivers out of the system.  We need to have forward-looking policy.
     I think one important case is mandatory data sharing between platforms and public agencies, for example.  Nothing stops Uber from sharing data with city to plan city traffic management better, et cetera, et cetera.  I will stop now and let Obasegun come back if he had something to say.
     >> OBASEGUN AYODELE:  Apologies for that.  I just had an outage.  I was trying to explain -- can you hear me, everyone?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, we can hear you.
     >> OBASEGUN AYODELE: So how we try to look at this is what looks to almost be working.  And we try to work backwards and find out what exact element in that thing makes it work.
     And if you look at the open access movement, which Nicole mentioned, of the inclusive open science movement, you realize there has been a lot of data sharing and advancement and innovation and a lot of collaboration.  
     Like in Africa it really helped for producing low cost regions or for people like a way we can facilitate an open source microscope that is high end and costs so much money, we will take the open source and produce something that is accessible by low income communities.
     So the open access movement kind of is almost working.  So what we can do is we mirror the successes of the platform, of the movement and see if we can draft policy suggestions that governments can take up.
     So like UNESCO tried to do at the time to drop the policy for the open science movement.  So we can also look at opportunities like where government can say okay, this works, and get some growth and progress and how can we draft local laws.  Things like that.  
     I think we should look at this more from what from the open access perspective and see how we can work backwards to find a solution to this.
     >> MODERATOR: Great.  Thank you so much for joining us again.  And thanks, that is really great.  
     We will try and address the other question from the chat, which is an interesting one, in fact one I was just talking about yesterday.
     And it comes from Win, who talks about the potential of there being no farmers kind of by 2030, sometime in the future.
     And how do we go about resisting, what are some of the solutions, some -- I mean I will put a bit of context only because I was talking about it yesterday on the subject.  
     Agriculture is going through a massive revolution.  Who does the farming and how food is distributed and so on.  And a lot of it is being driven by data, and the same kind of consolidation and concentration narrative we see in so many other sectors.  
     And this is hugely problematic because across the world, you know, the -- you know, the huge amount of farming is still done by very, very small-scale farmers who partly subsist by selling through local marketplaces.  And yet we what we are seeing technology do is of four different challenges.  
     One, technology is being used to engage in a new generation of bio-piracy where local crops can be kind of constructed and impatented.  We are seeing real consolidation of the business so everything from seeds to equipment, again all around being able to produce better data.  
     We are seeing a move of the big online marketplaces.  So Alibaba now has invested in farms, you know.  Producing milk in New Zealand to ship into southeast Asian markets.  So the big players are coming in.  
     And ultimately it poses, you know, a serious challenge for kind of small-scale farmers in the future who may not be able to rely on, you know, tech and so on.
     So just that bit of context in place.  I don't know if any of the panelists want to talk about what we can do to make sure -- and again, Obasegun already provided some really interesting really specific kind of things we can do.  
     If you want to come in again and talk about what can we do to really help farmers access the data so that they can continue to do what we really need them to do, which is obviously continue to, one, have a livelihood, and two, grow the food that we need.
     >> OBASEGUN AYODELE: Okay.  Should I jump in?
     >> MODERATOR: If you want to, yes.
     >> OBASEGUN AYODELE: Yes.  So I think in addition to what I already said with the panel, I think the thing for us was some creative platform where we could engage with the panel where we could understand what are their needs and try and see how we can market those needs to data that is available for business.
     So I think another thing which sometimes is difficult for people to do is we have so much data and just coming out of their existing infrastructure and it is sometimes maybe because it is not on the long-term business case, you know, and plans.  They sometimes meet that part where they have to map what data is useful for the communities.
     What we tried to do is do like a town hall and bring the data cooperations, you know, bring the public sector, the government and the agencies and all of the different people together in one room where you can say this is our problem.  
     And then it is easy for cooperations and these, quote, data brokers to access.  In addition towards what I said earlier, this would be also a very good opportunity, you know, to kickstart some collaboration with farmers like that.
     >> MODERATOR: Brilliant, thanks.  I notice -- thank you very much.  That was a really useful addition.  
     And obviously we need to bring the constituencies together.  That was a really good point to end on.  
     We reached the end of our session.  I would like to thank the three speakers who joined me today, Nicole and Deepti and Obasegun.  I think it was a really interesting discussion which not only showed that there are exciting things going on on the ground, and in many different continents and across many different sectors of the economy.  You know, it is really great to hear that people are already doing it.
     And also there are big challenges that remain.  And so we absolutely need to keep working so that we can distribute the benefit of data much, much more broadly into the communities who really need it.  
     So I would like to close and say thank you very much for joining us for this hour and a half.  And I hope to learn more from all of you in the future.  All right.  I hope you have a really lovely day.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-ws246-will-the-real-public-interest-internet-please-stand-up^^

 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Welcome, everyone, the ones who are in the room. My name is Bruna Santos. I'm from data privacy research association. I'm one of the cocoordinators of the Internet Governance Forum council. I share this responsibility with Sheetal Kumar who is joining us in this room as well. 
Just for your information, the majority of you know, but it is a collective ‑‑ civil society collective that dates back whose main goal has been facilitating civil society group participation throughout IGF processes and spaces. 
And then I would like to welcome you to the panel today whose name is "Will the Real Public Internet Please Stand Up"? Today we want to talk about how to set forth an agenda on behalf of the public interest and also to understand whether there is a concept ‑‑ if that's a concept that's adopted across the community and also perceptions we all have around this. 
For this session today our speakers are Ramon Roca from the foundation of open free and neutral network, Mehwish from head of digital from article 19, Farzaneh Badii from social media governance, Graeme Bunton, a policy director and hopefully we'll be joined for a short intervention. 
Our discussions will be divided into two parts. First we'll start with questions for the panelists which go around the meaning of public interest internet. We are asking what does a public interest internet mean to you and is it working on behalf of any public concept. Also what factors should be used when seeking to promote a public interest internet, tackling challenges and how can we govern the internet today on behalf of the public interest. 
I'm going to hand the floor to Ramon. You have four minutes. 
>> RAMON ROCA: Thanks, Bruna. Thanks, everyone, for coming to the session. Let's start with this concept which is very wide, you know, the public interest. For me in the beginning I would like to underscore because it doesn't matter, in fact, what is my interest or everyone's interest in terms of individually, but the general interest. That's the public interest, the interest for all. 
When talking about the internet, I think everyone in this room, I assume really understands that the internet is something important for accessing many. It's fundamental for accessing many other rights like education, health, and so on. Since it is a fundamental right it doesn't matter what's my interest, but the interest for all. It starts with very basic things which is, okay, we have to connect everyone, right? 
So it's not, let's say what happens quite often in the internet because in internet there are many interests. As many as people connected. But the general interest is to have everyone accessing to the same rights and the same opportunities and so on. 
So quite often while talking about accessing internet and so on we are getting numbers like 80% of the population in some countries already have internet. In some others maybe it's a bit less, 60, 40%. 
We are looking in this way and we have to start looking in the other way. When talking about general interests we have to realize the minorities who don't have access. So even if you are 80% people accessing the internet there is 20 that they are not. This is a big discrimination that as a general, a humankind, it is not acceptable that there is a difference between the connected and the unconnected. 
So we have to look only at those who are connected but the minorities who don't have access. Many of the efforts have to be therefore put there. So it is a public interest to look for the minorities, whoever is not corrected or even in some cases unfortunately the minorities. 
Let's say be sure that the internet is generally available for all without discrimination, without creating differences either from gender, territorial. Doesn't matter what you like. You have to get access. Be sure of that. I'm saying that because since the internet there are many private interests also that are mixed there. Can be confused in some cases and those are private interests. Private and public interests are not synonyms. 
Also in some cases it can go together. Meaning for instance public‑private partnerships. Because internet in many cases are provided by private companies. But we have to realize that maybe it will be the private interest which also has other interests like profits and benefits and so on. Maybe for them it's in their interest not to connect everyone because, okay, or not to provide the same opportunities to all because in some cases, okay, if we already provide mobile connectivity somewhere what about providing other alternatives like WIFI or fiber optics, if they already have mobile. So we don't have to invest and we are taking the money anyway. 
What about connecting the people who don't have incomes? They will have no interest as a private interest to connect someone who can't afford the connectivity. 
So that's why we have to look from the public interest perspective to look to the minorities and not to look to just whoever is connected but also the others and the minorities. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much, Ramon, for highlighting the point of minorities and more diverse and marginalized communities which should be a main focus for this discussion. 
I'm going to hand the floor to Mehwish who has been doing a lot of work on access ITU and digital rights community. So Mehwish, the floor is yours. 
>> MEHWISH ANSARI: Thank you very much for having me. To answer your first question, perhaps the most fundamental way to think about the public interest in the context of the internet is to think about whether the consideration of the users ‑‑ both individuals and communities ‑‑ are at the center of not just the deployment of internet technologies, but also the design and development of them. Civil society has taken different approaches to this concept. 
At Article 19 my team and I build the human rights framework before design and deployment of internet and infrastructure technologies. Some of the points Ramon makes are really important. Bruna, you asked whether the internet is working on behalf of any public interest concept. 
In answering that, I would like to respond to a slightly different question. Does the design of the internet reflect the public interest? To answer that you need to look at the political economy in which the internet is developed. The development is largely driven by industry at this point with the support of governments under the assumptions of, you know, a capitalist environment. We are not just talking about the U.S. and Europe. We are also talking about more market interventionist states like champion, South Korea, and Japan. 
Some of the very deeply embedded private interests, industry‑driven assumptions present some of the staunchest challenges to the design of the public ‑‑ of a public interest internet. So let's take the example of publicly deployed internet connected infrastructure like smart cities. 
Often these technologies are marketed in terms that sound like the public interest but are technosolutionist like public good or social safety. 
Within civil society we are often talking about these from a point of skepticism because they are enabling the surveillance and datafication of people while claiming to solve inequities in the social infrastructure that pre‑exist the technologies that we deploy. 
It's not a coincidence that you find the tech sector descending on structural societal problems like policing or housing or poverty or education. The simple fact is that marketing something as a fix sells. It undermines the structural work that would actually reflect the public interest. 
This is not to say ‑‑ like Ramon said, there are definitely moments where the public interest and the private interest intersect and even align. But civil society needs to be there in the decision‑making process to be able to question some of the industry‑driven assumptions. 
If we want the internet to be governed in the public interest, one of the key ways to do this is build civil society's intervention in the design and development of internet technologies before we get to the point of deployment. This can be difficult because much of this is completed entirely behind closed doors. But standardization presents a critical opportunity to do that. Standards bodies like the internet engineering task force, the international standards organization, the international telecommunications union, the ITU, the institute for electronics engineers. These are places where civil society should engage. 
While they are driven by industry and governments that want to enable their technologies, we can enter these spaces as civil society to take our public interest approaches to question some of those deeply embedded narratives of technosolutionism, efficiency as the primary value for driving education or the need for technology in all aspects of our lives. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much, Mehwish. Just bridging this conversation, you touched upon points such as the consideration of users being at the very center of the design and deployment of technologies and also a lot of need for us to consider the political economy and the scenario set out behind the development of such technologies. 
Now I will go to someone from the private sector. Graeme, I'm going to hand you the floor to bring our perspectives as well on what has been kind of the principles or definition of public interest that have been shaping your work or the tech sector work with regards to domain names and so on. You have the floor. 
>> GRAEME BUNTON: Thank you, Bruna. Hi, everyone. I'm Graeme. I'm from one of these evil commercial interests seeking to exploit all of you. Really that means I work for a large domain registrar Called Tucows. We have been involved forever, I think. Generally we are a good actor in the space. I think this is an interesting question. Actually unlike me scribbled down some thoughts so apologies if I read. Normally I wing it. 
I think the problem we have in the framing of the question is that we are treating the internet as an monolithic thing and we sort of go off the rails when trying to define public interest because there is so much complexity inherent in the system and anything really on a public interest needs to reflect that complexity. My experience in speaking with regulators, governments and anybody who is not an expert, we tend to lose sight of that and that's a problem. Given that there is an immense competing plurality of ideas of what the purpose of the internet should be, getting to a public interest will be extremely difficult. Where I think we have opportunities is to bring it down or think about it in terms of the layers, the functions of the internet itself and figure out what we want the public interest to be. 
I work for an infrastructure company so I think about the infrastructure of the internet, not necessarily the content layers on top of that. That's a whole separate world of thorny difficult problems. 
So I think the public interest there in that infrastructure layer is that it's robust, resilient, secure, flexible, accessible. You know, it's maximally enabling for people around the world. I think there are opportunities to say that's what we want out of the infrastructure layer of the internet. That's our public interest.
How do we protect it? For me that's been thinking about what I would call DNS or technical abuse of the internet. That's people using domain registrations in my world to exploit the domain name system or exploit the internet to cause harm. I think there are ways into that discussion where we can make definitions of what is harmful, what's against the public interest and figure out the incentives, disincentives to tackling those things. 
I had interesting experiences and I shared them in other sessions about trying to look at harm ‑‑ websites and domains related to COVID. It was a hilarious disaster.
It was next to impossible. My team spent hours looking at something close to 20,000 different websites related to COVID to try to assess things. There was so much diversity there and so much subtly and nuance trying to assess I think we are nowhere near the place for those conversations. 
So maybe if I can try to wrap all of this up, public interest and approaches to it need to reflect the complexity of the system. I think there is real opportunity at the infrastructure layer and what we want it to do. We just need to make sure we are reflecting our approach that the complexity of the problem in the complexity of our approaches. That's maybe where there is a bridge between what I'm saying and what Mehwish ‑‑ I apologize if I brutalized that ‑‑ that's where we are get standards and working with the IETF and others to come together and build approaches we can agree on to make the internet a better place for more people. Thanks. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much, Graeme. Some points you highlighted in your intervention such as agreeing on open ended, accessibility and robustness are starting points for this conversation. Either at the technical community or part of any of the layers related to the internet. 
So this can be definitely a starting point for us to try to convene a common understanding or even try to achieve some sort of agreement between stakeholders. 
I'm going to hand the floor now to Farzaneh. You have four minutes. 
>> Thanks, everybody. I am not representing my employer here. For the sake of saying the obvious public interest is difficult to define. Global public interest is even more difficult to define. Even for difficult when we talk about the internet and global public interest. 
Now public interest is a concept that domestically has been abused by states and other actors to reach their political or other agendas. Some argue that in the developed world since they are democratic you see less of this abuse because there are checks and balances. 
Unfortunately, on the internet some of those checks and balances may not work. For example, if you look at the international organizations and governments at internet corporation for assignings and numbers you see they argue many things are in the public interest. Despite providing no rationale as to why those issues are in a government ‑‑ governments claim they are in public interest and get away with it. We have not been able to challenge these claims and we see more and more policy changes in the name of public interest which we don't even know what it is. 
Sometimes on the internet one country's public interest is another country's public abuse. I'll give you an example. When it comes to sanctions, since many of the registries are based in the U.S. many comply or overcomply with the U.S. sanctions. The U.S. argues that the sanction laws are to protect the U.S. public interest. But the sanction laws are not in the public interest of the normal, nongovernmental, nonblack‑listed residents of nonsanctioned countries because it has a sweeping effect under access to the internet, something we discussed that the infrastructure layer wants to provide, and also various functions of the internet. 
For example, you have the NGO that's being allocated by public interest registry. This registry is set up to ‑‑ and I quote ‑‑ serve the public interest online arguing that their globally diverse team is committed to providing a stable online platform to enable people to do good things, but not all people. 
Of course they don't really mean serving global public interest because they simply can't claim that because in the U.S., there are sanctioned laws that the residents of sanctioned countries cannot register .NGO. There are ways to deal with the problems without some grand international organization or involving one, convening some high level panel to talk in abstract or always putting the governments in charge of that unknown global internet public interest. 
Actually discuss the interest applicable to a globally distributed network, we need to look at the public interest as a globally distributed concept. This means that we need to look at various functions of the internet, how and who conducts them and what sort of public interest issues may rise. The public interest on the internet cannot only be decided by the governments. 
I'm going to say the magic words since I'm sure you have heard it a lot but if we only have a group of governments that tell us what global public interest is on the internet with no checks and balances when you are going to have expansive and broad definition of public interest that frankly wouldn't serve the public interest and would serve the bureaucrats' interest. We have seen the concept of public interest being used and piggybacked on for policies that could potentially harm people and the very public interest they claim to defend. 
One is bringing safety and security to the internet. I can make examples of when private actors aligned with the government argue that they are fighting against bad actors to bring safety and security to the internet. But at the same time they obviously want to protect their private interest through those policies. 
So if you ask the global public interest to raise its hand in this room, we are going to see a lot of functions and elements of the public interest and they are not only in this room. They are distributed all over the internet and, as Graeme says, we need to look at it on the different layers. 
Sometimes what we consider as public interests may not be a public interest. Thank you. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much for your intervention and also highlighting for me some points as well on the relevance of being wary of the various applications of the ‑‑ of what like a global public interest could be and how this can feed into governments taking more awe authoritarian decisions in light of what they deem as a public interest. Thank you very much for the intervention. 
I'm going to hand the floor now to Peter Micek. You also have four minutes. 
>> Thanks, everyone. So I wanted to join this mainly to kind of reflect on this big campaign that access now and many of you and other partners in the space contributed to which was to push back against the proposed sale of control over the public interest registry to private equity firms last year. End of 2019 and the first half of 2020. 
I think we have heard a lot about the complexity and the difficulty in defining public interest which makes it ironic that in this case it was quite clearly the public interest registry that we were trying to save and truly Access Now and many of our partners saw this in very stark terms. This is the home of civil society online, this domain of .org. As we learned throughout the campaign and heard from many of those proposing this deal it's not just NGOs or do‑gooders or something registered on dot‑org but nonetheless we have established the space and built it into an incredibly valuable and rich environment and eco‑system and home for civil society online. 
I think that was reflected in the valuation of the proposed deal to sell control of the public interest registry around $1.1 billion. 
A few things that stuck out to us during this campaign that kicked off at IGF in Paris in November 2019. Dot‑org is one of the few platforms that is available to civil society that we have built up and that, again, isn't controlled by either a private company, profit‑seeking company or a government. 
The internet society has controlled the public interest registry since it was created in 2003 when it was granted control over the dot‑org domain. This is important to us to have this formal stamp of civil society control. Say what you want about any individual organization. But just the fact that you have an entity that's organized legally as a nonprofit and was granted control of this domain under certain terms to protect the public interest it was important to us. Also clearly important to the almost 900 organizations and more than 27,000 individuals who signed on to a letter to save dot‑org. That should be still available online. 
Sea. Second thing is that we see, I think, as other speakers said not just increasing capitalization and privatization of shared internet resources. That's been true since the beginning of the web but the hyper capitalism and extension of walled gardens to almost everything we say and do online is something that creates a lot of vulnerability and kind of an monoculture as we have seen on other panels that's really dangerous. It can allow us to create our weird and wacky websites, put some diversity and permaculture forward. 
Finally, I think we agree there is more that could be done to protect this domain and that's coming out on this panel is that just calling yourself the Public Interest Registry doesn't mean everything you do is in the public interest. So we came up with some of our partner organizations with a few safeguards that we think are necessary to sort of prevent this sort of pulling the regular out from under us again. This proposed sale to unknown entities with a lot of money. But also to protect the public interest. 
They are putting human rights at the center of the operation of this infrastructure, committing to affordable pricing for the domains now and in the future, just locking that in because, again, $1.1 billion evaluation for dot‑org raised questions as to how the money would be recuperated. 
Finally, strengthening governing structures around dot‑org. So it is putting a diverse and representative panel of experts onto the board and ensuring real power for the community. Opens questions as to how we define who is the community, who sits on the board and who is actually going to be sustainably inputting. We think the structures are necessary to create. 
So that was a successful campaign and I think reflected, if nothing else, you know, there is still an active and very large community globally that wants to help protect the public interest online. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much, Peter, for the intervention and for highlighting that there is still a lot to do in safeguarding digital rights and participation and diversity in these spaces. We thank you very the intervention. 
Now we have a space for anyone who is either an attendee or panelist who wishes to raise their hand, bring any new perspectives to this discussion. So if you would like to speak please raise your hand in the chat or the Zoom room and I would be happy to give you the floor. 
In the meantime if any of the panelists wants to reply or has thoughts or ideas of what has been discussed so far, you are also welcome to do so. 
Since I am seeing no hands, Ramon, do you wish to speak? 
>> RAMON ROCA: Yeah. Thanks to the panelists for the points of view and trying to get into ‑‑ we are promoting community networks. So people by themselves. So not from that perspective. I'm talking about the infrastructure. Sometimes it has been said that the internet is complex. Many variety and a lot of complexity on it and so on. 
But at the end of the day it's about thinking and applying common sense and looking holistically. That can seem simple. I want to provide two very simple and hopefully understandable concepts that can be easily addressed, right? 
One is, okay, for bringing the internet we need the infrastructure that has to be built. Typically what's happening is that all of the fundings being used for that companies but not the local communities to build networks for themselves. That's the reality. 
Look, what happens if it goes only in that way. The thing is, okay, we are connecting the people, providing internet through a large company but at the end of the day the behavior of the company is just taking the money of the internet that we have provided to them which is actually a need because people need connectivity and we are extracting the money. What about the economics that at the end of the day are happening? 
We created an extractive tool for making the poor people even more poor than they were before. We created the net and they have to spend. 
It's as simple as saying, okay, what about not just bringing the money to large companies but also to the communities to empower themselves to get connected because maybe technology is complex but it's not that complex. 
For instance, I'm in a rural area and connected with fiber. At the end of the day it's about buying a cable, installing the router. It's something that can be done by the citizens and not just only the large companies. So it is important to create alternatives to that. 
Secondly, a very stupid thing that's also happening against the common sense, against the public interest and often I see that happening through the public administrations. They are managing the public domains and so on. 
There are many infrastructures like power lines, railways where internet is already there with the fibers deployed in those infrastructures. 
When people are trying to access those infrastructures to get connected from their homes, and for getting /ABG Tess to those infrastructures quite often they give you a price, a cost for accessing it. They index the cost to the meters, the distance for accessing public conduits, whatever infrastructure. That's stupid because yes, it's mathematics. That's against common sense. Whoever has a longer distance and fewer population, if you are living in a rural area, it will be more expensive. 
So it makes common sense to average financially the indexing, the pricing for getting access to the internet by simply avoiding and no regulators or very few are looking into that. 
So just a couple of examples how the public money is being given for providing access to the internet and how somebody should look if we are taking care of the public interest. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much. Anriette has her hand up. Would you wish to speak? If not, I can put your questions on the general chat as well. I have promoted you to a panelist. 
In the meantime, I can read Deirdre's comment on the chat which is that we globally need to be aware that our core values, our perspectives and perceptions may not be the same in order to add to the complexity of the discussions we are promoting today. 
I'm going to post also questions on the general chat. So everybody is aware of that. 
>> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN: Maybe the panel can answer Anriette's questions. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Do any other panelists wish to address these questions. Okay. So that's definitely food for thought ‑‑ 
>> I'm sorry. The question was about the core infrastructure? 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Whether or not you think there is such a thing as a public core. 
>> I totally agree we need to come up with a definition of ‑‑ I hate this word definition. It makes everything complicated. We can never reach consensus really. 
But we need to really identify the core public infrastructure which is ‑‑ internet infrastructure, which is global. So these public infrastructures do not have to abide by one jurisdiction or one body of law applies to them. We see this problem not only in the domain name area. But also we see it in the internet regional registries. We see that they are elected country‑specific law can also affect people around the world. Like for example Europe has sanctions against certain countries and then the internet registries, they can bring lawsuits against internet registries to not provide the IP addresses to people in those countries. 
I think we definitely need to have a framework on how we define them and hopefully give them immunity. 
I mean, I know this is ‑‑ really work. But I don't know if the framework or the norms that these commissions or, you know, high level panels come up with are practical or issue‑specific and until now I have not seen an effect. But I think we really need to look at the issues that brings up the public ‑‑ that actually violates public interest globally. Thank you. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much. Another question that's been raised on the chat is that recently it was proposed that we should create parks in relation to private enclosure of the internet to date. 
Also bridging to the second part of our conversation, where we are going to discuss the challenges both your works across the community faces in public interest as a principle or any related principles. I would also like to ask this to our panelists. At first, any kind of ideas surrounding more common open spaces are taken into consideration. 
Also, what challenges are you currently facing and examples of measured proposals and anything else that can help us protect the internet as a common ‑‑ and our almost agreed concept of a public interest. 
So I think I'm going to start with Ramon again and we can follow the same order. 
>> RAMON ROCA: Myself? 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Yes. 
>> RAMON ROCA: Okay. I'm glad to see great common spaces and so on. That's the way to go. If we want to go to public interest participation is a key point. Any way to participate in all the layers. I was referring to the infrastructure previously and citizens, yes, can help their communities to help in building infrastructures and not depend only on the others.
That's a good alternative. 
That could happen also in other layers. I have seen referrals to the DNS, the core of the internet, and many other layers. The way to go, yes, is to democratize everything to be sure everything becomes participative and being sure people get involved in all the layers and being sure not a few layers, just in very few hands in short. That's the point. The policies have to be approached from my point of view. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much, Ramon. Moving on to Mehwish. If you could add anything on the challenges we have been facing recently and also examples of measures and proposals to protect the public interest. 
>> MEHWISH ANSARI: Thank you, Bruna. One of the major challenges that civil society faces at least when we are talking about internet infrastructure decision‑making is just the power asymmetry that exists in the most critical decision‑making spaces, including spaces that are multi stakeholder. 
So when we look at the landscape of bodies that develop technical policies and standards that make up internet infrastructure we see plenty of them that claim to be technically open to civil society. One is financial. Participating in standards development while critical for public interest advocates in general is heavily resource‑intensive. Right? Standards develop over the course of years and require in‑person participation in several meetings per year in addition to intersessional work on mailing lists and spaces like GitHub. That means travel and meeting participation, staff time in between meetings as well. So that's also a consideration that funders need to be aware of when they are providing support to civil society. 
But the other major barrier we see is a knowledge barrier. These are extremely technical spaces that have their own very particular histories, very particular politics. So being effective in them means not only knowing the technologies but the idiosyncrasies and communities that make up the space. This can be difficult for new entrants to hit the ground running which is stressful when you think about the resource scarcity problem we have. 
That's not just for human rights organizations like mine but also for small ISPs, community networks. In terms of responding to the challenges the first step is continuing to build around these. There are a few civil society organizations that work in these spaces that can provide support to new entrants in overcoming the knowledge barrier and connecting them to funders to help with the financial barrier. 
We really need to do a much better job of bringing global representatives into these spaces. Right now, even the civil society advocacy that is present in these spaces, although small is dominated by global north perspectives and we really risk perpetuating the same monoculture in our sector as we bring that up. 
That's something we need to address in terms of the power differentials that exist and how easy it is for global north organizations to get funding versus global south organizations. How we can champion our allies. Speaking as somebody who works for a global north organization I think that's really important. 
The other way is working with ‑‑ more on the public side. Those who aligned themselves with internet freedom agendas and the idea of a public interest internet present a critical opportunity here. These governments are often civil society funders through ministries of foreign affairs and departments of state. They can create funding opportunities that provide civil society ‑‑ that can support civil society interventions in these spaces, but these governments can also provide pathways to support the participation of civil society in intergovernmental standard spaces which remain the least multi‑stakeholder and the most closed off to civil society participation. These are standard spaces like the ITU and the ISO and governments can allow civil society to join government delegations to these standard meetings, for example. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much, Mehwish. Graeme, for a civil society as both Mehwish highlighted Andrea moan highlighted some parts of it, power imbalances in these spaces and allowing for more participation and for other stakeholders to understand the layers and intricacies of the actors as well as s an issue and also a challenge for us. 
Moving to another stakeholder, what would be the challenges you would see or like to point out in this and also examples of measures and proposals?
 
>> GRAEME BUNTON: Thanks, Bruna. You know, the resourcing issue is interesting. I spent four years as elected chair of the registrar stakeholder group inside of ICAN which represents all ICAN accredited domain registrars. 
Really exposed to the diversity of that group and was part of my mandate was to encourage diversity in the group, get more voices from more places to participate in the policy development process. Boy, was that a really interesting challenge? You know, huge language issues there. You know, there is a sense that a lot of commercial players in the internet are these giant mega corps and there are lots of those. My company is sort of medium‑sized now. We have grown a lot over the past few years, but we are not huge. We're the second largest domain registrar in the world and it really wasn't until the past year, 18 months before we really dedicated someone to policy issues full time. 
It's really only in the last two years that any company other than Go Daddy within the registrar space had a full‑time policy person. The vast majority of /TKPHAO*EUPB domain registrars trying to engage in the space, it was just a small portion of one person's time. These are small shops with two or three people trying to engage even for them as commercial entities in standards‑building, policy development at ICAN is extremely expensive, time‑consuming and they don't have resources for it either. It's a problem that it's narrowed not just to commercial entities ‑‑ a small number of commercial entities. We need to solve that problem, too. 
You know, I don't have any great ideas on how to solve this huge array of problems in front of us in protecting the global public interest. I think whether we like it or not, the internet is built on commerce. It's commercial entities all the way essentially top to bottom. My experience with governments is they tend to be bad actors in a lot of circumstances, even the good ones. I'm Canadian but we have lots of garbage legislation floating around that causes me deep concerns. I don't have great ways to provide spaces that are not impacted by commercial interests. With my early intervention about separating into layers.
Figure out for a particular layer. I'm thinking a lot about incentivization programs so we can reduce that type of technical harm on the internet. It will be registries and registrars causing people harm. I think there are interesting solutions that can be done that are narrow and tailored to solve specific problems. That may be a reasonable way forward instead of thinking of the grand scope with the problems with the commercial internet and a global public interest is like let's pick a layer, look at the low‑hanging fruit and start working our way upwards.
Thanks. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much, Graeme. Interesting point as well especially on the idea of us all compromising on behalf of keeping it as open as it is. Moving on I'll go to Farzaneh for the same question. Challenges and opportunities and proposals. You have the floor. 
>> I think I said a lot of challenges. I'm not in my most optimistic mood. 
I agree with Graeme that we need to really look at the public interest on the internet at a granular level. If we look at it ‑‑ if we don't then we are just going to miss a lot of issues that are real public interest issues and we'll be left with norms and I think norms are very important, but norms that cannot be enforced are not effective. 
Also what we need to do is move away from giving the states or the governments mandates to come up with this definition or what global interest is or what they think ‑‑ who can identify the global public interest. I think that the /SHAEULDs should be able to do that. But as I said, there are difficulties with that. Sometimes like stakeholders have conflicts among each other what is a public interest and what is not a public interest. It can be, as I said, it can be abuse. 
But I think ultimately we need to look at the various functions of the internet. How the internet comes together and consider its distributed nature and look at ‑‑ then we will not miss part of the public interest that could be violated in some part of the internet. Also when we discuss about stakeholder participation, civil society participation it is not only about participation. Because we see that we come up with a lot of policies that we think in a multi‑stakeholder fashion and then there is a comity there that can just say, well, no. I need you to change these things. 
So it's not only about participation. It is also about empowering them. And multi stakeholder approach is not the answer. Not all the time the answer. And we can discuss this having two, three stakeholders or I don't know. But I don't think that we can have just the government to come up with the public interest for the global internet. 
>> BRUNA SANTOS: Thank you very much, Farzi. Also for highlighting it is not only about civil society participation but also about a meaningful one. Lastly, I'm going to hand the floor back to Peter. Peter, again, same question. If you have any comments on that. The floor is yours. 
>> Thanks. Super thoughtful stuff. I think one thing we try to do in the dot‑org campaign was to get people to conceive of this domain as online civic space. 
I see talk in the chat about creating online parks or dedicated public interest spaces. I think there are issues with that. In the U.S. at a public park you could say just about anything you want so long as it follows certain time, place, and manner guidelines. I think it would be interesting to see it play out online. But, again, this campaign showed there is huge and broad, active communities that are willing to fight for what they see as a public interest. 
Concept of the public core is useful because, again, if we get rough consensus around what maybe one piece of the public core might be and then we can ‑‑ I think we can create broad coalitions to protect that. 
So I think the two main campaigns that Access Now runs against internet shutdowns and intentional disruptions. Then on the digital ID and access restrictions, both get at aspects of what it means to be a human and enjoy your human rights and do so online as offline. 
I think the more that we can kind of identify these key threshold issues like just the ability to access affordably, openly and securely one piece of the internet is something we can protect in some way as we can.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-ws254-the-interaction-of-platform-content-moderation-geopolitics^^

 
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Thank you, Secretariat.  Welcome, everybody to workshop 254, "The Interaction of Platform Content Moderation and Geopolitics."
My name is Jyoti Panday, with the Georgia Tech School.  We have Internet Governance challenges at the IGF and elsewhere.  The goal of this workshop is to deepen the content moderation at the intersection of state and private power and for the knowledge sharing around content moderation in different jurisdictions.  Representatives from technology companies and civil society to discuss new ideas for introducing transparency and content moderation policies.
In January of 2020, Soleimani, he was a commander and a member of IRGC which has been designated a terrorist organization by US, Saudi Arabia, and others.  There was strong reaction and millions of individuals and organizations to share the views about the killing.  With an estimated 24 million active users and as one of the few western built social media apps not banned from the government, Instagram is an important communication tool in Iran.
In the days following the enter, accounts of Iranian newspapers, news agencies, at least 15 Iranian journalists and several human rights activists and celebrities were censored or suspended by Instagram.  The parent company, Facebook clarified that it removed commending or supporting groups labeled foreign terrorist organizations by the US State Department.  Although the company later restored some profiles, posts containing informational references about Soleimani's death were deleted permanently.  The story of Instagram around Soleimani's killing demonstrates several things with Internet platforms and user speech rights.  There's dependence on platforms like Facebook and Twitter which serve as the online public square.
It shows how platforms like Instagram have unprecedented capacity to monitor and regulate individual expression, as demonstrated in the censorship of posts published by media professionals and unaffiliated users.  Facebook's decision to go beyond US terrorist sanctions listed highlights the tensions that can arise when balancing standards defined and enforced within platforms with global standards or those agreed by the industry.  As more and more of the social interaction moves online and given the role that private entities have in deciding what narratives are available in the public discourse, it's crucial that we examine the content moderation practices of platforms.  Platforms cannot be ‑‑ cannot claim to be neutral arbiter without considering the broader significant application of their actions.
Whether we consider action by Facebook and Twitter against accounts, allegedly backed by the Chinese government to spread disinformation on Hong Kong protests, or recent action by the Vietnamese government where Facebook's local servers in Vietnam were taken offline earlier this year, slowing local traffic to a crawl, until Facebook agreed to significantly increase the anti-state force for local users, or we consider Facebook's informal agreement with the Israeli government to work together to address incitement on its platform.  It is increasingly apparent that transnational social media companies that are not elected bodies are emerging as an influential force in international and geopolitical affairs.
Platform content moderation standard, business practices and the relationship with nation states effectively arbitrate which narratives can reach the global public, while content moderation are essential functions of a platform's business, policies and practices of global platforms carry with them the capacity to deshape the dynamics of the public discourse and also changing the way political power can be organized and exercised across borders.
In the absence of transparency and accountability, the rules and the procedures for content moderation established and enforced by private platforms pose a threat to democratic culture as they can severely limit participation and impact the individual use of platform users particularly minority groups and marginalized communities at risk.
This workshop will examine how platforms content moderation standard are reconfiguring the responsibility, accountability and power in societies.  Our focus on content moderation, slices go through the claims of neutrality and deserving certain legal rights and obligations.  It allows us to understand how platforms can uphold consistent policies in the face of competing societal expectations, different experiences, cultures, or value systems.
By understanding moderation as a fundamental aspect of a platform service, we can ask new questions about the power and society.
This workshop seeks to deep dive into one specific aspect of content moderation, uneven enforcement of community standards.  Panelists will examine content moderation practices to highlight how constantly evolving standards and guidelines can contribute to differential treatment of similar content on platforms.  The aim of the discussion is to draw attention to how inconsistency of enforcement of content moderation standards can reinforcement existing power disparities.  Uneven enforcement can lead platforms to become a proxy battle in which disputing narratives and activities emerge and collide, and content removal and account suspensions, lack of procedural transparency, algorithmic bias, and it contributes to eroding trust of users on both side of these opposing narratives.
To better understand these issues, we bring together experts and regional perspective examine how platforms, content moderation standards are reconfiguring the responsibility, accountability and power.  Since we have 90 minutes we have structured the discussion in three parts.  I will open the discussion by opening up with a round of questions.  We will follow this with panelists reactions on questions posed by me, and we will follow that with Q&A from the audience.
I encourage attendees to use the chat to discuss as we move along but please use the Q&A to discuss questions for the panelists.  I would like to introduce Pratik Sinha who is the founder of Alt News, what has been your experience of moderation of problematic content and behavior on platforms run by large social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter? 
>> PRATIK SINHA: Hello.  Thank you for having me here.  As a fact checker and watching what is going on in the US, and places like Facebook and Twitter monitoring what Mr. Trump says, and nothing like that happening here.  Basically, what people in India ‑‑ and I'm speaking on behalf of the fact checking community.  What we feel is that that ‑‑ you know, the countries like India, Pakistan, Bangladesh are not a priority for companies like Facebook, Google and Twitter.  And this is a point that we have raised again and again.
US being the home country for Facebook, Google and Twitter, that country remains a priority, while similar issues that arise in India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh are not taken care of.
Basically, what happens is that ‑‑ and there's also very narrow world view.  I want to start with quoting a speech of Mark Zuckerberg.  He was speaking to NBC where the issue of political fact checking came into picture, you know?  Facebook said that they are going to fact check politicians.  His response was the decision to not fact check politicians comes from the point of view that politicians are already overly scrutinized, and that is where the basic problem lies.
You know, there are people who are going into and heading these organizations they have a very narrow world view.  To make a statement that politicians are already overly scrutinized is ‑‑ you know, disregarding what is happening in countries where there is not much freedom, press freedom.
In India, hardly any of the mainstream media news organizations, whether it's on TV or print, they ‑‑ you know, they don't fact check politicians, especially not the Prime Minister or the home minister, who are the most powerful sort of ‑‑ politically the most powerful people in the country.  It comes from a very narrow worldview.  I can say that for many countries.  There's similar issues of press freedom, Pakistan, Bangladesh, et cetera.
So you know, the problem starts at policy level, where the people who are making policies in these organizations ‑‑ and I don't want to sort of just talk about Facebook.  This is something that Zuckerberg stated in an interview, and sort of, you know, showed his ignorance about, you know, how world politics works, but the issue is not just with the Facebook.  The issue is across Facebook, Twitter and Google where they don't seem to understand what is the impact that hate speech and misinformation can have on countries which have limited press freedom, which have governments which have authoritarian tendencies, where the media steps back and then it is the civil society which steps in and then there's this huge amount of propaganda that is launched against civil society activists without the social medias stepping to control the data.  Not only from the point of view of a fact check and somebody who is working on both misinformation and hate speech, what happens is that politicians first created a divisive environment through misinformation and hate speech.
The platforms either don't act in the case of hate speech ‑‑ for example, the latest example of the former White House advisor who called for beheading of two US officials and Facebook decided not to take down his page.
Now, that is something that would be discussed in the US, because it is, you know, Mr. Bannon calling for beheading.  But similar things that happen in India won't even be discussed.  Things happen in India apparently are of not that much value.
And these people will not be censored.  And when we fact check them ‑‑ let's say, a very recent case of a minister in the Indian state of Assam, he claimed that certain people in opposition, raised slogans of Pakistan ‑‑ kill Pakistan.  It's called Pakistan's endeavor.  It's equal to hail Pakistan.  We fact checked it.  Facebook put a tag and then took it away and saying we don't fact check politicians.
The first organization to fact check was Alt News and the other is Boone Live which is a Facebook fact checking partner.  And when you ‑‑ when you talk about, you know, people, these two organizations who have limited reach and none of the mainstream media fact checked it.  People think that, you know this actually happened and that ‑‑ that, you know, there were some people who ‑‑ you know this is a party which has majority of backers from the ‑‑ from Muslims as the majority of the backers.  And they are the ones raising slogans in favor of Pakistan and they are quote/unquote internationals.
This is how it plays out.  If your view of politics is one that is sitting in Palo Alto or wherever these policymakers are sitting and there's not enough of a local view coming in as to how their decisions impact the democracy in different countries, then we are, you know ‑‑ we are getting in the situation where, you know, countries like India are going from bad to worse.
And, you know, right now ‑‑ just now, the election in called Bihar got over.  Bihar has one‑third the population as the US.  But there were these Facebook ‑‑ Facebook and Twitter went out of their way to ensure that, you know, the impact ‑‑ I'm not saying that they did a good job but at least there was an attempt to ensure that, you know, there's less impact of misinformation, but at the same point in time, a chief minister in ‑‑ went ahead and gave a speech in Bihar, he stated in his speech that those who have inter‑religion marriages and his claim is that a lot of those are sort of propaganda, as in a lot of those are not genuine relationships.  If they indulge in that, then he used a phrase that ‑‑ (Speaking native tongue).
We will make sure that they are killed.  It's a euphemism for killing someone.
And something like that happens and nobody even talks about it.  And they continue to have his page and broadcast things.  It's a law and order issue as well.  I'm not denying that India has a political issue, and not everything can be handled by platforms, but platforms also ‑‑ but platforms have increased responsibilities in countries which are, you know, going towards authoritarian tendencies.
Yes, those are my initial comments.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Thank you.  We have Varun from Facebook.  I'm sure he will want to raise some issues that you raised.  But before we get to Varun, I would like to introduce Ms. Marianne, Diaz with Derechos Digitales.  Deferring to local context, is what Pratik pointed out, do you see similar situations playing out where you work?
>> MARIANNE DIAZ: Yeah, I actually want to start by echoing one of the main points that Pratik said, which is that we don't feel like a priority.  We are not a priority for these platforms and particularly from Latin America standpoint, what I have found as a researcher, is that there is ‑‑ that there are both issues of over moderation and under moderation.  And there's discourse, for instance, that has been taken down because somewhere else, for instance, let's ‑‑ certain language is considered a slur.
But in the conversation, in the context of this happening, it is just a friendly conversation.  It happens a lot ‑‑ I'm from Venezuela, and certain language that is ordinarily everyday use in Venezuela, can be considered a slur in Spain, for instance, but this is a conversation happening between both Venezuelans.  And so there's no reason for accounts to be suspended even, which happens like every week to friends of mine, and they are talking to me.
That's one thing.  On the other hand, we have on the moderation, which is like ‑‑ in the broader perspective, is a way bigger issue.  We can't really flag content for misinformation from Latin America, because that's like a US priority.  That's for US elections.  Actually the hashtag ‑‑ even somebody may have noticed this.  The hashtag is elections 2020.  It's like it's the only elections happening this year.
And I'm working ‑‑ one.  Products I'm currently working on is monitoring social media content regarding the upcoming Venezuelan elections.  I will use the world "elections."  Not really, but okay.
One of the things they have said to us at platforms is that they can't fact check content that we bring to them, because even the ‑‑ while passing through this filter, like we are researchers for this work, and they can't really fact check content from Latin America or most ‑‑ or from anywhere else than the five key countries because they don't have the capabilities.
And Pratik was saying that this starts from policy level.  For me, I believe that this is mainly an economic issue.  And when I say it's an economic issue, I say that this responds to the economic model of the platforms.  The platforms are trying to look for a certain homeostasis in the platform, which requires that enough content is left there for people to engage, but also that some content is taken down, even though it should be protected by freedom of speech standards, just because it makes people uncomfortable.
And these response to just the ability to have the larger number of users engaging in the platform at a given time.  The fact that this response to economic driven incentives and not to freedom of speech standards or human rights standards in general is causing main of these issues.
So when you have that tied to the fact that these places that are private places are performing a public service function, like, they are ‑‑ they are acting as public places, like, they are ‑‑ they are performing functions that are usually just like a square town and then ‑‑ and this is our private spaces but they cannot be entirely related as private spaces.  Because if we allow that to happen, then this economic model is going to basically just shape the policies.  And so it is before ‑‑ just one or two steps before we get the policies, we have to think, like, why are these policies in place.
And so for a place like Twitter ‑‑ I'm very focused on Twitter because I'm very focused on Venezuela, Twitter is big in Venezuela.  Misinformation is rampant for other issues and it's unbelievable that I can, for instance, flag as misinformation something regarding the COVID, that is a global issue.  It's not a Venezuelan or Chilean or Brazilian issue, but it should be allowed because these platforms are not national level.  This is global.  It's really ‑‑ it can be really hard to really distinguish where specific content is coming from.  It's a global Latin America form.  It just gets retweeted and shared and information comes and goes.
And then they try to actually apply these policies in that way.
And so what I think is that while the economic model for these platforms remains the same, these issues are going to remain no matter how much we change the terms and the conditions, and no matter how much we speak with the platforms to shape policies in a different way.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Thanks, Marianne.  We will touch, you know, on the issue of the lack of local resources in more detail as the conversation moves forward.
But it's interesting that you pointed out that when platforms are ‑‑ you know, take the hands off and say that we can't intervene, then governments can step in and we are increasingly seeing governments seeking to regulate platforms and Germany being, you know, a country that has introduced a whole wave of legislation or is considering introducing legislation and we are very glad to have Amelie Pia Heldt who is a researcher with the Hans Bredow Institute.  Hi, Amelie, has the intervention by the German government to enhance users against hate speech and provide more clarity on the way platforms handle and moderate unlawful content been successful in your opinion?  What is your assessment? 
>> AMELIE PIA HELDT: Thank you very much.  Thanks for having me.  I think what I meant to say here as an introduction will resonate pretty much with what has already been said before.  So if we look at how the regulatory context actually shapes content moderation, I would say it's ‑‑ it's really decisive in that most of these companies coming from Silicon Valley, we have a very US‑centric approach, and that goes back to constitutional rights or just the ‑‑ you want to look at the first amendment, and the fact that in the US, Congress is not allowed to regulate speech or at least not content based.
And this model has been exported and is ‑‑ or at least what we see in the comparison with Europe, is that first of all, we have speech restricting laws coming from criminal law.  The second thing is the separation of private and public actors or state actors.  There's the same separation here, but private actors can become sort of the functional equivalent of state actors in certain ‑‑ in certain situations.  And that would also lead to this horizontal effect of freedom of expression, which might be applicable between place forms and their users, actually.
So I think that the regulation or ‑‑ there's sort of a push back to this first amendment centric policies, and then ‑‑ and so the first is probably ‑‑ or what I can talk about more satellite formal part is the EU pushing back with laws or more regulations and the very first from Germany, because Germany adopted in summer of 2017, this law Network Enforcement Act, NetzDG, which makes it mandatory for companies to ‑‑ or platforms to actually have a complaint tool for users to flag content that would be forbidden under the law.
They also need to remove unlawful content within 24 hours and they have to publish transparency reports twice a year.
Now, how effective has this law been actually in the past two years?  I'm pretty skeptical, because we still are lacking data in the sense that we know how much has been removed according to the law.  But we actually don't know how much of ‑‑ say, you take incitement to violence.  We don't know when Facebook or any of those companies actually say in their transparency reports the next ‑‑ I really mean the NetzDG reports, not the general ones that they removed X cases because of incitement to violence.  We don't know if it's ‑‑ these cases would have also been removed under community standards.
So there's no way for us to know how much influence the laws had on the community standards and therefore, I mean, Facebook also sort of tried to ‑‑ well, not apply the law because they sort of hid their ‑‑ this complaint tool according to NetzDG with the legal information of the ‑‑ of the platform, so users couldn't ‑‑ haven't have easy access to that.
Which ended up with Facebook having, I think like 500 cases first half year, which was ridiculous.
Obviously, they still remove content if it's incitement to violence, but if they do, it's under the community standard.  Does the law have any effect or not?  One positive thing, I guess is that Facebook has way more ‑‑ or the platforms have way more content monitors and people who are trained to actually look at German laws and know if there is an infringement of German law.
Now, this goes back to this whole question of which part of the world is important enough in their eyes to have content moderators that are capable of actually checking if there has been a breach of the law.  And that's something where, I guess, investing in more content moderation or ‑‑ in moderators that are trained, that know cultural differences and also legal differences plays a big, big role in this conversation.
And it's an investment that I guess not everyone is ready to make.
And that would require, I guess ‑‑ so content moderation has been more of a topic in the past years because we know more about how the moderation works, about who are the moderators and where do they work, and that their work is probably like the ‑‑ the cheapest workforce in those companies.
But if you actually see that as a service, as something that users actually value to know what type of content this is, why they see it, is it something that has been fact checked or not, this brings ‑‑ this brings another value to the platform, I would say.
So going back to the NetzDG, the evaluation is not really helpful, I would say.  There's April amendment now that is waiting to ‑‑ or that will probably be adopted soon.  It also ‑‑ so it increases the transparency.  The transparency obligations for platforms.
Unfortunately ‑‑ and that's a final remark.  Mat forms will now have to disclose to which extent they shared their information with research, and I think it would have been a good moment to actually insert a sort of rights or access to data for research that would have been really helpful in ‑‑ because more research just makes better ‑‑ or more data makes better research and it would actually help regulators to make better informed laws in a sense.
So that's from Germany or from Europe.
And we see that now with the digital services act coming up next month.  So, yeah.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Thank you for raising so many important issues.
We had ‑‑ I think over the past few years, we have seen increasing, you know, attention being given to the role of human content moderators, with scholars like Sarah Roberts conducting extensive research to bring, you know, the conditions actually to the public's understanding.  But we also see simultaneously, you also talked about research and the importance of having access to data to understand the impact of these policies.  And this are have been some recent controversies where Facebook has attempted to ‑‑ I don't want this panel to pick on Facebook as a platform, but in terms of the scale and its influence, you know, there are very few platforms that match up.
So in terms of, you know, platforms taking back control over their datasets is a constant issue that keeps coming up and I'm sure we will discuss this more.  Varun, since you are here as a representative of a platform, do you want to talk about, you know, some of the challenges of enforcing content moderation decisions.  How is Facebook tackling moderation on platforms like WhatsApp that don't have community standards, for example?  What is the role of local resources when you are drafting policies or when you are enforcing them?  The floor is yours.
>> VARUN REDDY: A lot of important points raised by the panelists here.  Thank you so much for having me.  I will focus my initial intervention on transparency around enforcement of the Facebook content policies and standards and also touch upon briefly about how we work in the local context into both policy development, as well as enforcement.
As you know, Facebook services more than 2 billion people around the world, to express freely on the platform in multi languages and cultures and countries.  We want to ensure a platform that is safe and makes people feel empowered what is important to them.  To enable this, we take a role to prevent our key abuse of the platform, quite seriously.  We developed community standards.  These standards take into mind what is and is not part of the platform and panelists are familiar with these standards.
These standards are not developed in a vacuum.  We speak to experts and work inside the company and outside the company as well.  Experts in fields US as law, human rights, public safety and technology.
And we not ‑‑ we don't consult experts on just one country or one region.  We reach out to people with limited expertise around the world.  We have a stakeholder engagement team that speaks to these experts as necessary.
This also reflects in the localization that goes within these one set of global standards.  For example, within India, I'm focusing on India because Pratik sort of mentioned that probably Facebook doesn't care about countries in India like India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
If you look at Facebook's hate speech policy, three years ago, they had protective characteristics.  These include race, nationality, ethnicity, you know, a few of the characteristics on those lines, demographic where people have made it difficult to change.  We heard consistent feedback from our community and from stakeholders within India that caste an important aspect of hate speech in India.  And so we have experts who are on caste and activists working that space to understand the issue and include caste been Facebook's hate speech.  And that's how we build it into the seemingly one set of global standard.
And Marianne brought up the important topic of slur, how the same slur can be positive ‑‑ in one country, but be very derogatory in some other country.  And also the usage of slur itself can have different meanings.  For example, certain words have been claimed.  Dyke is a word that is reclaimed and there are other words that are constantly reclaimed and then new meanings of ‑‑ new meanings emerge for those words over time.
So we keep ‑‑ we keep an eye on this.  We attract these transport on the platform and experts on the ground and then work those into our policies.  We have slurs for different countries and different languages.
The challenge comes in when we're looking at enforcement.  Often when we enforce, we are limited by context.  We can only factor in the specific piece of content or, in all the context in which that word has been used within a post or a comment.
That then introduces its own challenges in terms of understanding, you know, is this positive ‑‑ was this slur used in a positive context or a negative context?  If it's clear, yes, we do go ahead and enforce, according to the policy.  And if it's unclear, then certain sometimes we default to safety and remove content and certain times we default the speech depending on the slur and the context.
Enforcement also is done not by someone sitting in the US and no the having any context about India or, you know, or not having any language skills.  We have over 35,000 people who work on safety and security of users on the platform.  And these teams are based in offices around the world.  They speak over 50 languages and they are equipped with the tools and trainings to enforce the policies objectively and consistently.  And we have algorithms to, you know, check the quality of these enforcement.
And we rely heavily on AI systems and machine learning systems and they do come with their own challenges because, you know, there's certain things that machines are quite good at detecting, nudity, graphic violence, machines can do an excellent job, probably better jobs than humans according to the policy.  But when it comes to hate speech, bullying and harassment, machine learning can only go so far because context plays an important role.
And this is where humans come into the system or how we have a unified set of standards.  Over and above this, there have also been ‑‑ Amelie made an important point about ‑‑ in a sense, I take it was a backhanded compliment when she mentioned, you know, it's not quite clear whether Facebook is enforcing the law or taking down the content in the community standards.
It shows that law and our community standards don't need to be, you know, adversary.  They can work synergistically.  There are several content that's harmful and there's no date about that.  We don't have a quarrel.  And I also go back and talk about Marianne's point about economic incentives not being aligned with the need to take down harmful content on the platform.
That's something that I agree with.  That's not something I have seen within Facebook.  It's within our interest to ensure a safe and, you know, welcoming environment for our users to come on the platform and engage and share what's most important for them.
We have seen that when this hate toxicity and there's other kinds of harmful content.  It doesn't enable them to bill communities and empower them.  It's not true where ‑‑ that, you know, the incentives stop us from going off bad content.  Economic incentives apart from doing the right thing, it also takes down harmful content.
So there are these synergies that can be done between local law and the regulation and the platform policies.
And if we have taken down content under our own policies without having to invoke or rely on the German law, then that's a testament that we do take removing harmful content on the platform quite seriously and our community standards often go above and beyond many local law requirements.
For example, bullying and harassment, no country's legislation defines bullying and harassment in granular a manner as Facebook's policies do.  And I can point to several different policies where there are ‑‑ Facebook's policy far outpace any local law in any country given the restriction.  These are the points I wanted to make.
The one last point, sort of the underlying tension is we don't know what Facebook is doing.  We don't know what their motives are.  We don't know what the systems are.
I would like to draw this panel's attention to the fact ‑‑ to all the transparency initiatives we have taken over the years.  One the first transparency measures was publishing user data.  This goes back to 2013.  Since then we published and updated these numbers twice every year.  By the initial focus was only on government‑requested user data.  We since then expanded this report to include data related to volume of content restrictions based on local law, the intellectual property rights infringement and we also started putting out numbers related to community standards enforcement.
And we have been updating these numbers twice a year and since August 2020, we have committed to producing quarterly reports.  So over the years we only increased the transparency as we built up our systems and figure out what is the best information to people out there and the most useful information to put out.
The other metric that I would like to draw this group's attention when we talked about the community standards enforcement report, transparency in that area, we were releasing numbers related to just six policies only on Facebook.  The latest report has numbers related to 12 policies on Facebook and 10 on Instagram.  So we are constantly increasing the metrics that we are publishing and being transparent about as we affect the systems at the back end and we have these metrics in consistent manner.
We have law, governance, economics and sort of ‑‑ to look into the metrics we were releasing, advisors whether we were on the right path or not, because when you are putting out numbers, they probably won't be useful if you are not putting the right kind of metrics if you are not putting the will accurate metrics.  So this expert group ‑‑ the different expert group went into our disclosure reports and sort of came back with a second recommendation and they were not on the right path, and they have asked us to include data on content by users.  We have included that in our latest reports.
And we have also committed beyond getting this expert panel to sort of advise us if we were on the right track and if we were disclosing meaningful metrics.  We also committed to having our numbers audited by an independent auditors and we hope to, you know, finish this process and have them on board sometime next year and then share those results once they finished their audit.
So these are transparency measures that we will be building over the years and we continue to push the envelope and be, you know, be the industry leader in terms of explaining what we do to keep the platform safe, both to the general public, as well as the regulators and the civil society stakeholders are here.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Thank you.  That was a pretty useful overview.  I hope at some point you will touch upon WhatsApp and encrypted systems and private groups and how are these community standards and transparency standards, you know, applied to, you know, less open communication channels that Facebook controls.
But moving on to our next panelist, I'm excited to introduce Professor Tarleton Gillespie with Facebook and with the department of information science at Cornell University.  Professor Gillespie is not only mentioned in almost every paper research on content moderation that I have come across in my career and the author of the influential book "students online."
Welcome, professor.  As someone who has been tracking the evolution of content moderation for many years now, what are some of the broader challenges around transparency, accountability and access to information regarding the operations of the biggest Internet platforms?
Another question I hope that you will reflect on is how does the growing secularization of Internet speech, terrorism, elections impact the state of online speech.
>> TARLETON GILLESPIE: Thank you so much.  I'm really honored to be a part of this conversation and I have been paying attention to this for a while, but it's so helpful to get to hear about this perspective from many different places in the world.  It's one of the failings that we know platforms have struggled with and it's one of the failings that scholarship and policy struggle with.  So thank you for organizing.  This.
There are sort of three points I will make and one I will go quickly through because it echoes one of the things that was said before.  The first thing that I think is important to remember, the platforms are in their adolescents and I don't mean that in any way to excuse what I mean as continued missteps.
What I mean is to say that the kinds of things that we are asking about, both asking of platforms and struggling with, I think are the kind of things if we look at the history of the modern journalism industry, it's taken 200 years to sort out these issues and we haven't finished.  It's a reminder that these things move slowly, and it's what helps me kind of reconcile the points that I hear so far, on the one hand the concern that we heard Pratik say, which I completely degree with, that the large platforms don't take serious the communities far from the US, the specific political needs and what Varun was saying about what Facebook is doing in response to this.
The worldviews that Pratik was talking are long standing and they take a long time to change that.  Means that we need to push them to change, right?
But, you know, with we hear, like, that Facebook is now thinking about caste as a vector through which there could be hate speech and inequity, you know on the one hand, that's terrific.  I'm is glad that's there and some way Facebook is leading among some of its colleagues to address that.
To say that a social media platform has been in India for more than a decade and learning that now is kind of an astounding reminder that those worldviews upon which these platforms start are incredibly persistent, right?  That that is sort of shocking and not surprising that it would take that long to get to that.
But it's important here and I want to echo something Jyoti, that we focus on Facebook and I'm glad that Varun is here to answer for Facebook.  We have to think more broadly.  If we have to think about what type of policies should exit and you are going to ask the questions that you are asking with this panel, which is what kinds of problems happen when platforms and states partner up or political pressure is exerted.
You know, in some ways while Facebook is an important object for us to consider and YouTube and Twitter and TikTok and a handful of the ones that we that you can about all the time.  We have to think carefully about how these arrangements and problems apply to the next platform, the smaller platform.  We have to think about how they apply to web hosting and cloud computing and ‑‑ like you are pointing, encrypted personal networks.  Each of these raise the problem differently, but also because the next company that doesn't have the sort of ‑‑ the political sort of impact of Facebook or YouTube and Twitter and doesn't have the resources and even the history of having thought about this will be even less prepared for the political pressure that can come or the problems that will spike in a country that they have just not conceived of well.
So the first point is that platforms are in their adolescents and this is an incredibly difficult question.  We can see that we have over moderation, and under moderation.  We have concerns about what is happening because the platform chooses to moderate and what is happening because the platform is obligated to moderate.
We know there are concerns for what happens when humans do the moderating and when the software does the moderating and we talk about a few platforms when really we have to think about many.
The second point I will move quickly through because it's been said clearly and very well by the other panelists.  These platforms that we're concerned about now began in the US, and began with an American political framework as their ground.  And let's add maybe sort of like optimistic or youthful version of the American sensibilities.  So the idea of ‑‑ that these are sort of spaces that if the platform gets out of the way the enthusiasm of web users will produce fantastic conversation is ‑‑ is lovely, but sort of painfully naive.  And it's taken a long time to ‑‑ to not only recognize that even ‑‑ even in the best conditions and even in the American conditions that's an optimistic view, but that  was deeply unprepared to understand how these services would play in different cultures in conflict environments, in places with different sort of political tensions, racial tensions, what have you.
And it also means that some of the things that the platforms did early to think about their obligations around political violence or terrorism were structured around the things that the US was focused on early on.  So very focused open Al Qaeda and ISIS, and not understanding a whole array of forms of political violence and extremism that we need to worry about.
Even in the face of kind of clear international missteps, you can point to Myanmar, and you can point to manipulation coming out of Russia and other places.  I think even in the US, the platforms are only beginning to really change their perspective and I agree when Pratik brought up the question of how platforms address, you know, the president of the United States and this is how the platforms think of themselves as being against the pressures of political leaders.  That's a very new thought for them.
It shows for how long the platforms have thought about the bad behaviors they had to deal with was imagined to be trolls.  It was imagined to be misogynistic harassers and spammers and maybe foreign interests and that's the US‑centric way to think about, it but a fundamental belief that users were acting authentically.  I think that was a persistent notion.  That was not just American but it emerged out of early dreams of web.  And it's made it very hard to recognize that even sort of public figures might want to misuse the platform, if that's even what I to describe it as.
Here's the third point I wanted to make because I haven't heard it yet and I want to add it to the mix.
You know, we know that content moderation over the last 10 or 15 years at these platforms has grown in scale and complexity, in part because the platforms are trying to respond to the immense scope that they have ‑‑ that they have engaged in.  And one of the things that's happened for the biggest platforms that we are talking about is a kind of move towards an industrial approach to moderation, right?  Tens of thousands of moderators, software running constantly, overseen by a policy team that mostly deals with rule changes and emerging problems, and public backlash, but that the front‑line moderators and the identification software is doing a lot of the work.
But, of course, even in those places those teams continue to handle certain people and certain cases to make direct decisions like President Trump is an easy example in the US, but there's certain kinds of users and kinds of content that still rise to a more ad hoc assessment, right?
So either cases that get escalated or cases that are highly sensitive and demonstrably problematic and in the midst of a controversy and the public.  So it's not as if we use the US president as an example, it's not as if the front‑line moderators at a team in Hyderabad, they are not being thought about.  They are being thought about in‑house.
And that gap between how platforms moderate the many and how platforms moderate the few, I think, has been growing as a gap.  And while this group will care a lot about what that means for political figures, I think in a lot of ways, that gap developed more about influential content producers, right?  So the way YouTube thinks about it is not what do we do about any old person who posts a video that might be against our rules and then President Trump.
What they think about is like hundred people who bring in millions and millions of dollars.  They are treated differently.  They have access to the team.  They have special handlers, right?  They have people watching that.  Or, you know, a highly charged, you know, commentary figure who is always running into trouble and they need to be ahead of, because if they aren't, it will be in "The New York Times" of the next day.
And so when I hear about the kind of concerns that we have and the international sector, sometimes it's the ‑‑ what happens to any old speech, right?  Someone who is accused of a slur and that's ‑‑ and doesn't understand the cultural context.  That's a concern about how people are lost inside a very large scale system that is largely doing this through software and human moderators and is going to be ‑‑ it's going to be difficult for them to be sensitive to culture and language and context, and then other concerns like what do you do about the leader of a political party, who is ‑‑ because they are prominent, it's not easy to say, well, we will just take down any old post that they give.  But, of course, they are engaged in something that according to other standards would look like hate speech and incitement.
The last part of the question was:  What happens as with see increasing state involvement and concern around the kind of political security of these platforms, around violence and extremism?  And I think in some ways that kind of adolescence that we are seeing ‑‑ in some ways, the platforms are getting more responsive.  They are recognizing some of their international obligations.
What happens when a government or a state comes to them and says you seem engaged in the effort to think about terrorism and extremism.  We are also.  Let's partner up, wouldn't it be good if you partner up.  Or we provide a list of terrorist organizations and that will be helpful to you because you don't want to be judging, like, which some new group that's emerged halfway across the globe that you know enough.
But then, of course, it opens platforms up to another kind of vulnerability, right, where they have to judge those partnerships and judge what kind of pressure or what kind of influence or what kind of ‑‑ what they are missing, when they engage in that partnership, even if they engage for the right reasons and are in good standing.
I come back to the notion that he with shouldn't be surprised because the tension about what it means when private actors, whether that's a social media platform or news orgs have a large influence on what people hear and the shape of the news in a given political environment.
They are, of course, of interest to governments that want that public space to ‑‑ to sound a certain way.
So while the platforms are new at thinking about this and there are dimensions of social media platforms that we haven't seen before, the tangle about both wanting healthy participation, and not healthy influence, it's not a new question, but an old question.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: You raised several issues, what kind of content they censor and remove from the platforms and what type of content they decide to leave up.  I think in the Indian context, a lot of the controversy has really been, you know, more towards why they are not acting on certain content.  And this is where we begin to see the growing influence of governments, whether it is, you know, private platforms in India being hauled up in front of a committee to explain the political bias in their decision making or being threatened, with you know, changes to the intermediary liability guidelines in India.  We are increasingly seeing these play out in the regulatory context as well.
Now we move on to the more concrete aspects of our conversation.  We seek to deep dive and highlight the gaps that leave them open to manipulation.  So this is the question to all the panelists and feel free to jump if you think you can answer this in the context of the area you work in.  How do the variety of political and regulatory context shape the different ways in which content moderation decisions and enforcement of community standards take place on platforms?
And we already touched on some aspects of this, but I'm intrigued to know if, you know, the threat of regulation is making platforms step in more, or are they taking an approach towards enforcing and sticking to global standards so that they are not caught in associating terms at a local level?  Anyone?
Amelie, Marianne sorry to call you.
>> PRATIK SINHA: I can comment from the Indian perspective.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Yes, go for it.
>> PRATIK SINHA: For example, the ease of business impacts how corporates work.  For example, in India, it is increasingly ease of business for friends of the government, you know?  That is how things are increasingly going.  If you are friendly, if you are north critical of the ruling government, then it's easier to do business.
India has seen again and again how institutions are misused to conduct raids, et cetera, on opposition parties on corporate bodies, on backers of journalistic institutions, investors, et cetera when it's seen that ‑‑ that a certain organization is expressing a thought that is critical of the ruling government.
Now, a lot of this governs how ‑‑ how platforms work.  Recently a top official in Facebook India resigned.  "Wall Street Journal" did a story on political partisanship.  And one of the top officers in Facebook right now has had a history of actively canvassing for Prime Minister Narendra Modi.  How do these people end up in the top most positions in these organizations?  And the way I understand that is because ‑‑ because in India, ease of business is ease of business for friends.
So you have to have friends who are close to the government, to ensure that you do business well.
And this ‑‑ you know, and this goes to a lot of crony capitalism, for example.  There's a company called Reliance India, which started a mobile service, it's called Geo and within three years.  They are one of the biggest ‑‑ biggest ‑‑ you know, they have the biggest market, and it's ‑‑ it's estimated that another two or three years they will have almost 50% market.  And that's unseen of that kind of rise for a company.  It's unseen, unless you are close to the government.
And so that is one of the reasons why again, I bring the issue of the countries who are going through a authoritarian regime and how things change in these case, and there are a lot of regulation decisions ‑‑ it ‑‑ it is not a justification that Facebook uses.  That's what a Facebook, Twitter, Google, any of these ‑‑ it's not a justification that they can use.  But a lot of them act because they want to keep the ruling government happy.
And those are ‑‑ those are the driver of regulation decisions.  So recently, you know, in the "Wall Street Journal" article, they spoke about the politician from a southern state in India who has cases of repeated hate speech.  Somebody like that in the US would be taken down, without a shadow of doubt.
Because in India it brings so much political pressure, this person was not taken down.  So I want to sort of refer to the point that was brought up earlier.
There are a couple of things that go against that argument in emerging its of software.  I have been a software engineer ‑‑ I was also a software engineer for the past ten years.  If you look at the feature that Twitter has brought in right now that you cannot retweet right away.  You have to retweet twice.  Now that seems like a feature which was not thought through.  This is happening.  You bring this in the middle of an election.  And what do they say?  It is a temporary feature.  It's only for the US elections.  While elections are happening in some part of the world every day.  They specifically said this is a temporary.  They bring in a half‑baked feature, which is ‑‑ and why did they bring in the feature?  They want to reduce engagement.  Finally they realize it's the engagement, which is driving misinformation and they want to reduce it and this is the case for all platforms.
So they say it's a temporary feature.  There are things that show poor software engineering.  And there are many other software products which are well thought through, and so I will give another example.
When we are fact checking, the same kind of technology can be used to mark popular content.  This video is copyright.  They have a database of videos or audio copyright and someone has posted.  This let's try this because this is a violation of copyright.
The same principle can be used to mark misinformation.  This video or this image and in India, a large majority of videos and images are ‑‑ they have the same sort of tool for promoting misinformation.  These are being reduced for misinformation.
If you mark that, you can use certain amount of automation to mark all of those.
You know, saying, that okay, you know, one is marked and so let's help ‑‑ mark all of those.  At least semiautomatically, but those are not well meant ‑‑ even if they are not there.
I mean, I can go on about the number of things that can be done but that will take up a lot of time.
Bar but, yeah, these are the two points I wanted to make.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Thanks.  Does anybody else want to weigh in on this question?  
>> AMELIE PAI HELDT: Yes.  Thanks a lot.  I would jump in with the copyright example, because I think it's a very interesting one.  There have been mistakes there as well.  So while you can use content ID to find songs, they by no means any of these are recognized the exemptions you have.  So there's a lot of work about fair use in the US, but also there are other exemptions in the EU or other parts of the world, which are not taken into account.  And this brings me really to the broader question of global platforms and local laws, because it's really ‑‑ it's complicated.  I mean, it's not something you can just ‑‑ it's not something where we can also as lawyers say, well, you just have to respect the laws of the country where you are, because eventually it will ‑‑ it will ‑‑ some countries will use to that to have laws that will be highly ‑‑ that will censor what people say.  And indeed in some parts.  World, it's important to allow people to freely talk in ways they don't have elsewhere.
I wanted to bring in ail thought here.  I don't know if you heard of this case in Austria.  It's versus Facebook and yesterday, there has been a ruling of the Austrian court, which has confirmed actually that platforms need to take down content globally, if it's considered illegal.
I mean, it's really ‑‑ this will be a challenge where, like, we don't really know how to handle this, and Varun said, the laws and the community standards overlap, but sometimes they don't.  And sometimes it's something that is more of a moral standard or more of a social norm, but it's not a regulation.
And one of the participants raised the example of a picture in Indonesia that was considered obscene.  I don't know if this showing nudity, apparently or transparent clothes and see‑through clothes.  And I don't know whether this is something that is forbidden by law or to show that, but in many parts of the world, it's not.  I mean, and so this leaves us ‑‑ is it a question of community standards, of moral, social norms, where you are, where you see it, or is the question of law because at the end maybe law reflects which kind of norms we want to have clear and ‑‑ and applicable and where we expect compliance by corporations.
So this dilemma of global platforms and local laws will ‑‑ I mean, will stay for a while.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Right.  I think Shirley in the chat, you know, mentioned this example, where transparent panties in Indonesia are considered culturally not acceptable, but YouTube refused to take down content because, you know, it doesn't go against the community standards.  So, of course, these tensions will continue.  But speaking of, you know, other ‑‑ I mean, I'm actually interested in know about formal and informal relationships that have developed around these cultural norms and that have probably not really been incorporated into the community standards, but, you know, platforms act on it, or, you know, there may not be a local law prohibiting it but platforms stay away from certain kind of content because they ‑‑ it's too dynamic for a particular market.
Do you have any examples off the top of your head?  Tarleton?  It would be amazing to hear some of your experiences on this.  Marianne, you too.  Feel free to jump in.
>> VARUN REDDY: I can jump in quickly here.  The attention to the local laws and global standards are something that we at least ‑‑ me as part of a team that deal with this, feel every day being out in different countries.
The way Facebook does this is we have a standard global process for government requests.  The process the same in every country around the world, right?  And these ‑‑ they are there to have the national human rights policies and we are also signatory to the global network initiative, which has framed a set of principles that ensure due process and transparency and that are linked to human rights principles.
So we are audited on that.  So we follow this global process of receiving the requests from government and complying accordingly.
When we receive' request from government to remove a piece of content, we assess first against our own community standards.
In some cases, as Amelie noted and I can attest to, the local law and the community standards overlap.  In those cases we treat that government request as any other user report because we sort of assess any user reports again our own policies and remove them to viable policies.  We receive a government report, and we assess it against the standards and if it violates and it removes a piece of content, there's no other action needed.
But in case that piece of content does not violate the standards, then we go to the next step, then we do a dual review.  Do this as access ‑‑ the request itself is violated, which it's coming from the empowered regulator in the country, whether that request adheres to the process laid down in the law.  Once that requirement is satisfied, we think that the content is unlawful as claimed by the government or whatever regulatory agency is sending.
Both of these prongs are satisfied, then we may go out and redistribute the content in that specific country where the content is, and allow us to be locally unlawful.
Now, Amelie touched on a point and mentioned how there are these court cases where the courts have adjudicated that you should remove a piece of content if it violates law, and true, we don't have an answer to this.  And this raises the question of extended jurisdiction.  One country's law and courts exercising rights over users and, you know, subjects in other countries.  And this is something that I believe will play out for a few years before we arrive at a satisfactory solution for multiple stakeholders, the governments and the courts, right?  It's something for all of us to watch and probably, you know, contribute thoughts and push the envelope that area.
In terms of ‑‑ I also want to quickly touch upon what Pratik mentioned, which is certain interventions being US centric, for example, platforms have taken certain actions that they otherwise haven't taken because of the US election.  This ties back to what Professor Tarleton said.  I want to go back and take a bigger view on that.  It's not just the platforms.  Online speech itself is quite new.  It's probably three or four or five decades old.  Online mass speech is even younger, right?  Probably a couple of decades when these platforms started taking off.
Human speech offline, has evolved over millions of years.  The social norms.  We hold back when you are talking.  And we are more free when we talk to close friends on certain topics.  So these have evolved in cultural context offline.  To expect all of that no directly translate into platforms and platforms to come to these problems of online speech, like overnight is very hard.
Some of the interventions, for example, there's a lot of focus on what Facebook or other platforms have done in the US election context, but what people forget is we are learning with every election around the world.  We have rolled out new features and new interventions and ways to squash harmful content with every election.
As we build out the teams and the playbooks and the policies, we get better and better.
So we do this and it translates to other contexts as well.  That's we build and push the envelope in terms of the interventions overall for users around the world.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Right.  So in the interest of time, I would just remind panelists to please keep their comments briefly ‑‑ to be as brief as possible.
Also, I would like to end this discussion with the focus on outcomes.  And you know, it would be useful if the panelists ‑‑ that platforms could take to limit comments as a tool in the geopolitical, cultural value conflicts around content moderation.  So what are some of the opportunities, limitations associated with proposals for fostering greater transparency and accountability?  The enforcement of platform content moderation standards?
We know, for example, we have a Facebook oversight board that has been recently constituted.  Professor Gillespie, how effective do you think this board will be in, you know, providing users a voice to be able to challenge content moderation decisions going forward?
If you could.
>> TARLETON GILLESPIE: Yes, yes, I will be quick.  The kind of problems that this panel is bringing up, the kind of complex relationship that platforms have and will have with states and with a variety of states all at once, it is a hugely important question and I don't think that the oversight board is anywhere near the thing that will answer it.
I think the oversight board ‑‑ we don't have to get into, like, what it's going to be good for, but it's not built for this question.  It's built for Alex Jones, right?  It's built for like, we have to have a way to answer for someone would objects to having been removed.  It's not built to handle what stays up or the proximity of government, and it's nowhere near of that question.  It's of a family of things that a number of platforms, a number of gestures that platforms have made in the last four years, that are steps in the right direction, better than nothing.
But they also suffer from the American centerism.  I'm really struck by Marianne's point that the #election2020, doesn't neat US, that's as much American's problems as platforms, but it's a problem.
One the things that we have seen is that as the platforms recognize their global footprints, right, which they have had for a long time, and grew extremely rapidly, and have tried to respond to everything from formal legal requests that come from states and informal gestures of if you want to be a good citizen, you should do the following things, that they are responding but they are responding ‑‑ it's almost like, you know, if you have ‑‑ if you have made a massive oil spill, you start to clean up wherever you can.  Right, someone goes there's a problem here and you start to address it.
Platforms are saying you created a serious problem here.  This is what our political environment struggles with.  Please come do something and then you begin to see action, but that the next question, which is the kind of, like, if that was adolescent, it's time to move to maturity, is to say that ‑‑ configuring that for being a private actor in a complex political environment, in a number of countries all at once, whose politics are complex, not the same as the US, and changing, requires a discussion that doesn't just happen at the platforms.  I know that some people have been pushing for kind of a human rights set of principles.  I think that was a really promising start of a conversation, because it says we're going to need standards that exist sort of outside any one platform and outside of any one of these national contexts.
When I go back to thinking about journalism, I think about, you know where did the norms and the professional obligations of journalism come from?  Those things had to be built over time.  But every time I think about, it I run into the problem of, like, these sound very nationally and culturally specific, right?
We grew these things around previous information industries in national contexts that could think about the way that it honors certain cultural values and it responds to certain kinds of political pressures and, you know, to have created a speech environment that acts in, you know, 180 countries all at once, is just a kind of question that ‑‑ that I don't know that the old answers work for.
Yeah.  I wish the next sentence were here's what we should do.
(Laughter)
But I don't know what that one is yet.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Okay.  No.  Even if you don't have, you know, a set of steps we can take, it's good to channel the discussion and, you no he, highlight some of these tensions.  Actually to talk about some of the different cultural norms and the interaction with, we have Urvan Parfentyev, with the Russian association of electronic communications.  We invited him to talk about what are some of the issues that he's been ‑‑ he runs a hotline that deals with censorship issues.  Urvan, what do you ‑‑ just a request that we have ten minutes left and I would really like to touch on it at least one of the Q&A from the audience.  So please keep it as brief as possible. 
>> URVAN PARFENTYEV: Thank you.  I'm Urvan, from Russian association of federal communications.  We do run Russian center which has a hotline and deals with different type of content.  Some of them, are, of course ‑‑ they have to be political centered, like, for example, the issues with different types of hate speech, terrorist issues and so on.
And, you know, while we are cooperating with the hotlines all over the world, including Europe and the US and so on, we see that we already have not just social network, or any other platform, which has placement, but, in fact, it's global.
And in many cases, we do deal with the issues that are influenced by the state of play.
So professor we mentioned the issues dealing with US elections including Russia's influence in 2016 and so on.  And, you know, we feel that there is a problem, that there are actually no standards.  Social networks and media hosting, realize that they can't apply their standards, the local standards and the Chinese standards and so on, they try to create a substitute for the global standards.  So the question is don't we have to think about the global governance of this issue?  That maybe the solution of this tension between global coverage and local laws might be kind of the U.N. Convention or something, which covers the basic issues of how the information has to be treated and basic requirements for the Internet platforms that deem to be global.
So for example, that might be an obligation to have the local moderators in some micro regions.  For example, okay, you may have tens of thousands of moderations ‑‑ of moderators but just in one country.  And these people might deal with their views, the issues and so on and would, again, get this conflict of social and political cultures.
So, maybe we should think of the global governance with such requirement to the platforms that claim to be global that have many users from different micro regions, and standards which should be kept in their moderation activities, for example, respect to some cultural issues in some regions.  So this is actually the point and maybe the question to be the full extent, I think that they represent different areas of the globe.
Thank you.
>> Thank you, Urvan.  Does anybody on the panel want to respond, reflect? 
>> TARLETON GILLESPIE: I will say a quick thing but it doesn't ‑‑ it doesn't conclude, but I do think that if we start to look for governance mechanisms, whether that's United Nations, whether that's ‑‑ you know, wherever that comes from, I think a lot of times we tend to think about wishing there were standards for speech, right, which things count.  And I think that is tempting around specific issues, right, when we think about hate speech, but it's also worrisome, because it's hard to imagine how that ‑‑ how any standard could fit, right?
I think the thing that we have under explored is whether there would be ways for global organizations like the UN to offer guidance about process, right?
And the calls for accountability and transparency are one piece of that.  So what must you be accountable to acknowledge that is being done or not being done, but there are other aspects that we can imagine that say ‑‑ and maybe this is something like what Urvan is saying.  You know, if you serve people of a language, then you have to have X number of people with language expertise and you have to say what you have.
There's other kinds of transparency, besides what request did you get and what do you add to that.  It requires a subtlety that doesn't say that every platform has to act the same way but acknowledges that the ‑‑ simply taking on the role of moderation, simply opening up the ability for people to use something in a country with a very political context, means you have certain obligations to the fact that you are there, and those obligations need to be answerable, right?
And that focus on process as well as we have a specific law that requires certain things to come down, how do we tell you about it, right?  And what must you do in response to it, maybe it's a piece of the puzzle that we haven't spent as much time on.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: 90 minutes is really too short a time for us to touch on all of the complexities of content moderation.  I couldn't have hoped for a better panel.  I would like to conclude this session with pointing the panelists to the Q&A.  We have a couple of questions from the audience.  Some are addressed directly to panelists.  Amelie, there's a question from you, from Professor Milton Nueller, he's asking if it's not clear or whether it's the community guidelines or community standards or the law that is actually leading to it, then what is the usefulness of the particular laws so if you want to respond to that? 
>> AMELIE PIA HELDT: Yeah, I will be brief.  I already answered in the chat, but just to say the law does not oblige platforms to prioritize the law, like criminal provisions over community standards.
If you take hate speech, hate speech is inciting violence and insults, and then they can remove content under the definition of hate speech and they don't have to say which German law they think this actually might have infringed.
So there's no ‑‑ they need to apply the law but they don't need to prioritize it.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Right.
>> AMELIE PIA HELDT: I hope this helps.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: So time for concluding statements.
I think if ‑‑ to be brief, you know, it would be really useful to kind of get a sense of a wish list from each of our panelists on one or two things that they hope our platforms can do in the image context to improve the content moderation of what they think is going to be useful in ‑‑ especially in the context of this growing state influence over the content moderation powers of private platforms.  I will start with you Marianne, since I feel like I have really shut you out of this panel.
>> MARIANNE DIAZ: It's okay.
Yes, I wanted to really underline the importance of transparency in content moderation.  I believe that they are having a lot of fundamentals in terms from coming from no transparency at all and transparency reports that are every now and then to real transparent mechanisms where people can actually see what has happened to their content.
And this is ‑‑ my main example, I'm not coming after Facebook.  I know Facebook has been improving and working a lot on this but it's that 2015, we had a video that showed the ‑‑ the circumstances under people ‑‑ in are which people were being tortured in Venezuelan prisons and it was flagged by Facebook for previous censorship, which that you couldn't publish the link.
And, of course, if there is no content at all, you can't really address how the content is not being allowed because there's no mechanism for that.  I think that that's the way that ‑‑ that is still to go in terms of transparency.
When there are unusual behaviors regarding content removals that are not like, okay, your content was flagged because this is nudity or whatever, that's an explanation at least.
But there are still, like, a spectrum, a wide spectrum of why some items are taken down that can seem political.  There's no response to that.  There's still content that just disappears, and it's no explanation.  And I think that transparency is still ‑‑ like, there has been a lot of progress but there's still a way to go.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Pratik, do you want to go next?
>> PRATIK SINHA: My wish would be that, you know, with we know that the platforms have taken some step in the US elections just because we expected things to happen.  They knew what happened in 2016 and then they knew that there's going to be repeat, especially considering who the president was.  Everybody expected the claims that the US is making.  It's no surprise to anyone.  So basically the platforms learn from history.
That is the same thing that the platforms feed to do in other countries.  Learn from history, and we can't be working independent of the political content of a country.  And who they hire and who they don't hire.  That's something that the platforms need to take care of.  That would determine how the platforms would work in a specific country.  That's about it.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Thanks.  Amelie.
>> AMELIE PIA HELDT: Thanks.  I would just like to echo what has been said about governance structures and I could think that if there was sort of a transfer to an independent body or a third body to oversee some of the decisions, I think that could be a great way to move forward.  And also, I think, indeed, we need to focus more on procedural rules and less on content based rules and I hope that digital services act might be sort of a blueprint for that and instead of having, like, even more speech restricting laws, rather focus on the process.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Professor Gillespie?
>> TARLETON GILLESPIE: Yes, I think we have seen platforms learning from, you know ‑‑ truly learning that their public footprint is greater and more complex that they thought and that's good and we should see more of that.
I think that one thing we can do is help push that sensibility, not just no the largest platforms, which are already deeply engaged in having to be political actors in these ‑‑ in at least the big countries where they see themselves as playing in a market but that offering up best practices that help a private intermediary navigate these tensions and do it well, such that best practices doesn't just speak to four companies but speaks to the next 100.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Thank you, professor.  Varun, our hopes rest with you. 
>> VARUN REDDY: Thank you.  I have a wish list.  There's personal reflections after being in the space for almost four years now.  The first is the great acknowledgment and the defining these definitions itself.  I see a lot of commentary where an episode or a piece of content is taken down and then there's immediate implication of models or they took it down for this reason and this they took it down for whatever reason.  We should step away from that and this is to an extent what Amelie and Professor Gillespie is saying.  We should look at the specific governance rather than the specific definitions themselves.
So this acknowledgment of complexity and scale will lead to more nuanced engagement and push the content as well.
The second wish list is more for civil society and academic research.  There are some countries where obviously the research, the engagement with this issue is quite advanced.  The US definitely comes to my mind, and it's quite natural because a lot of these platforms have come from there.
We do want ‑‑ at least I want more of this research to come out from different parts of the world, so that, you know, it's also informed by these cultural context and local social political contexts as well.
This research and this additional new thinking will then inform and push the envelope in terms of what platforms and the ability to learn and, you know, improve the systems.
And the final thing is just a call for greater collaboration.  I think this panel discussion was a great example of that.  I personally have some takeaways.  I will go back and read up on some of the works of the panelists that I have not previously engaged with.  And that will spread within the country and within my teams and engage with industry peers as.
So this greater collaboration between civil society, of governments and with academia and industry will ‑‑ it's definitely top of mind for me at the end of this conversation.
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Thank you, Varun.  And on that note, we are already five minutes over time.  Thank you so much for my panelists for showing up early in the morning, in the afternoon, evening.  Thank you to Juan Carlos Lara who woke up especially early to help me moderate.  And thank you to the Secretariat to make sure we have access to links and for not cutting me off even though we went five minutes above time.
Thank you.  Enjoy your weekend, everybody and hopefully we will stay in touch.
It's Diwali here in India.  Bye.
>> Bye.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Thank you, everyone.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-ws255-digital-inaccessibility-and-universal-design-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Okay.  Well then I think it is time to begin.  Ladies and Gentlemen, good mornings, good afternoon, or even good evening, from wherever you are joining us from.  Welcome this it session at the Internet Governance.  My name is Edith Kimani, I am a journalist and I'm joining you from Nairobi and together with our sign language interpreter we will be taking you through this session.  A large majority of Persons with Disabilities globally are excluded from reaping digital dividends because most digital technologies are by design not access toible to them.  Today more and more aspects of political and social economic life are being shifted to the online sphere and this virtual conference is one of the best examples of how that is happening and yet it is unfortunate that now more than ever and because of this digital shift the societal exclusion of Persons with Disabilities is amplified.  At the same time there is evidence that not only Persons with Disabilities but really everyone could benefit if ICTs were designed inclusively.  And so during this workshop we will be looking at a diverse set of stakeholders, including you you as participants mainly in East Africa and Western Europe and we will be discussing two main aspects.  The first is the state of the art of digital accessibility and then we will hear about systemic barriers to accessibility.  Our main objective here and I would like you to remember this is to develop concrete recommendations for implementation of accessibility policies.  And so in short we are here to see how we can improve usability for communities who are currently by and large E excluded from digital development.  I would like to take a moment to thank the people who organized this session.  It has been supported by sdwer man cooperation for internalt cooperation and they are doing this on behalf of the German industry for economic cooperation for development.  This, of course, would not be much of an inclusive session if we didn't do our best to include everyone.  There is a life transcription available for this session.  You can simply access it by pressing the closed caption tab on your device.  It is available in various languages.  So feel free to look at it at any one point.  Also be taking questions and/or statements from you audience later none this program.  And to participate you simply send us a message on chat or you can raise your hand on the chat and our online Moderator will bring your contribution to my attention and then we will be able to share it with the rest of you.  So now I would like to introduce the esteemed panel who will be speaking at this workshop.  We will be hearing later from Irene Mbari‑Kirika.  M able is a NGO that empowers the blind.  And it is no wonder that shoo recognized an as dynamic global va at the jik leader and executive level innovator.  Welcome Irene.  We will be hearing from Tim Unwin, he is the cofounder of tech win.  And UNESCO Chair holder at ICT4D.  Committed to excellence in the use of ICTs for development.  He is also a really great writer on you the use of technology and development practices and we will be hearing quotes from him later when he speaks.  Bernard Chiira, somebodying real it partnership with global disability and innovation hub innovative now.  Innovative now is part of the project AT2030.  It is life changing assistive technology for all and I can't wait to hear from him.  We will also hear from Clair Sibthorpe she is the head of GSMA and works with mobile operators and their partners to address the barriers to women accessing and using mobile Internet and mobile money services.  She does have about 20 years under her belt with public private and international development organizations on social policies, service delivery with a focus on information, and communications technology.  Also going to be hearing from Wairagala Wakabi.  This is the executive director at CPESA an organization aimed at promoting effective ICT policy in Africa.  He holds a Ph.D. n infomatics as well as M of C in infomatics.  A highly decorated panel and we will be digging in to thoughts on issues later.  It brings me great joy to introduce the first speaker, Dr. Bernard Chiira.  Commissioned by the German Federal Ministry for economic cooperation.  Welcome.  Dr. Bernd Schramm.  
   >> BERND SCHRAMM:  Thank you.  Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, welcome to this virtual workshop at this year's Internet Governance about Universal Design and digital inaccessibility.  My name is Bernd Schramm.  I'm the head of a global project on inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in German development cooperation.      I'm particularly thankful for the federal German Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development who has not only commissioned our project but also supporting this important workshop.      It is a real pleasure to me to have the honor to welcome our great speakers and Moderators today on behalf of BM Zed.  They spared no efforts to be with us and share their extraordinary expertise and insights on this important subject.  I lls want to thank Paul Horsters from TIZ for taking the lead in conceptualizing this workshop and bringing together such a diverse group of it competent speakers.      What we are talking about today we will be talking about an issue of increasing relevance and great scope which has unfortunately been neglected for too long.  The inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in the area of digital development.  Persons with Disabilities constitute more than 15% of the world's population and more than 1 billion people globally of which 80% live in low and middle income countries.      The German development cooperation implements a Human Rights based approach strongly targeted towards gender equality and seeks to mainstream inclusion of Persons with Disabilities within its projects and programs.  The strategy for digital development by BM Zed our Federal Ministry entails equal opportunities as one of its five main pillars.  Roughly one year ago BM Zed adopted a comprehensive cross‑sectional strategy for including Persons with Disabilities in our development efforts.      Ensuring this in an increasing number of digital projects worldwide is fundamental and grows more fundamental day by day.  The COVID‑19 pandemic reveals how situations of crisis affect the vulnerable the most and why we need to work together for a future that leaves no one behind.      Accessible applications, platforms, websites, but also digital literacy, digital skills, knowledge how to use assistive technologies, affordable soft and hardware as well as connectivity and awareness about existing technologies and their benefits is essential for building this future.      With regard to Persons with Disabilities we are currently piloting and upscaling different approaches to inclusive IT.  For instance, in Ghana, Morocco and Kenya, both the so‑called digital scales accelerator an Africa focus on IT skills and shops for Persons with Disabilities.  We support this projects together with valuable partners from the private sector, the Government, and international NGOs, specializing on disability rights.      Why is it important to have Persons with Disabilities as coders, web and software developers of tomorrow?  Because only if digital technologies are designed inclusively from the start, we make essential features of social life available for all.  E‑governance,E education, e‑Health are just some of the many examples for this.  There is sometimes misunderstanding when talking about Universal Design in the context of disabilities.      Universal Design seeks to make products, services and environments accessible for all, not just for Persons with Disabilities.  In fact, the most diverse groups of users including Persons with Disabilities should participate in the design of these products and services.      There is one thing people often forget to realize in this context that challenges experienced by Persons with Disabilities and other groups can do and do actually foster innovation, increase usability and widen the customer base and ult maitly benefit everyone.  For example, voice output and input does not only benefit Persons with Disabilities, but illiterates and elderly persons as well.      The invention of the e‑mail is another example.  This would not have been possible without trying to overcome communication barriers through digital technologies for persons with hearing impairments.      Let me stop here dear Ladies and Gentlemen.  Our great speakers know much more about this and they know much more about this than I do.  So I thank everyone of you for joining in today and look very much forward for this exciting workshop.  Back to Edith.  Thanks again to all you.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Thank you very much Dr. Bernd Schramm.  I think we all felt like your speech ended a little bit too soon.  I could have wanted to hear more from you.  But auspices start indeed.  Based off what Dr. Bernd Schramm has said what do you think is the main challenge of one billion people with disabilities worldwide in using digital technologies from your Point of View?  Do you think that it is A, affordability?  Is it B, connectivity?  C, accessibility?  D, awareness?  E, skills?  Or F, something that's not even on this list.  I will just go through those options again.  Is it affordability?  Connectivity?  Accessibility?  Awareness?  Skills or something that's not even posed right here.      I really look forward to your comments and your views on that.  But to move along with the program I will definitely be sharing the results on that, don't you worry.  But the first question I would like to pose is to Irene Mbari‑Kirika one of our esteemed panelists ‑‑ you should have a popup on the screen to let you choose what you think the answer is and you can submit.  I have just made my submission.      All right.  So back to Mrs. Irene Mbari‑Kirika.  First of all, I'm asking you to do something impossible, to anticipate what you think our participants will say.  And then I will give you the real answer and we going with your views on that.  
   >> IRENE MBARI‑KIRIKA:  Thank you.  I think because I work in this space, I think accessibility is one of the biggest challenges.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  All right.  Short and sweet to the point.  Paul Horsters what do our participants think?  Can you bring us the poll results?  
   >> PAUL HORSTERS:  I can't see them right now.  I think there are people saying that C and E are the main barriers.  And that is ‑‑ C and E, that's accessibility and skills.  That's what's being said here right now.  Another participant is telling that accessibility covers the other options as well.  I don't know whether Irene would agree with that.  But yeah, go ahead.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Okay.  Sorry Irene for interrupting but it would seem from right at this moment Tim is suggesting that the poll needs to be closed and then it will show up.  The theory that accessibility encompasses all, what are your views on that?  
   >> IRENE MBARI‑KIRIKA:  I'm glad to hear accessibility and skills while some of the top comments because I'm actually in both accessibility and skills training.  And I completely agree, if products are not accessible, if you don't focus on inclusive design, if you don't understand what people with disabilities need, you cannot design for them.  So you cannot have an accessible product.  So at the same time people with disabilities need digital skills.  Enable which is the organization that I help has spent the last 13 years training blind students how to use technology.  So we do have kids that do basic computer skills all the way to coding.  Unless you teach the basic basic skills how to operate devices and to use the technology and access proublts they will not be able to move to the next level.  So at the same time for them to access that information, the products that you are providing have to be fully accessible.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Okay.  I'm just going to come back to you with a follow‑up question because we are talking about Universal Design.  Oh.  Hold on one second.  I have been interrupted by the poll results.  And the numbers are in.  It looks like accessibility by a wide margin.  That's what we people think is the biggest challenge to people with disabilities world wide using digital technologies.  57% of you think that accessibility is a problem followed closely by affordability and then awareness and other, sort of combined and skills and connectivity somehow end up at the bottom.  Coming back to you we are speaking about Universal Design and the guy who coined this phrase, he said that it is the concept of designing all products in the built environment to be aesthetically useable to the greatest extent of everyone regardless of age, ability or status in life.  Where are we missing the mark?  Are we ‑‑ is it the design excluding Persons with Disabilities or just not universal?  
   >> IRENE MBARI‑KIRIKA:  I think we are missing the mark in the first list, from even recognizing that people with disabilities exist and they have specific needs.  Even when they are going out to developing products, when they gather the requirements for group of people who want to design for, people with disabilities don't exist.  When we present the product we present the product and save it is inclusive to everyone.  Until people with disabilities try to use the product and they realize they cannot use the product.  So the issue comes from requirements gathering to the design phase to the development testing the whole process.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  This is a fantastic time to bring Tim Unwin.  Should we seek to use digital tools to foster societal inclusion?  What's the best approach here?  
   >> TIM UNWIN:  Hi.  That wasn't the question I was expecting.  But that's fine.  I ‑‑ there isn't a best approach.  I think I will begin with.  I think we need to design at the contextually specific level.  Far too often people are interested in making a universal single solution that they will be able to market across the world.      And actually if you drill down the needs of people in particular in context are important.  Than can apply to all different levels.  It can apply in terms of the design of policies and strategies.  You can have templates that can be adapted.  But it also goes right down to the ‑‑ design of particular products.  I hear we have ‑‑ we were talking before this session was set iP, what sign language are we going to use.  There are many different sign languages and attempts to universalize those.  But just like I speak in English, (speaking in a non‑English language).  Yeah, there is the dominance of the global.  So and I think listening to what Irene was saying for me probably the most important thing it should never be designing for but always designing with.  And I would pick up on her point, that all too ofrnl people just don't see and using that word wisely, people with disabilities.  And they need to be involved in the process from the very, very beginning.  And yeah, that's part of empowerment for people with disabilities.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  I really like what you just said, Tim.  Sim' sorry but the question is not what you are expecting but I have to say you handled it quite well.  So how far can Universal Design increase digital accessibility and stimulate innovation?  We will be coming back to some of these themes.  
   >> BERNARD CHIIRA:  Yeah.  I hope you can hear me well.  Thank you very much.  So yeah.  So I think when you look at digital accessibility and Universal Design as enablers then a lot of interesting things start to happen.  I will give you very practical examples.  One of the most fundamental issues around universal design is participation.  That everyone can participate.  And when you look at how our society is organized, a lot of the developments, economic developments, social development that every country so aspiring to achieve, look at the SDGs that we are all globally trying to drive together.  This cannot be achieved if you leave any segment of society behind.      And Persons with Disabilities I'm glad, you know, our Minister from Germany talked about, you know, we are talking about 15% of the total global population.  Contributing to economic and social development.  Think about that.  Think about the number of people in Kenya or any other, you know, lower living country that is not being given the opportunity to contribute to social and economic development.  Now let's see what happens when you introduce these concepts.  All of a sudden because of Universal Design we can can achieve accessible transportation.  People can move and go to work.  That's the one that I have seen people try to address by putting ramps but it is more than a ramp.  It is more wholistic than that.  We have to think about accessibility more wholistically.  How accessible are our institutions, our banks our schools, you know.  Am I able to achieve the same level arrive at a meeting the same time and not have to wake up five hours earlier to get to the same meeting because if I go during a peak time during traffic I basically wouldn't be able to access.  And that's happening in many parts of the world including right here in Kenya.  I will give you possibilities.  All of a sudden you will see children who for many reasons are not able to access education early enough because schools do not feel equipped to train children with disabilities and Irene is working in this sector trying to bring digital skills to children who are visually impaired.  All of a sudden these kids come from a very young age to become contributors.  And last but not least we talk about, you know, wanting to achieve sustainable impact in many ‑‑ in many facets of life.      When we look at our society, when we look at our environment, all these issues can actually ‑‑ we can take ‑‑ we can learn from inclusive design and use the ten principles to make the world a better place.  It is not about Persons with Disabilities.  It is about human beings being able to thrive on this planet.  And it is not a favor.  We are not asking special treatment for Persons with Disabilities.  All we are trying to ask for is can we build our world where everyone can participate regardless of their age, disability and any other characteristics that makes us unique.  Thank you very much.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Thank you so much Bernard.  I think that was a really strong point.  Wholistic Universal Design and I like the examples you gave about having to plan two hours before getting to work because it simply just not accessible.  And it sounds like a very rudemental thing but can you maybe take us back to some of the specific challenges that people with disabilities in low and middle income countries like this one we are living in with regard to ICT usage face?  
   >> BERNARD CHIIRA:  Thank you very much.  So when I look at the future of education, and even the current trends in education, and I choose education because I believe it is so fundamental in creating a sustainable future for our kids, technology is deeply embedded.  We are not escaping from this.  And we cannot claim to be an advanced society.  If the most vulnerable people in our society cannot access the same level of user experience as anyone else.  So in Kenya we are now being faced with a COVID‑19 pandemic.  These are very practical example.  All the schools are closed.  And the new trend now is digital learning.  Let's learn from home.  Let's all join Zoom and have a great time, right?  Now when you look at kids who have disabilities, it is so sad because their problems are compounded.  Parents are not equipped with how to give their kids access to digital learning of if you have a disability, your parent is trying to get around Zoom before they can even help you.  And also we have a challenge of resource.  Many homes are not equipped with the assistive technology and digital tools that would enable kids with disabilities to learn while they are at home.  And this ‑‑ we don't know how long COVID is going to last.  But it is teaching us fundamental lessons about inclusion.  Because if I am able to learn from home why shouldn't a kid who is blind or deaf be able to access their class from home.      And our education ministries our Governments needs to be empowered to not ‑‑ to look at disability inclusion from a lens of, you know, this is not a special thing.  We have to think ‑‑ sort out everyone else.  This is something we have to sort out from Day One.  Our schools need to be equipped with the technologies and resource people to help our kids learn.      And that is just education.  I have not talked about access to work where we also need inclusive employment and jobs.  Our current cohort, we ran ‑‑ we run cohorts of support for assistive technology entrepreneurs and we just launched a koul for innovators who are providing inclusive solutions for employment and the role of assistive technology in that space is tremendous.      And these are some of the practical examples and I believe that from COVID we are all learning one or two things on how to become better human beings. 
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  I sure hope so.  I sure hope so.  So Claire we have heard from Bernard that some of the key challenges particularly in low and middle income countries access digital literacy, being far too expensive but even if you have all of these things, there is a question of this design and from the perspective of the private sector Claire.  I would like to know what are the main reasons to disregard disability inclusion in the development of digital products and services?  I mean in how far is the private sector in charge really to increase digital accessibility and how can it be done?  
   >> CLAIRE SIBTHORPE:  Thanks for the question.  The private sector needs to do more and I would argue that all stakeholders need to do more.  Unfortunately I think this is being not considered sufficiently by all stakeholders this issue.  As I think that Bernard mentioned it is considered an add on or an afterthought.  It is not the way that it should be considered.  In terms of Universal Design if you ‑‑ if there is a section that adding this or considering this as an add on is an extra cost and it is difficult.  But I think Universal Design is good design.  And if you design your product with everyone in mind from the start then there is sort of benefits everyone and that needs to be the way it is done.  We are about to release a set of principles for digital inclusion for people with disabilities on December 3rd which has been designed by and for the mobile industry.  And mobile being a key tool.  So that's the tool that most people have in their hands, Smartphones have a lot of accessibility features in there.  It is a huge potential.  And we set out three kind of main areas that need be to tackled if we are going to do.  One you need to embrace disability inclusion at every level of organization.  When we launch this we will have a series of practical things that people can do under this.  You need to embrace digital inclusion.  You need to understand how and better to reach Persons with Disabilities, to understand the challenges and needs and we, for example, run more ‑‑ there are mements around looking at the customer journey and understanding what are the needs and requirements of Persons with Disabilities at every step in that kind of journey to accessing and using products.  So without that data and understanding then it is possible design.  And then you need to really focus on delivering those inclusive products to meet the diverse needs and requirements of Persons with Disabilities.  So I think, you know, what we are seeing there is a lot more action by the private sector, certainly within our members.  More initiatives, more needs to be done more sure but definitely a greater awareness and people are much more mindful.  Safari Com has been doing a lot of work in this space.  They developed a voice platform to enable visually impaired people to dial a number to connect.  So we are seeing more.  But more needs to be done.  Another space where there is more work needed in the innovation space.  We see that there is a lot ‑‑ we have identified through our research a lack of early stage funding for startups and social enterprises trying to develop digital assistive products with inclusive design.  We have lawn ‑‑ that support financial and with technical assistance.  And when we look at our research this is kind of point on the question that was raised in the Zoom.  So we do a lot of research also on this topic to try and fill this gap.  Because there is a big gap in terms of data available.  We have done big surveys and big pieces of researches in lots of low and middle income countries.  There is a disability gap in access and use of mobile which means that even if you have inclusive designs products and service they are not reaching everybody.  So we need to address this gap.  When we look at what barriers people are using mobile services, people with disabilities, the number of ‑‑ the top barriers that are coming out are affordability of handsets and awareness of accessibility features.  We did some research in Kenya and Bangladesh and only 10% use features.  We just published a training content that could be used by any organization just to increase awareness about for people with visual and hearing disabilities but b how to use the accessibility features.  Even when these are there and things are accessible there is a lack of awareness they are there and how to use them.  It is a big issue this whole issue that needs to be thought about from both the access to the devices and affordability of devices and accessibility and design of services.  It needs to be considered wholistically if we are going to tackle this important challenge and a huge opportunitied for people.  It is a massive market opportunity and segment if you think about the number of people with disabilities in the world and the critical importance of ensuring they are included.  As Bernard said right from the beginning it needs to be thought of from the start of the design process and consideration of products and services.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Thank you so much.  Just to borrow your words Universal Design is good design.  The private sector is getting it better but a lot still needs to be done.  So Wairagala Wakabi what's the main challenge, particularly from a policy Point of View?  
   >> WAIRAGALA WAKABI:  Thank you.  I would say that the challenge is for the government is a bit different from those of the private sector.  For the most part I think Governments either are indifferent or clueless or both about what they should do to meaningful improve accessibility.  There are no champions for most governments familiar with.  No champions for accessibility but there is also limited advocacy that comes from the Government sector that is holding Governments to account in order to support accessibility more robustly.  So the manifestation is obviously the lack of government efforts in this regard, include the poor implementation of laws and policies.  Very many Governments have laws and policies that really aim to improve accessibility.  But they are hardly implemented.  The policies on access to information, on education, on right to political participation, all of which have very good aspirations among the different countries.  But we find that hardly anything is done partly because like I said Government either appear indifferent or clueless but also there is little that is being done in way of holding them to account to show how have you lived up to the what we expect of you as a government and that should be doing.      The Governments, for instance, have in many countries they have inaccessible website, inaccessible e‑services where even national authorities in countries like Kenya, Uganda, where government ministries and agencies ‑‑ but there is nobody being held to account when they do not honor those obligations.      The issue of access to education services in the COVID era, it is also true for like work but it is also true for political participation.  Very many countries right now are going through electoral processes but there are social distancing processes that need to be followed.  A lot of campaigning, a lot of citizen education, how leaders engage with the ‑‑ how they are engaging with elect tore rate in digital means.  Laws that provide for accessibility, for information be released in friendly formats, we find that there is very little that is being done in terms of providing that information in friendly formats which obviously undermines the right to participation for Persons with Disabilities.  The other issue again which was ‑‑ it is both a manifestation of the problem but also becomes a problem itself is the lack of disaggregated that data.  Goal 17 of the SDGs stresses the need for countries to provide high quality timely and reliable data, that is disaggregated by disability.  There is the African protocol on the rights of Persons with Disabilities which was passed just two years ago.      It also asks countries to ensure collection of ‑‑ collection and analysis of national statistics and data that cover disability in order to promote the rights of Persons with Disabilities.  But when you look at our countries, I do not know any country that consistently collects data on how many people with disabilities are there.  What are their needs.  What categories are using ICTs and how they are not.      A few countries like Kenya, Uganda a year or two ago have tun done studies ‑‑ or in the information African protocol.      The similar thing is with expensive assistive technologies of we see that governments are not doing anything about this.  They should and they have the means to do it.  But also private sector didn't doing anything substantial about it.      Why?  Again it goes to the lack of sufficient goodwill, the lack of holding Government to account, the lack of Governments and regulators themselves also holding private sector players to be accountable and fulfill their obligations.      Governments, of course, can offer incentives for investment that innovation in accessible devices and software to encourage their development.  This could be done for ‑‑ through tax incentives, tax exemptions on mobile devices, for instance.  Or through the usage of Universal Service Funds.  Very many countries have universal service funds that are not invested in very sustainably, which do not always go to meeting the mandates of enabling the people who are marginalize, unserved to get access.  Many Governments also have tech innovation funds that are often given out to most live through competitive processes.  This chunk of this is could go to supporting accessibility.  My last point on this is with the private sector.      I think that the social and business case for accessibility design and innovation is not apparently clear to many of the private sector actors.  That means that they have not addressed accessibility issues sufficiently.  But also in a situation where governments are not enforcing laws and policies of this.  And Civil Society also is not really speaking out forcibly and loudly to make a case for private sector to offer obligations.  We have seen very little in way of the private sector itself coming on the table proactively and robustly working to improve accessibility.      
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Well, what an opening you started with.  Mr. Wairagala Wakabi saying that Governments are completely clueless.  Then have to go back to Tim because I don't want to leave us feeling so desolate and hopeless.  In the absence of Government and lack luster at best participation through the private sector how can we support digital inclusion through the development cooperation.  
   >> TIM UNWIN:  Thank you.  I have put up on the screen some the answers ways through we might be able to address it more.  The first I think particularly international agencies and organizations but also entities such as GI Zed and our own IZ in UK.  So good practices include examples from elsewhere and you design in to your local context.  And I think there is a key role going back to what was just said, about international agencies and donors helping Governments to deliver just what was articulated so very, very clearly just before me.      So sharing good practices, not imposing a single universal practice.  Having Guidelines and templates is what I talk about you can adapt in your local context is really important.  And I think, you know, where ‑‑ I have written this before you said what you said, so I think the second point I make here is how why can support governments to turn policy rhetoric in to practical actions.  In recent years I have been working with Islamic countries and we did a survey of five Islamic countries all of which had very, very different levels of policy application implementation for Persons with Disabilities and I think if we had to encapsulate these and they included places like Jordan, Tunisia, Kata, Pakistan and a drn and Malaysia, a range of different countries.  But going back to Wairagala Wakabi's ‑‑ the policies are designed and written up by consultants and experts from outside who pay a huge amount of money.  If donors and organizations should having maybe supported those policy as being crafted that engage practically on the ground in their implementation.  And I think the third point I would make very briefly and Claire we can perhaps have a discussion a debate about this, but I think a real challenge with the digital tech sector at the moment is too much funding that's being spent on innovation.  Innovation has become a buzz word.  In ‑‑ if you are an entrepreneur ‑‑ it is immoral for donors to fund too much on inn know vagus.  We know going back to Bernard's point about education, we know how to deliver education with and for the most marginalized.  We have known it for years but we are to the doing it.  We know how to role out tech for Persons with Disabilities in vocational training.  We know how to do it.  GI Zed has done some outstanding work in this field.  But we are not doing.  Why are we not doing it?  Because we have a fetish around innovation science is are going solve the world's problems.  It is not having the will.  I would go back and summarize those three points.  Firstly, sharing good practices.  Secondly, supporting Governments to turn policy rhetoric in to practical actions on the ground and thirdly funding things that we already know make a difference.  But if Governments and donors spent more money funding what we know really works we would make a huge leap forward and let the private sector get on with doing innovation and taking those risks.  So thanks ever so much to coming back to Edith.  I appreciate that and I hope I may have stirred up a little bit of debate.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Actually you have.  The original question was if there is one thing could change about accessibility of digital technologies what would it be.  But Tim has given a breakdown of what we can do.  So rather do you think there is anything else you could add to that?  Anything that Tim hasn't mentioned that you would change or you could change about accessibility of digital technologies?  Please let us know.  I would like to come back to Claire because as you were speaking ren ask *** and I think she was asking from the perspective of private sector.  
   >> CLAIRE SIBTHORPE:  Yeah.  So more generally around to sort of Tim's point.  So absolutely like we fundamentally believe that it needs to be ‑‑ that is a lot can be done without necessarily investment in innovation, there is huge, fundamental building blocks that can be addressed and tackled by the private sector but we also do think this there is a role to fund innovators.  The mobile space is a new space.  Access to Smartphones is getting out in a rate that's higher than has ever been before.  There is a lot of new ‑‑ it is a new area.  So I think it is unlike other sectors where it is maybe more mature.  We did some landscaping research where we looked at is there nuch innovation and there was surprising little innovators do, work around the tackling barriers to digital inclusion for people with disabilities.  And when we looked at why that was the case it was a lack of that funding.  So I think in a kind of newer area, I think there is a role for investment and innovation.  That does absolutely not mean that that we can't ‑‑ we shouldn't be focusing on the building blocks.  And that should be a very core focus and that's the work we do with our members.  But I think there is ‑‑ there is a role for that investment and innovations fail but we should learn from these fail years.  These are issues that need to be tackled and we need to invest in a range of ways including look at how we can support innovation as well as getting some of the fundamental building blocks down.  So it is a space for everything and think specifically in looking at digital inclusion, we are an interest interesting point where we have that access and not seeing some innovations and we think we can.  And we announced an innovation fund and we have got a lot of applications and interesting stuff that we haven't seen before is coming through.  So I do think there is a space but I agree that it is not the answer and but there is space for that.  I don't know if I have entirely answered the question that I was asked but that's the point I wanted to make.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Irene might be respond privatedly on the chat.  I would like to invite all 43 participants that you might have.  We open the floor to you to send any questions or statements you might have that you would like shared at this panel.  But before we get to that, or as you sending those questions, I would like to come to ‑‑ I'm not sure if Bernard is the best place to answer this.  Tim said we should get away from using the word best practice.  What's the best way to measure efficacy of digital accessibility.  Irene do you want to take that?  
   >> IRENE MBARI‑KIRIKA:  I will think that Bernard you should take that.  Let me give it to Bernard.  
   >> BERNARD CHIIRA:  You asked the best way to measure.  And, you know, while I agree, I mean I come from the innovation practice.  So before I respond to this, I will say to Tim that what we need is not less investment in innovation.  It is a balanced investment in all the facets that we know are needed.  But just coming back to your question, I think measuring cannot happen if we don't have metrics.  So we need benchmarks and we need to identify okay, for example, if it is e‑education sector in a country, how do we first of all, what goals do we have for accessibility because those gives us benchmarks and then we set metrics around those benchmarks that can help us understand whether moving in the right direction or missing the point.  A good goal would be we love to have say 20% increase in number of Persons with Disabilities getting in to professions that are digital technology oriented.      And we have that as a goal.  We can then go and look at our education system and courses that are offered to everyone to become professionals in this area.  And then ask ourselves how do we measure, you know, the number of Persons with Disabilities being able to access, you know, training and how do we monitor that.      So the thing is my challenge with a lot of the approaches is that we do not seem to have clear goals and we do not have ‑‑ we do not seem to have clear metrics around how we are going to measure whether we are achieving those goals.  I think we can learn from the SDGs.  They are ambitious goals and they provide everyone with overarcing direction.  But I think we have a responsibility as countries as governments to set our own benchmarks and goals around accessibility and not just in education.  We have to do this in a wholistic manner across society.  We have to look at the built environment.  We have to look at education.  We have to look at employment.  We have to look at contribution and participation of Persons with Disabilities, even in leadership.  And define clear goals and say what will we achieve in the next five years and how will we measure that.  How will we report that and how will we practically demonstrate that we have either achieved or not achieved those goals.  Thank you.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Thank you so much Bernard.  Already somebody with a response saying, you know, their argument and their opinion that the SDGs have failed.  So setting goals his point is doesn't really make sense.  But I will bifr you a chance to respond to that later.  I would like to ask Irene, what are some of the dej tal tools for Persons with Disabilities, as you are thinking about that I would like Tim to take on one question, it is a comment from Peter cross by.  And he says for the most part we are continuing to understand accessibility in terms of physical and sensory disabilities.  As such we are ignoring one or more, if not the largest disabled populations for whom we have to understand ICT accessibility very differently.  A word that Bernard has used what is our responsibility when we talk about inclusion?  But Irene, first to you some of the digital tools available.  
   >> IRENE MBARI‑KIRIKA:  There are various digital tools available for people with disabilities.  But one thing I want to say first is some people with disabilities use specific tools.  But also if you have your product fully accessible following the globe accessibility Guidelines you will make your products accessible to more than just people with disabilities.  People with low literacy levels will be able to access your contents and as we know we have huge numbers of people with low interest levels.  People in low bandwidth areas will be able to access your information.  We know that Africa most of it has very low bandwidth areas and elderly will benefit from digital products and service if they are actually accessible.  When you design for people with disabilities you design for everyone.  So some of the tools I would talk about are like screen readers.  For people who are blind, or low vision, blind people use screen readers and what happens is that this screen reader reads the content.  Most peep don't understand how does a blind person get on our website.  What happens a screen reader reads the con ten on website and that's how they operate the device.  They operate different applications.  If your website or application is not accessible then the screen reader will not be able to read the content.  During this COVID season a lot of people are using PDFs to communicate to share a lot of information.  To write reports and send them around.  What's happening is that you find a lot of those PDFs are not accessible to screen readers.  So screen readers sometimes a PDF is blank or it reads information in a ‑‑ in a very different way that is should ‑‑ that the information is not able to make sense to someone who is blind.  We also have Zoom, what is it called screen magnifiers for those who are legally blind.  They can magnify the content up to 400%.  For people who are deaf you use captions, I am insisting when you design for people with disabilities you design for people with disabilities.  If you don't want to make noise for anyone you put on captions.  Someone using a public transport for any public space, you are listening to a video or watching something, you turn on captions.  Think about Zoom and Skype, we are using captions.  People can use captions if they don't want noise around me.  If you make your digital pruk products and services accessible for assistive technology to be compatible what ends up happening you benefit everyone.  Thank you.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Thank you so much Irene and I just like to reiterate that Claire posted a link that can help with training.  Claire, I hope I'm sending the right message here that can help with usability of some of these tools.      But Tim, I had asked you a question.  I hope you are ready for me.  
   >> TIM UNWIN:  Yes.  Thank you very much indeed.  I thank you for the question.  I think it is ‑‑ what is our responsibility.  But I would like to begin with ‑‑ a short story at my expense.  I was ‑‑ I'm sort of kind of lively and when I am in a real live face to face gathering i get up and walk about.  At last year's IGF I got up and walked around.  Afterwards somebody came up to me as want very cross with me and she said you have autism and I was very annoyed with that.  I couldn't concentrate.  I was deliberately going up to people who were deaf.  So and I have some physicality there and blind people touching their desk.  So I was trying very, very hard but we still make mistakes.  And I think part of the answer is we can never get it right but or responsibility is to be aware.      And then sort of two more positive things, I hope, one is I go back to what so many colleagues around the table are saying already.  Our responsibility must be inclusion for those with cognitive disabilities.  They are often forgotten because they are invisible.  So we need to be aware and do our best to be inclusive.  And I think going back to some of the things that Bernard was saying, around education, and I have a real challenge still, over this debate between special education and mainstream education.      Should we include all Persons with Disabilities in the same learning environment.  Ideally yes, but I know no education system in the world that is funded sufficiently well to do that.  So for persons with cognitive disabilities how should we be helping them learn?  What's the best environment in which to do that?  And I remain challenged by that.  If there is enough resourcing in the education system, I think the mainstream is important.  But in some contexts and, you know, across the world, particularly in Africa I have been to some amazing special schools incredible amount of work to support people with cognitive disabilities.  My main point in answer though, what everyone has been reiterating, Edith you have been saying it is about inclusion.  It is about a complete change of mindset and it is all of our responsibilities.      We will never get it right but that doesn't mean that we can't go on trying to be more inclusive in everything that we do.  Can I tell one other last story?  One minute?  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Yes.  
   >> TIM UNWIN:  It is a physical disability one but it links in to this very nicely.  Some people think that UK is a great country.  With Brexit coming up and the way that we have mishandled COVID‑19 I'm sure that's wrong.  I had a son who had a ming Perthu's disease, disease of the hip and we when we choosing secondary schools and I said what's your provision for Persons with Disabilities and the teacher showing us around said we don't have Persons with Disabilities.  And I think in answer to your question there, cognitive disabilities that is just so so real.  Thank you.  I have spoken too long.  I must shut up.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  I really liked your points.  Thank you for sharing of but now I would like to invite back Paul Horsters because he is our online Moderator and I believe he has some questions from Youtube.  And Irene says she would like to make a comment if time allows for education for students with disabilities.  We will have Paul first.  And then Irene.  
   >> PAUL HORSTERS:  Hello.  Maybe we can take Dafni Stevens because she said she would like to comment on that directly.  Is it possible to unmute her?  I think she is currently in the watcher's list.  While we are waiting for that, we could continue with some questions that we received from Youtube.      So there is one question from Sammy ‑‑ she ‑‑ the first one was from Christina.  Are there training programs for the parents with disabled children, learning usually starts at home.  I think that would maybe go to Wairagala Wakabi or Tim that is engaged with education.  And then another question for the development cooperation sphere, what are the three main highlighted points about accessible features that development companies have to keep in mind.  The three main highlighting points about accessible feature.  Maybe we can head over to Dafni Stevens and if not possible then I would like Tim or Wairagala Wakabi to answer the question.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Please go ahead Irene.  
   >> IRENE MBARI‑KIRIKA:  Great.  So thank you for the question.  So yes, there are programs for parents with disabilities and let me talk about specifically Africa and not the first world.      The challenge we face is that there are very, very limited resources for parents of children with disabilities.  Enabled just completed a study, courtesy of UK aid and we were ‑‑ we were trying to figure out what's going on with students with disabilities three months after COVID kicked in when the government said that currently students are learning from home.  What we found is devastating.  Kids with disabilities who are at home are not receiving any form of education.  If there is any education it is on TV or radio which is not accessible to if you are deaf or if you are blind, you are actually left out.  So there is actually a big challenge in terms of parents are struggling a lot.  And there is a lot of pressure.  Students are struggling a lot because they are very idle and they are resulting to just doing household chores and students are anxious to go back to school because they feel that's where they belong.  In terms of investment there is limited investments.  The other comment I wanted to pass on education is that I think as donor agencies as NGOs as organizations, we are ‑‑ we have a habit of naturally focusing on trend.  We bring programs based on trend.  But one thing I want to say COVID has created a lot of opportunities for disability and it is important because disability has been brought to the forefront and most importantly people are realizing that the tech we talk about all the time is not inclusive.  Whether it is products or services or education or anything.  The biggest mistake we are making when you don't invest in the future of education.  What do ‑‑ I mean of disability.  What does that mean?  If you are going to invest in disability it doesn't start with innovation and employment.  It starts with education.  We must make sure that our products have a full ecosystem where you start from education, what type of support are we providing for education in special schools.  What are we providing in higher education and then we get to employment and then get to productses and services.  What you are going to find today everyone's focused on products and services and employment.  Half the time people are complaining people with kiss abilities don't have the skills they need to even be employed.  So what I'm saying is the students in disabilities who are in school today, five years from today are going to be knocking on doors to join employment or become entrepreneurs.  There is 0 investment in tech.  We are talking technology but special schools in Africa have 0 technology.  Enable has spent the last 13 years teaching blind kids how to use technology.  If you give them the skills and technology they need.  So I urnl all donor agencies this has been done in the first world.  It has been successful.  When they come to investing in disability in Africa please let's start with education.  Because education with investment education, investing in the future of disability in Africa.  Thank you.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Thank you very much Irene.  And Dafni who we are trying to get in touch with has just sent us a message might be easier to respond to Tim.  I don't know if you would like to read it out Tim as it is for you.  
   >> TIM UNWIN:  Yeah, I am just reading it and for those who may not be able to see, my little brother with Down Syndrome has been luck enough to go to a "normal" school with special support, but this has definitely allowed him to develop in such a way that might not have been possible if he went to special education. Now the whole town knows about him, and he is very much included in the society. So to add a positive note from the Netherlands. I have got nothing to add.  Dafni thanks.  But my comment would be I think that just reinforces how great examples can be models and it is working with people with disabilities to help them become more visible I guess is part of the going back to the invisible thing.  Enabling it to be nonl malling ‑‑ we all have disabilities and we all have ables.  Those of you who have fewer disabilities are incredibly privileged and can benefit from tech less.  Those who have most disabilities are able to benefit from tech for more than those of us who have fewer disabilities.  We need to make everyone realize that.  I think that Claire is better than I am to answer the private sector question.  I don't know if she ‑‑ three main points about accessible features that private sector should keep in mind.  I could answer that but Claire you might prefer to.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Claire it appears you have been volunteered to answer a question.  
   >> CLAIRE SIBTHORPE:  Yeah, I mean I guess what are the three main features, I think it is hard to answer that question because I think what we need to recognize is that there is such a diversity in terms of disability.  So while one feature might be relevant for one segment of the population, so it is hard ‑‑ again what we as a program focusing on we see mobile as a key tool.  Our concern about the sort of lack of access to Smartphones by people with disabilities because it offers a range of accessibility features and options to address the barriers but think it is hard to say just a few things features because of as was been highlighted there is a kind of visual impairment hearing impairment but also cognitive disabilities.  So there is such a range it is very hard to say there is just one or two that would reach everyone but it comes back to the fundamentals of this session that we need universal accessible design.  We need to be thinking about everyone and what are the challenges that people can face and if it can be accessible for as many people as possible.  It will benefit lower literacy or other challenges that they are facing.  We need to get back to that core Universal Design approach.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Before you leave.  There was an earlier question from Ben which ties in with what you are saying and his question how many development cooperation or what can development cooperation do to increase awareness of accessibility features?  
   >> CLAIRE SIBTHORPE:  Yeah, I shared in the chat we have ‑‑ we have created because of this issue and our ‑‑ didn't know about accessibility features.  We have created a training toolkit.  We are working with our mobile operator and others to see how that could be, you know, used as a tool to help increase awareness but I think that's available to anybody and I would encourage people to try and use tools like that or just include it in the training but also do a lot more awareness raising about these features and, you know, so I think there is just a role to raise awareness not about features but in general about this topic.  But I feel like we are starting to see a bit of a shift where there is a lot more ‑‑ there is an increased focus on it and recognition of the need to include Persons with Disabilities when thinking and that's ‑‑ it is at the beginning of a journey.  We have a long way to go but it does seem and I think that COVID has helped highlight just the importance of this as an issue.  So I think there needs to be more awareness raising of importance of this and opportunity for addressing it and just more sort of research done in this space as a huge lack of data.  And you can't possibly know what actions to take if you don't have the information and data to support the actions.  There is massive lack of information on this topic.  Investing in training and awareness programs and pushing stakeholders who put this higher on their agenda and to think about it is an important thing to do.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Thank you so much Claire.  There is one more question I would like to ask to Wairagala Wakabi and then I will hand it over to Tim to give us a brief overview of what was discussed today.  You did say earlier that our Governments are at best clueless and they don't have accountability structures.  How do we motivate these policymakers in the private second to adhere it and to implement digital accessibility and policies and regulations?  
   >> WAIRAGALA WAKABI:  I think need to show them the numbers.  For instance, it has been mentioned earlier that in many countries a large percentage of the population is Persons with Disabilities.  But also we need to show them that this population is largely left out in terms of access and use of technologies and the lack of accessibility obviously imparts a lot in their lives and livelihoods in areas like education, political participation and employment.  That would necessitate a need to conduct a gap analysis to understand what the needs, unmet needs of Persons with Disabilities are because like Claire just mentioned if we do not know what the gap is, what person with particular type of disabilities are facing as a challenge we are not going to be able to design useful solutions to those problems.  But also Governments it is simple.  You have laws and regulations enforce them.  You can start that enforcement by making your own products and services accessible.  A lot of e‑services that Governments are implementing, a lot of education public education programs, a lot of eGovernment services let governments start by making all of those and all public websites accessible to the standards which they have already put in place in some countries.  Also we need to make the case that governments need to promote affordable devices, affordable assistive devices and technologies and the money is available in many of the countries.  It would mostly be a matter of moving it and investing it away in this sector.      The other aspect which we need to do finally is making the case that implementing the existing laws and policies the private sector must do more.  The private sector is not doing a lot of what it should be doing according to their obligations.  So Governments need to be hard on them that we need to implement these things.  But that is going to take a lot of actors from the different sectors educating the Government, helping to do research presenting the evidence to say you need to act on this because it is a life problem by which is denying people so many opportunities.  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Maybe one day when we have a bit plor time we can talk about research.  It seems to be a theme that keeps coming up and questions about data collection.  Tim I would love to give you this opportunity to give us overview of what you think the key points were from this discussion.  And then we will wrap it up and unfortunately this is where our contributions to come to an end but Tim you do have the last word.  You are muted?  
   >> TIM UNWIN:  I am going to share my screen.  I hope this works and you have probably seen me Tim you haven't been concentrating enough.  But with luck you will see a screen of what I have been putting together.  Just anyone got thumbs up to show if it is there?  Can you see it Edith?  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  Yes.  I can see it.  
   >> TIM UNWIN:  Great.  This is summary of what you you all been saying.  I'm not sure Paul if you can find it a way of sharing it online.  Here is wonderful Moderator in the middle and this we have the result of the poll.  And I ‑‑ 
   >> PAUL HORSTERS:  Right now we are seeing your desktop which is nice as well.  
   >> TIM UNWIN:  Sorry.  Let's get out.  Sorry.  It was meant to be seeing ‑‑ can you see a green ‑‑ 
   >> PAUL HORSTERS:  Now it is perfect.  Yeah.  
   >> TIM UNWIN:  Here we have our wonderful Edith who moderated and set us going.  If we go up we began with Bernd making great points and bringing the key things there at importance of Universal Design Universal Design and then Bernard commented on how far we can Universal Design increases digital accessibility and stimulates innovation.  Maybe we should make this a bit bigger as we look around.  And came up with again emphasizing accessible sustainable impact.  They brought in the SDGs.  We need a comment about the SDGs.  I made a mess of my first question but then Edith came back to it when I was talking about international development and cooperation.  And then we had ‑‑ sorry.  Wairagala Wakabi give a whole list of important things, that Governments are clueless, but the ideas around COVID and Claire, sorry Claire is ‑‑ I put over here.  We are talking about the great work that GSMA is doing but emphasizing also that all stakeholders need to do more and she mentioned the GSMA digital principles for mobile industry are going to be launched in December.  We had a whole load of questions and then I have looged the answers here here as well as I can.  I know we are short of time.  But I hope you can see that that's summary.  I hope you can feel your voices were represented.  And the will be this follow‑up that everyone involved in this session can take away.  Paul, I think you can put this ‑‑ I will clean it up, and you can put it on the GI Zed site and I will put it on our UNESCO Chair site so everyone can have access.  Is that okay?  
   >> EDITH KIMANI:  That's fantastic.  I have no idea how you were able to do and still respond to the questions that were being posed to you.  True I will you are a man of many skills.  Thank you to Tim and all the panelists who showed up today.  I don't have anything to add because Tim has done a very good job of tieing everything together for us.      But my biggest take away was what Tim himself said our biggest responsibility is inclusion.  Today I asked you for concrete steps that we can take to do this and I think we have heard about them.  Now it is up to us.  Thank you very much for attending this session and from Nairobi Cohere.  
   >> TIM UNWIN:  Truly great moderation there.  Well done. 
   >> Thank you very much.  
   >> Fantastic job, yeah.  
   >> Thank you Edith.  And thank you, everyone. 
   >> Thank you.  
   >> Bye Chair.  
   >> BERNARD CHIIRA:  Bye. 
   >> Excellent panel.  Thank you so much.  
   >> Thank you very much. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-ws338-keeping-us-together-internet-infrastructure-in-emergencies^^

 
>> Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the panel "keeping us together, internet infrastructure in emergencies."
I would like to remind all participants that this meeting is recorded and will be available at IGF's YouTube channel. The discussion is hosted under Internet Governance Forum code of conduct and United Nations rules and regulations. Private chat and raise hands has been disabled for this meeting, so please if you have a question or want to have the floor, send your request to the panelists using Q&A at the bottom of the screen. Have a nice session. Thank you. 
>> Thank you very much, good morning, good afternoon, good evening, everyone. My name is Bea Barbosa and I will be moderating the session. I'm part of a Brazilian civil society organization and also network rights coalition. I'm also a board member of the CJ.BR, the internet steering committee. Thanks for joining us for this workshop, "keeping us together, internet infrastructure in emergencies."
This workshop is coorganized by the CGI.VR and the telecommunications agency 
Bear in mind the internet's central role in situations of disasters and emergencies, the sessions will convene participants from different sectors, regions and professional backgrounds to foster our discussion on the risks, opportunities, gaps, and possible solutions for all the issues this context of emergencies raises to the internet and on how we use it in our daily lives. 
 
Special attention to our strong dependence especially in times of social restrictions that affect social interactions locally and globally. We seek to cover a set of policy issues in the sessions such as the importance of having a solid national and global infrastructure to safeguard the resilience of the internet, the central role of telecommunications and ICTs in the digital eco‑systems in the context of emergencies and, three, the development and deployment of technology to support the preparations for mitigation during and also post disaster recovery of cities, regions and countries. 
The speakers of the session are Ms. Alison Gillwald, executive director of research ICT Africa from South Africa. Thanks for joining us, Alison. The president of the regulatory authority. Mr. Hajime Onga from the telecommunications bureau internet of affairs and communications from Japan. Professor at universe of arts in Netherlands. Mr. Pablo Rodriguez, vice president at NIC.PR from Puerto Rico. Tais Niffinegger, head of international affairs of the Brazilian national telecommunications agency. Last but not least, Mr. Demi Getschko, from Brazil. 
The debate will be organized around two main policy questions. The first is how do we keep up with appropriated development of tools, technologies and infrastructure that allow society to be resilient under severe circumstances. 
The second one, what are the roles, gaps, bottlenecks, risks and opportunities in leveraging information, infrastructure, the internet and the digital eco‑system as a whole when tackling emergency situations. 
Participants will have up to six minutes each one to give their vision about these questions and describe their experience within these issues. 
After that we'll have a Q&A, question and answer, and an overarching debate with the audience. Without further delay let's kickstart the session. I'll give the floor to Ms. Alison. Please.
 
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Thank you very much, Beatriz. Nice to be here with all these interesting people on this panel. I have very little time so I'll start by emphasizing that when we talk about critical infrastructure and we are not only talking about physical infrastructure which is often the points made especially in relation to developing countries and the bottlenecks we face. We are also talking about the virtual infrastructure that's necessary that are the critical assets of the economy and society. 
So the question is really, you know, what critical infrastructure has been in place in order to redress the problems associated with the pandemic and of course lockdowns. Secondly, what can be done to address those. 
I suppose the important point to make is really to say how the COVID‑19 pandemic and particularly the lockdowns that accompany it have really compounded digital inequality. We have long known that digital inequality reflects structural inequality in society. But I think what we have seen with the pandemic probably for the first time ever is this compounding effect of digital inequality so those who are unable to digitally substitute for economic activities, schooling, banking, et cetera that can I don't to physically are doubly disadvantaged by these circumstances. So it is a challenge to ensure we have these critical infrastructures in place and also universal or comprehensive access to these infrastructures in place. 
The problem is actually a very small minuscule proportion of the African total population have been able to mitigate the effects by digital substitution over the period of the lockdown by getting their food online, getting even their grants, social protection measures have been challenged. We have had strict lockdowns and you have had to apply for the grants online. This is a critical issue because, in fact, we have a lot of the physical infrastructure across many countries in Africa that have low penetration rates.
Least developed countries like Rwanda which has a good infrastructure and 90% of the population plus covered by broadband but less than 15% have access to the internet. The signal is there, the infrastructure is there. But the human development challenges are there. First, people can't afford it. Second, don't have the skills or devices, et cetera. These are important things to acknowledge. Simply supply side measures aren't enough. We have to do demand side stimulation as well. 
Of course there is the question of because of this increased demand several developing countries, South Africa included, put out temporary spectrum to operators to deal with the demand. 
This is really a lost opportunity in trying to get new kinds of services, experimenting with lower cost services to people who are already offline. The temporary spectrum was granted to the dominant players in the market, mobile operators and of course it should have been because they control out these services but there were a number of ISPs, community networks et cetera that applied that didn't get services. There was TV white space which is positive. But really the opportunity to bring more people into the market to make it more competitive, make it more cost effective and for people to come online was a lost opportunity. Of course the mobile operators took the new spectrum and set up 5G services which very few people can access never mind during a pandemic. 
So we really have to focus on what supply side interventions we are looking at. And speak about the lack of penetration and its impact on the ability to use technologies in order to manage the pandemic and limit the pandemic. 
In fact, smartphone penetration rates across Africa but even in a country like South Africa where you have between 50 and 60% internet penetration levels. There is not sufficient intensity of devices in order to make these contact tracing apps effective. 
Even less so in other countries like Kenya or Nigeria have 30, 35% internet penetration. Even if you get half of those people online you need about 60% of the population to have smartphones in order for these apps to be effective. Basically during the pandemic across Africa, at best they have resorted to manual contact tracing. 
For those people who are online and able to get onto using the internet and being able to access the big social networks data there is incredible problems with bias and representation and invisibility. If we have less than 20% of the population online the AI dashboards and things we are using are really only telling us about what's happening with the elite, not what's happening with the whole population. This is really a big challenge for us as we try and prevent or create critical infrastructure for the next pandemic. 
Moving from the physical infrastructure ‑‑ yes. Moving to the issues, of course we have the issues of lack of data governance in many environments. Even the setting up of the contact tracing and the mass surveillance and often the human rights and data governance in place and then of course once people are online problems around cyber security not being in place, safety, and then of course because of these things a lack of trust online. These are really big issues. I suppose the main point that I just want to say is a lot of the infrastructure bottlenecks are spoken about from the supply side. But it is really the governance issues and these are ‑‑ talking about internet cyber security, access to data, these are now global public goods and need to be governed at a global level. I think this really calls for global cooperation, country cooperation in order to address these issues and ensure that the weakest link in our global eco‑system is actually safe and protected for use. We simply cannot go on doing the same things and hope we get different results. We have to be very experimental in our policy and do things differently. We've got to do small and lots and opportunities and ensure that we actually bring the vast majority of Africans who are offline online effectively and meaningfully online. 
>> Thank you so much, Alison. What a wonderful start for our session bringing much more topics than the usual idea of all that is important in this context of infrastructure. I think it brings much more topics for us to discuss during the session. Thank you very much for your contribution. I don't see if Mr. MUCHANGA is with us. I think he needed to connect and we lost him. So if it is okay, we are going to move for Mr. Hajime Onga. It's okay for you to go and if Amerigo comes back we'll put him in line again. Thank you very much. Mr. Hajime Onga from the ministry of international affairs from Japan. 
>> HAJIME ONGA: Thank you for the introduction. Can you see my slide? 
>> Yeah. 
>> HAJIME ONGA: Okay. Thank you so much. Very pleased to meet you all. Appreciate a lot for inviting me to this workshop. I'm Hajime Onga from ministry of internal affairs and communications in Japan. 
Today I would like to share resilient telecom infrastructure enabled in emergencies in Japan by focusing on the recent national disasters. As you might know, Japan was a disaster‑prone country for earthquakes, typhoon, heavy rains, flood, tsunami, volcano eruptions. The disasters have occurred more frequently and devastatingly and communications breakdowns spread to a wider area for longer times than before. 
The next page. Okay. So for example the last three years, Hokkaido, as you know had the eastern Iburi earthquake in September of 2018. Typhoon number 15 called the Faxai in September of last year. And heavy rain event of July 2020 by training. 
Then the next page. Just a moment. This slide shows the main break point or risks of the telecom network mainly for the general resident in the case of a natural disaster. For example, about mobile base station which is destroyed by a landslide, flood or else. Also suspended by power outage or exhaustion of emergency power supply and fuel after power outage. 
The second point is for backbone optical network, telecom building could be destroyed by landslide, flood or else. Also suspended by power outage or exhaustion of emergency power supply and fuel after a power outage. Cables can be cut by a landslide, falling bridge, collapse or else. Access to users could be cut by falling trees, flyings or else. For disaster prevention mitigation so major telecommunications in Japan take basically three actions. 
First one is ensuring emergency communications. Second one is improvement of reliability of telecom network. Last one is recovery of the telecom network. Among three actions from the viewpoint of resilience I will focus on the recovery of the telecom network especially for mobile service. 
Our daily life has been depending on mobile service increasingly. Therefore the importance in residential areas has been growing. Major telecoms like mobile first has become a policy. 
This is the case of Hokkaido eastern Iburi earthquake. The pie chart on the upper right shows the main cause of off the air mobile station is power outage. It is the same as typhoon 15 in September of 2019. Then please see the transitive graph in the lower. Around 3:00 a.m. on September 6 the earthquake which measured a 7 on the Japanese scale. Also magnitude around 7. 
Soon after the earthquake the blackout power outage all over Hokkaido came. Then you can see the mobile stations have been suspended. The peak of the number is around 21:00 p.m.
 
However, as you can see the area map in the center which is from NTT Docomo, the grey area is where service was not available was relatively small. This is because of recovery of the telecom network by power supply vehicles, a mobile station and portable mobile base station. Also portable power generator and so on. 
The next case is a heavy rain event in July 2020 this year. As the bar chart shows, the main cause of the mobile station is transmission cable disconnection. It's different from the Hokkaido case and typhoon 15. 
Next, please see the transitive graph on the lower left side. Before daylight on July 4, training occurred nine times for six days. Therefore different from earthquake and typhoon cases, the peak of the mobile base station is reached over more days than such cases as one or two days by earthquake or typhoon. 
In addition ‑‑ 
>> Could you come to your conclusion, please. 
>> HAJIME ONGA: Okay. Just a moment. Okay. Please see the other transitive graph on the lower right which is for telecom buildings. By landslides many are destroyed and transmission networks were cut. Therefore as you can see the green arrows on both graphs recover of many telecom buildings by detour route of optical cables and replacement of broken cables could make recovery of many telecom stations. 
This might be a kind of example which mobile operations become an event. Okay. So maybe I took a little bit longer time. So, okay. Example which we experienced in Japan recently, I want to share briefly with you. Please proceed next. 
>> Thank you very much. I think we'll have more time during the Q&A part of our session. So you could add more examples. Thank you for your rich presentation. 
We are glad that Mr. Muchenga could join us. He's the president of the communications regulatory authority. Thanks for joining us. You have six minutes, please. 
[ Phone ringing ]
 
>> Thank you. Thank you, Beatriz for welcoming me to the session. I'm sorry that I'm only able to join very late. I wish to say good afternoon or good morning or good evening to all the participants in the session. I see Alison, Pablo, Tais and many that I know from other meetings. 
I wish to say that this particular issue that we are dealing with of telecommunications in an emergency situation for us is an issue that's very important. As you know last year we were struck in less than a month by two powerful cyclones. One that affected the central area of Mozambique while the second affected the northern region of Mozambique. 
What we learned in particular from the first cyclone is that on the following day since it hit landfall during the night on the following day we had no communication at all. Not only in the city of Beira but in the central region of Mozambique. Most of the base stations were brought down even in situations where the base station was there. The tower was there but the base station itself was flooded or broken or the power equipment was not operational. 
In some places, the telecommunication infrastructure was there. But the electricity was taken down. All in all there was no communication. What we learned is that when we have that situation, first we have the problem that people aren't able to know the situation of the other person. So they don't know if a person is alive. They don't know which kind of help they can provide. 
But also the emergency services like the national institute of disaster management, it has no way of coordinating efforts as well. In our case, the INGC which manages disasters had relocated to a different area. They knew it was not going to be affected. So outside of the area that was going to be affected but when they started moving to another city to provide help they found that the bridges were broken. They couldn't move by road. 
It was not possible to go by air as well because the airport was affected as well. It was really a terrible situation. So there could be some road connection to the affected area. We learned it is important with those situations to have a satellite base kit you can quickly deploy to provide some sort of communication. So we could have had some satellite equipment that would enable the communication between the people located in Beira and the INGC institution or the area where the relief was organized in order to provide the support to the other side. So what did we learn after the disaster in Mozambique is it was very important not only to prepare for the disaster by building infrastructure that can be resilient to a certain type of cyclones but also we need to have telecommunications for satellite equipment that we can at least use to coordinate the relief and also for the telecommunication operators to have emergency kits they can use to restore the communications immediately. 
Fortunately, they were able to rebuild swiftly because on day five at least they managed to recover in the better city around 40% of the telecommunication network. It wasn't enough for most of the communications but at least it was possible then to know what is happening for people to send messages saying that they are okay or which kind of help they need, et cetera. It is difficult but there are lessons learned and we need to be prepared in such a way that when new disasters come we are ready to act swiftly. So we will be able to share what ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
‑‑ Mozambique has done or know it will come one day but we don't know when. Thank you very much. 
>> Thank you. If you would like to have two minutes more to move forward this topic it's okay. We still have time. It is okay if you want to leave it for the Q&A session part. That's okay. 
>> I'll share more during the Q&A session. 
>> Okay. Thank you very much. I will give the floor to Pablo Rodriguez, Executive Vice President from Puerto Rico that will share with us the experience you had during disasters in the country. Thank you very much for joining. 
>> PABLO RODRIGUEZ: Thank you very much. It is a great honor to have an opportunity to share with you the experiences that we have had especially in the past couple of years. Bear with me. 
>> President Trump declared an emergency today in Puerto Rico. 
>> The president warned to brace for the worst. 
>> Can you hear the audio? 
>> Yes. 
>> We can. 
>> Maria expected to become a hurricane later on, its path is following the path of Irma. 
[ SPEAKING SPANISH ]
  
[ Wind howling ]
 
>> There are no lights. It is dark. Entirely dark. Apparently it could take months to get the power back on.
Think about that for a second in the modern world ‑‑ months with no power. 
>> PABLO RODRIGUEZ: Imagine that. Months with no power. For the first seven or ten days our island as seen from satellites, we were completely blacked out. No lights, no power lines, no cell phones, no radio, no television, nothing. What happened to that PR? The registry was operational 100% before, during, and after the hurricane because we made provisions to have two co‑locations that were bunkers that could safeguard our DNS. 
In addition to that, we also had Any Cast technology deployed in several parts of the world. At that time we had it in Germany and now we also have it in Latin America. Something I would like to share with you is this picture and the picture above is what Puerto Rico looked like from the international space station prior to the hurricane. Look at the bottom picture. 26 days around the hurricane, it is around September 20. So on September 26, 95% of the island still had no electricity. Barely had running water. In addition to that most of the cell towers were down. Out of 136 cell towers were completely down. There was nothing that could help us out. Cable was attached to electrical poles and cell towers carry many antennas for connectivity. 
You could see over and over again pictures like this. I remember I passed the hurricane with my in‑laws in the center of the island as I was returning to the capital to San Juan I began to see towers completely mangled, twisted in such a way that it was unthinkable that something like this has occurred and such a hurricane had such power it was amazing to me. 
The one thing I learned is that the Latin American and Caribbean regions are highly vulnerable to natural disasters. Pretty much like Mr. Hajime mentioned, we are also vulnerable to hurricanes, earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanos. So much so that, look at this. This picture is from an earthquake that took effect in Mexico 24 hours before Hurricane Maria hit us. Hurricane Maria was one of two category five hurricanes that hit Puerto Rico within 13 days. 
Irma attacked many of the islands like Antigua and so many other islands. As we were taking people from those islands we were hit 13 days later. Mexico was going through that. Guatemala was going through volcanos. So we had lessons learned. Yes, indeed, we had lessons learned from what happened in Japan in 2011. We think, why is that? Why Puerto Rico is on the other side of the world from Japan, so why would that be an inspiration to us? Because we have many customers that have very important cyber real estate. Imagine all those names like Fujitsu Sony, Toyota, Honda, on and on. What are you going to do about that from a perspective as we are. 
So what we did is that we extended our renewal process. Why? Because there was no way they could contact us to tell us to please renew my domain name and here is payment. I'll send an electronic payment. There is no way they could send us money from Japan here or from anywhere in the world, right? It was our responsibility to protect our customers so we renewed their domain names for a year. 
We are expect in good faith that when they are ready, they will send us a payment. Indeed, that was the case. What is it that we propose? We propose that in 2017 we learned from what we have done for our customers in Japan and in other parts of the world that had been hit by natural disasters that we went through our databases and we looked out for all the domain names in the regions that were affected and we renewed them automatically. Then we expect that we would receive payment in due time whenever it was able for them. 
It was more important to make sure the cyber real estate was up rather than allow them to lose their domain names and their websites and all of the other information and services they provide to their respective constituencies. So what do we propose? We propose that registry operators throughout the world as natural disasters occur do not think that because you are far away from there it is not your responsibility or you have nothing to do. Make sure your databases, that you check your databases and if you have customers from those areas you can take care of them and renew those domain names and ensure they do not lose their cyber real estate. 
Thank you very much. Should you have any questions, don't hesitate to ask or contact me at [email protected]. 
>> Thank you very much for sharing the videos and the pictures. At the time I remember watching the news about the hurricane but recovering our memory on it is amazing. All of our solidarity to people from Puerto Rico. Congratulations for you and your team for facing and putting everything online after all. Thank you so much for your work. 
So we move forward now with the presentations and the contributions from the representatives from the two organizations that are proposing this workshop ‑‑ the Brazilian national telecommunications agency and after that from the Brazilian steering committee. So I will give the floor now for Tais Niffinegger and for those of you who joined us after the beginning of our session, we are organizing our debate around two main policy questions. How do we keep up with appropriated developments of tools and technologies and infrastructure to be resilient under severe circumstances. And also what are the risks and opportunities in leveraging the digital eco‑system as a whole when tackling emergency situations. Please, Tais, six minutes. 
>> TAIS NIFFINEGGER: Okay. Do you hear me well? 
>> Yes. 
>> TAIS NIFFINEGGER: Thank you for the introduction. I'll try to be as brief as I can and provide you with a bit of our view from Brazil and a bit of our past experience in Brazil as well. 
It's not by chance that you see my background the institute here which is the biggest open air museum in the world. It is located in the municipality of Rumajin in Brazil where we had a big incident last year unfortunately. I'm going to talk about this case later on. 
We do not suffer from earthquakes and tsunamis like Japan or cyclones like Mozambique or Puerto Rico. We still struggle every year with heavy tropical rains. Sometimes the lack of them, fires and other sorts of disasters. 
Looking at our role as regulators in particular during this unprecedented global health crisis, it is clear that internet is, indeed, essential. There is no doubt about it. 
What we need to do to create the conditions for the services should be deployed and for the consumers to have access to it is to fully support the infrastructures and put in place policies that can respond to the needs of the society. So having said that it is to our role to implement a national emergency plan including overall risk assessment, national disaster plan and applicable legislation and regulations. The rules need to be flexible enough to respond to emergencies situations timely. 
As an example, due to the COVID‑19 crisis we have seen in many, many countries policy makers and regulators granting permanent or temporary spectrum licenses in the context of the pandemic. This additional spectrum licenses allow operators to provide their customers with better network access or to improve quality of service or even to improve connectivity for specific sectors like health care when and where needed. 
So we could see that easing regulatory requirements or licenses is also a tool that having been proven to be quite effective for granting more connectivity. 
In March this year the international telecommunications union, the ITU, proposed a bunch of guidelines for emergency telecommunications plans. They suggest regulators have flexible rules and operators have their own plans to guarantee at least the functioning of emergency communications. 
According to the ITU, an efficient national telecommunications emergency plan should outline the strategy that guarantees the existence of services throughout the disaster's mitigation and the permanent exchange of information with the authorities. In addition, companies and regulators need to be prepared in advance to they need to get used to running simulations and tests before disasters occur. 
Just for you to have an idea, the regional disaster's history shows that disasters have affected about 400 million people in the past 50 years in the Americas region. 
Mostly related to climate and environmental events. Our main regulations in Brazil include three main things which are risk management of critical telecommunications infrastructure, monitoring the performance of telecommunications networks and preparedness and response measures for disasters. Emergency situations or public calamity state. 
Measures taken also include installation of terminals or shelters in strategic locations notifications to those at risk all free of charge. Counting to May of last year we also started implementing SMS alerts sent by civil defense to the local population. These can be quite helpful in mitigating disasters. 
I would like to share with you a couple of slides I have about the case I want you to talk about which happened last year in Brazil. So let me know if you can see my screen. Is it okay? 
>> Yes. 
>> Good. So this case happened in Brazil last year. It is a good example on how our communications system operated and responded, being able to mitigate the effects of the disasters. Brumadinho is a Brazilian municipality in the state of Minas Gerais where I come from in the southeast region of the country. It is located in the metropolitan region of Belo Horizonte with a population of about 40,000 people. The main economic base is supported by the mining activity, mainly by the company Vale. 
The Brumadinho dam occurred on 15 January last year when the main dam suffered a catastrophic failure. This is the region, as you can see. The dam is owned by Vale, the same company involved four years before in another disaster. So this is the region before the accident. The collapse of the dam occurred just after noon on 15 January. A telecommunications crisis cabinet was established and coordinated by the telecom regulator one and a half hours after the rupture of the mine dam. Here you can see a few pictures after the collapse of the dam. It was then we established with the service providers to re‑establish, repair and maintain communications in the region and ensure the functioning of the telephones and the mobile data communications even with the interruption of the electricity supply. Here is another picture. You can see the damage. 
Several measures were taken. Mobile 4G and 700 megahertz was established for emergency communications service.
 
Roaming was available to make calls from any antenna regardless of the provider which was very important. The cell phone carriers distributed about 300 sim cards to the affected population and members of civil defense. In addition to improve efficiency of the rescues. Records were then made available for the government. It helped find people who were in danger. 
In addition to that satellite communications covered the entire region and were also made available to ensure communication during the whole process. 
>> One minute, please. 
>> TAIS NIFFINEGGER: All right. I will move to the conclusion so we have time to discuss after that. So this is the scenario and the communications that were in place by then. The lessons learned so far from this accident and also from other past incidents were that the process has proven to be effective with fast and pertinent communications via WhatsApp. The response was improved with previous smaller scale experiences that is also important and to have the communication matrix meaning contact persons in charge of the situations. And the process to be followed. Network mapping survey of what was destroyed and also important that providers send daily monitoring reports with network operating status to the government the process should be evaluated and improved for each performance for future reference. And what we know by now is we need more simulation exercise, that's for sure. 
A last step which is also important is that international cooperation also helps a lot in exchanging best practices. We can learn a lot from others' experiences and I think that's what we are trying to do now. As my colleagues also highlighted before me, we need data from the governments and it can mitigate the effects on our own countries when disasters occur here. 
Having said that, I finished my speech. Looking forward to discussing and learning from you. Thank you, Bea. 
>> Thank you very much, Tais, for sharing the pictures from the Brumadinho. 
We have one more presentation to go. We encourage everybody to send your questions through the Q&A tool. Please feel free to participate. I would like to share some comments from Carlos Alfonso, a member from the civil society. He wrote in the chat that the presentation from our companions in Puerto Rico, a huge disaster ignored by the U.S. federal government reminds Brazilians that went dark without any electricity because they went dark. Isolux is a private company from Spain that had no spare parts, no replacement devices and had to be helped by the state company Telebras in Brazil. So Amapa is still without electricity except for a few hours which are rotated every six hours to the 16 municipalities of the state. Thank you. 
I'll give the floor to Demi Getschko from Brazil. 
>> I thank the organizers and IGF for inviting me to be part of this interesting panel on this critical theme. Especially in these pandemic times. Maybe I have some slides here. Yes. Okay. Here are the slides. Next one, please. 
We have an interesting model in Brazil. It's really not unique but it is important that we have a strong stakeholder model with government private sector, academia and civil society equally presented in the Brazilian steering committee. We try to achieve effective participation of society and sustainability, innovation and technical quality. Thank you. The next one, please. 
Okay. This is the composition of the Brazilian steering committee. As you can see, the left part we have the representatives from the government and on the right part we have civil society representatives. Elected each three years. We just completed new members of the civil society representation and the CGI is now full and working well. Next one, please. 
The operational hand of the internet committee is the natural information center. Nic.BR began more or less with the dot‑BR registration in 1989 and gained strength when we began to have resources around 2005. After that, we could in some ways return to the internet community again through the dot‑BR registration. 
We have of course some surplus of resources to develop in order to have the strongest internet in Brazil. NIC.BR has the research arms and I want to talk about the PTT in this event. Next slide, please. 
This is the mission of the CGI I will leave for your consideration. Later I will go right to the next point. Next please. 
Okay. We have heard a lot about the critical resources that support the people under hard circumstances which have calamities and other problems. I will change the theme to a more soft layer. We will talk a little bit about internet, not about the infrastructure of power, electricity, telecom that's of course critical and needed to have internet. But let's take a look in the layer ‑‑ internet layer theme to see what we can do to have a stronger internet. We are optimistic because Brazil is in the first position of the most tolerant countries around internet segment availability. This doesn't mean you have the most internet infrastructure but we are less prone to have resilience problems because we are very well distributed. We have lots of small players, lots of interconnections. A structure that increases availability of paths. In this case, we have a situation that we are less prone to have a disaster because a major player fails or has a disruption in infrastructure. Of course for us it was happy news to see we reached this position. This is more or less showing the different 20 countries. Next, please. 
One way we try to achieve this resilience is to spread the number of independent networks in Brazil. The autonomous systems. As you can see we have a lot of autonomous systems. We have 70% of the autonomous systems in America and Caribbean in Brazil. In some ways NIC.BR is struggling to let the people know in the area how important and how good it is to be an autonomic system. 
This is the growth of autonomous system. We have eight K autonomous systems here. Next please. The other point of distribution is the service providers in Brazil. The most part of internet service providers in Brazil are small or micro companies with 1 to 50 persons employed. They are quite well distributed through the region. Next, please. We have also a good infrastructure of cables coming into the country. 
Then I will talk a little bit about internet exchange and how to be more reliable in this area. 
As you know, Brazil has a big area. You see we have really thousands of kilometers. All these points you can see are internet exchanges established and managed by NIC.BR and in some way contributing to have a big diversity of distribution. 
By the way, this is one of the original concepts of the internet. Internet was conceived to be a distributed network without a center point of failure, without a critical dependence on any infrastructure. It's good to have in mind that these are very good principles. We have to stick to them to have a reliable internet. Next one, please. 
This is just to show we have during these five years. With the beginning of the entertainment at home using movies and streaming at late hours. The internet way of exchange changed shape and peaked around 22 p.m. ‑‑ 8:00 p.m. to 22:00 p.m.
Next, please. 
This is more or less the traffic of the PTT, the name we call the internet exchanges. The point of exchange of traffic in Brazil. This is Sao Paulo exchange. You have another good news on the Sao Paulo exchange. Also surpassed the Frankfurt exchange in July. We are the biggest point of internet exchange actor. Next one, please. Next one, please. 
Okay. As you can see between the 12‑week and 13‑week we have a big increase in traffic, of course, because of the rush to have your services and communications all through the digital way because of the COVID. Next one, please. 
If you see ‑‑ next one. And next one. Yeah. You see in 50 day ‑‑ 15 days ‑‑ less than a month, we have a big increase in traffic in this Sao Paulo internet exchange because of COVID. Next one, please. Here you have comparative look at distribution of autonomous system numbers in Latin American region to show that it's important to really put a lot of strength in trying to grow the numbers of systems and distribution of the infrastructure. Next one, please. 
Just to finish, I also want to stress the importance to look forward going to the IPv6 actually. 
This is the situation of IPv6 in the world. We are growing slowly in the world. Originally around 35% now. Next one, please. You can see for example some countries are better than that. India reached 47% of IPV6. United States at 41. Next one? Brazil, we are around 35%. This is also good numbers. We are doing quite well on that. Just to summarize what we are trying to say, next one. I think we have. Okay. This is the growth of use of IPv6. We have produced books on that and courses. 
Next one, this is material for laboratory. We can distribute this for free for everyone to be aware of the importance of the necessity to migrate to IPV6. Next? 
Finally, I think to have really an internet strong and safe you have to have a cross program around all the areas for a better and safer internet. We put together all the areas in NIC.br segments of the society where we put the best practices available to everybody and try to steer the internet to a safer situation. 
What I want to finish is to remember that the internet was built by thousands of independents and we have to keep in mind it is very important to have this distribution and not to concentrate the power of the connectivity in some single big points around the net. This is the way they are going more or less now. But to have to recover the initial idea to distribute end‑to‑end connectivity. Anyone can connect with any other. Not to live in walled gardens that, of course, cause a lot of instability and lack of security. Thank you very much. I'm available for questions after that. 
>> Thank you very much, Demi. Thank you for the presentation and for everything that NIC.BR does for us in Brazil. 
We have some questions here and we encourage people that are participating in the sessions to send more questions. We still have some time. 
I would start with Americo. We received a question that said it is good to see my country Mozambique represented in such an important event. 
The question is talking about internet infrastructure in emergencies is important to understand how rural communities are prepared to this situation. And how we can ensure what is being done to guarantee those places are connected for a good response in emergency cases. 
So if you could please address the question regarding the rural areas during this situation, please. 
>> Thank you. I wish to say when it comes to emergency situations or disasters, rural and urban areas almost share the same type of risk. In the sense that typically after a cyclone, for instance, this is the typical disaster we get in Mozambique. We don't get too much severe earthquakes. The area of Mozambique is not that at risk from cyclones here. We have 3,000 coast around the Mozambique Channel. In particular the northern area of Mozambique is prone to cyclones because it is already above Madagascar who usually shelters the coast from big cyclones. 
Now, I think when it comes to how you deal with disaster, a rural area typically will have a telephone network that can be used for communications. But after a cyclone, most likely that network will not be available most likely after a cyclone the roads won't be available. A cyclone will normally come with a lot of rain that will usually flood the roads, break bridges, et cetera. So when you prepare for disaster, you need to make sure to have in mind that after that disaster that typical traditional infrastructure of communication won't be there. You won't have an interest, et cetera. 
So the question is what do you do? I want to share here what we have learned, what we have done after the two cyclones we had last year in Mozambique. The first thing we decided is there is a need to do some sort of risk assessment and make the areas that are likely to be here to buy a cyclone of the same category as we had in /PHO*EZ last year. Usually when a cyclone of this magnitude comes it will make land fall and may go as far as 200 kilometers inland and continue making destruction. 
So in those areas, say in most of the cities located around the city, what we have decided in Mozambique is we need to map the area and be sure we construct certain infrastructures that are strong enough to be resilient to say a category five cyclone. So typically you need to have ‑‑ enough to sustain category five cyclones, not because you want to continue with lectures afterwards but schools are the places where you can use to shelter people after a disaster. 
You need to have certain buildings within a hospital or health care center that are also resilient because typically the disaster, you will have people who will be wounded during the disaster and you need to have a place where you can actually treat people. 
So this is part of the plan that we will need to have certain buildings, certain schools that are constructed in such a way that they are strong enough and to have a certain area of the hospital ‑‑ not the entire hospital, but certain areas of the hospital that are strong enough to sustain, say, a category five cyclone so you have the area where you can treat people. 
The third thing that we decided there is a need to have is that certain telecommunication network has to be resilient to a cyclone. You don't have to build the entire network to be resilient to cyclones but have certain base stations that are built to sustain very strong winds such that you can have at least some sites operational after a cyclone. 
Apart from that what we decide is that regional governments need to have some kind of HF communications network. Typically HF can reach very long distance and requires just a battery to make a communication. We are now in the process of looking for that kind of equipment that will be given to local governments such that when there is a disaster at least after disaster you have some form of communication with that area. 
Also, we mandated the telecommunication operators to acquire some satellite base kit they can use to restore minimum communication. You don't have to have communication for everyone in the city, but have communication that can be used by the disaster relief efforts to be able to communicate with other cities and ask for help and support. 
We want that located in the region such that when you know the cyclone is coming you can quickly move that equipment to that particular area. 
One lesson that we learned is that I don't think that after the disaster you will have the airport operational or the port operational, that you will have the roads operational. You need to prepare for assuming you may not have the roads available. So cool you want to locate some of the relief outside of the affected area, but you need to have some capacity in the area for a situation which the roads are broken so you can start on the following day to provide some relief. 
Also, assume that you may not have fuel as well. Because Beira is an area that quickly gets flooded we found even the fuel stations were flooded. You couldn't put fuel in your car if you didn't have it already. So if a disaster is coming you need to stock some sort of fuel in the cars, et cetera, to be able to power a generator or be able to power your car after the disaster. 
Those are some of the things I would like to share and say this is valued for both the disaster urban areas as well as rural areas. They all suffer from the same typical problems. Thank you very much. 
>> Thank you very much. We have three more questions. I would like to send this one to Hajime Onga so you can have more time to conclude your presentation at the beginning. We received a question from Susan sanders asking if in building public buildings and homes in areas prone to natural disaster, there is frequently a requirement that construction be designed and implemented to with stand these disasters. Do contracts for building, power and sanitation plans and communications infrastructure also include clauses that the structure must be able to with stand natural disasters known to occur in the area? I would imagine it would be more expensive up front but long‑term could be more efficient. 
So if you could please comment. Can you see the question? Can you read the question, Onga? 
>> HAJIME ONGA: Now I'm reading the question. 
>> It is the last one. 
>> HAJIME ONGA: Okay. I'm not sure if I can help with this question. Okay. My slide ‑‑ can you see my slide? 
>> Yes. 
>> HAJIME ONGA: So we take action like these five items. Maybe the first one is a kind of answer for the question. We revised the guidelines for telecom operators so for example ‑‑ okay. So at least 24 hours is required of a mobile base station and telecom building covering because the disaster response is supposed to be set up. So now we try to coordinate with telecom to make them power resources longer. Okay? 
>> Yes. That's it? 
>> HAJIME ONGA: Okay. This is kind of an answer to the question. If I have more time I would like to share my lesson from our experience in natural disaster. I think the most important thing is the readiness and cooperation system between public and private sectors is essential. 
In order for the second one, relief and safety of affected residents and the facilitation of recovery activities. 
Conventional equipment as well as innovative and collaborative solutions. So please let me introduce some example of the innovative solutions recently introduced in Japan. This is an example. For example the on‑drone base station and HAPS system is not yet in operation. Now on a trial basis. But on the other hand, on‑balloon base station and on‑ship base station and cable layer ship to deliver to the affected area, they are already introduced in Japan. So I hope these examples help you.
Thank you. 
>> Thank you very much. We are going to ‑‑ we have another question from Carlos Alfonso from Brazil to Tais. He mentioned your presentation was crucial. The communications need strong support to enable them to use a spectrum creatively building community networks, using the new technologies to allow for sharing, secondary use, deployment of a location database to enable local use of white space without infringing on the rights of the big telcos and so on. 
He says that community needs the help of Anatel to facilitate it and asks if you could give a perspective of this matter. 
>> TAIS NIFFINEGGER: Thank you for your question. We are very much aware we need to have creativity to deal with our own challenges. We are aware of that and we are doing a huge effort to try to ease the regulations to foster communities and small providers to be part of the market, and also to have crowd sourcing solutions for our problems. 
We are also studying, considering regulatory sand boxes to be available to the environment here. This is something that could happen in the near future. About white spaces we have had a public consultation already on that. The regulation is in the final stage of being elaborated. So we are going to have the implementation of that in the near future as well. That's what I can tell you at the moment. We are aware and working on that. We are very sensitive to all of these suggestions you had. Thank you. 
>> Thank you, Tais. Please, Pablo. Go ahead. 
>> PABLO RODRIGUEZ: Thank you. Excellent presentations for all. I just wanted to point out a couple of things. I concur with Americo regarding the need for the satellite station. That made a big difference here. We had no way of communicating with each other with organizers of the aid. So first we received satellite telephones in specific areas so you could coordinate distribution of aid, medicine, food, water and so on. The other thing that was really important was fuel. 
In that moment, diesel power was necessary because the co‑locations we were using, the power generators depended on diesel fuel. So if we run out of diesel fuel we would have completely dropped out of the spectrum. So that's also very, very important. Finally I would like to address partially the question Susan was asking regarding what about regulation regarding the construction of buildings and so on. Yeah, that's true. Many cities and in many countries in Puerto Rico included have very strong building codes. But what do you do with those buildings that were constructed 200 years ago, 100 years ago when those codes didn't exist. They are very historical buildings. We cannot destroy them and reconstruct them to code. So we have a problem with that. 
Furthermore, we have a problem with those constructions that were built illegally or at least out of code when a family from many years ago had a very extensive piece of land and throughout the year has been dividing that piece of land for a son, grandson, nephew and so on. All of the houses are built but not built to code. And they are in the middle of the mountains. So you have houses that are not built to code and that are old. When the natural disaster occurs you have to help them in inaccessible areas. 
So that's something the government has to start looking into. That was part of our experience. Now we have to find creative ways to address those individuals and to find ways to tell them now that the house was destroyed let's rebuild to code. That's part of the challenges. Thank you. 
>> Thank you, Pablo. I see Alison wants to comment as well. I would add a question, Alison. If you could please comment both of them I was thinking about sending this one to you that we received from our audience. 
Are these emergencies able to have an impact on the future of the internet? If you could comment on this as well. 
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Thank you. That actually does lead into what I was wanting to say. I was just saying these examples that have been given are so important and such enormous progress has been made on dealing with natural disasters in these areas. We have learned so much. 
I did want to highlight, you know, if we are talking about critical infrastructure as the assets that are necessary for the functioning of society and economy then the pandemic presents slightly different problems for us from a policy point of view to these. 
These obviously need to carry on for natural disasters but building on some of the stuff Demi was speaking about and the points I was making earlier this really requires more systemic engagement if we are going to prepare ourselves for the next pandemic. The fact that people are unable to mitigate through digital substitution, remote work and their schooling, banking, all of those things really means we are not prepared for the next pandemic. 
So we have to reduce costs. We have to get more people online. I think that was important about what Demi was saying. We have to get better systems in place. We have to get the distributed networks in place. We have to get better competition, less concentration, lower prices. We have to get the internet as it was planned to work better to mitigate the negative consequences of the pandemics which we see are inevitable and going to be coming again. On that note I have a very big dog who has had enough Zoom. I'm going to stop there. Making a big noise. 
>> It's totally okay, Alison. Thank you very much. 
Pablo, we have seven more minutes to close the session. So I will give you the floor for your final comments and final considerations. Then I'm going to start with reverse order from the beginning. We start with Demi then and I'll ask you to please stay in one or two minutes maximum so we can listen to everybody before closing the session. Demi. Pablo, just a second. We are going to start with Demi and I will call you. Okay? Thank you. Demi, please. 
>> Thank you again. I agree with the last comments. I want to say that if you look at the CGI we did some years ago we are trying to preserve, maintain the original concepts of the internet. I'm totally in favor of how the internet was conceived many years ago. Of course we are worried where things are going now. I think we have to strive to have the distributed network with open competition to everybody. And the communication end to end as it was the main and regional goals. Thank you very much. 
>> Thank you, Demi. Tais, please. 
>> TAIS NIFFINEGGER: So I would like to summarize saying that connectivity is crucial. We can see from all the speeches here. It also depends on strong infrastructure. Apart from that we need more integration, not only between authorities in our countries but in between ourselves and different countries from different stakeholders and different points of view. Thank you. 
>> Thank you very much. Pablo, please. 
>> PABLO RODRIGUEZ: Thank you. The one thing that is important to continue to have these panels and to involve decision‑makers at all levels from the government, from academia, from the private industry so they can begin to understand and coordinate in such a way that we can address all the different problems, challenges that we have. 
Unfortunately not all countries are created equal. Not all countries have the same resources and we all have different priorities. While connectivity and internet and pandemia are important there are lagging problems we also carry that must be also addressed with limited resources. So it is important to get government involved. It is important to get academia involved. It is important to get private industry involved so that we can all be on the same plane. 
Once again, thank you all for inviting me here. It's been a great honor to participate. Thank you. 
>> Thank you very much, Pablo. Hajime, please, your final considerations. 
>> HAJIME ONGA: Okay. Thank you very much for giving me this chance to join this informative discussion with your experience. Lastly I want to say that the next March is the tenth anniversary of the great eastern Japan earthquake. So please let me express our sincere gratitude once again. Thank you so much. 
>> Thank you. All our solidarity to the Japanese people as well. Americo, please. 
>> Thank you very much, Beatriz. What I want to say is that an emergency means it is always unexpected. If we plan ahead of time, we are likely to minimize the impact of the disaster. So what I would like to call upon is that each of the participants here who lives in a country that is prone to a certain type of disaster, there is a need to have a coordinated plan that's known by all the relevant stakeholders so that the reaction to disaster doesn't start when, for instance, the cyclone is announced that it is coming. You need to have ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
‑‑ there is a need to have infrastructure sharing. Typically in the telecom area when a disaster comes will not distract the network operators in the same way. You may have one or two operators that are up, but you will typically find that the customers that can use that network belong to another operator. So to have the ability of the operators to understand we are working in a disaster environment and to be able to start allowing the subscriber from another operator to use its network is very important. 
So sharing infrastructure is a must normally, but in a disaster situation it is even a bigger requirement. Those are some of the words that I would like to place here as a concluding remark. 
>> Thank you very much. Alison, please. Don't worry about the dog. We like dogs. 
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Thank you. I was saying what I said before was really just to emphasize that I think the pandemic presents slightly different challenges ‑‑ well, significantly different challenges for us. I think it is incumbent on us to look at the national level of what we do to get digital inclusion so people can mitigate these effects in many parts of Africa lockdowns could not be enforced. People would have starved to death. They couldn't get to clinics for help, et cetera. 
So if we are going to mitigate the effects of the next pandemic we have to get more people online, more people able to mitigate the negative effects of the pandemic and particularly the economic lockdowns and impacts. 
If we think of these disasters we have been speaking about, you know, months without electricity these are devastating consequences. We have had them for a year. Millions of people lost their jobs. Economies destroyed entirely. We have to have systemic solutions at the national level. But these require global cooperation because, as I said, these are increasingly global public goods. Cybersecurity, data governance, data protection, the internet. These are public goods. People have to have universal access to them. 
>> Thank you very much, Alison. Thank you very much to everyone. I think it was ‑‑ I have learned a lot during this one hour and a half with you. Thank you very much for all the amazing contributions and information that was shared with us. 
I totally agree with you that we need to keep going with this kind of topics in the IGF. Thank you IGF for hosting and receiving ‑‑ accepting the proposal for Anatel and the Brazilian Internet Steering Committee for organizing the workshop here. 
Thanks also to Vinicius, all the team from Brazil helping us organize this. 
Thank you for the more than 40 people that were with us attending in this workshop and thank you for having me hosting this conversation. I wish you good continuation for the IGF this week. Thank you. Bye. 
>> Thank you, Beatriz. All the best to everyone. Tais, Alison. Vinicius, thank you for helping me to get into this. It was very cumbersome. Thank you. 
>> VINICIUS SANTOS: No problem. Thank you for being here. 
>> TAIS NIFFINEGGER: Thank you, everybody. For participating. It was very good. 
>> PABLO RODRIGUEZ: Thank you all. 
>> VINICIUS SANTOS: Thank you very much. 
>> Tais, you have a beautiful background. 
>> HAJIME ONGA: Thank you. 
>> Bye‑bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-10-%E2%80%93-ws341-multistakeholder-voices-and-the-un-cyber-dialogues^^

   
>> RAJ BURLI:  Okay.  If everyone is ready, shall we get cracking?
Sweet.  Hello to everyone from wherever in the world and whatever time you're tuning in from.  Thank you so much for being here for our panel discussion on Multistakeholder Voices and the UN Cyber dialogues.  My name is Raj Burli the Global Ambassador for Digital Peace Now Society, and it's an honor to be your moderator today.  We have an incredible panel of subject matter experts here to talk about our discussion.  I'd like to start with Fabrizio Hochschild.  We have Isaac, we have Chris Painter, President of Global Forum, and Raman Chima Asia Policy Director for Access Now and Kaja Ciglic from Microsoft.
Now, before we dive into to what I know will be an enthralling discussion.  A quick run of show.  Our total event time will be 90 minutes.  Roughly split into two portions, one of 45‑minute segment dedicated to moderated panel discussion and then the second roughly 45 minutes being delegated to open questions from those in attendance.
I highly encourage you to ask any questions that you may have.  It's a fantastic opportunity to hear from our experts and they have an incredible insight into the topics that we'll be discussing.
Down below you'll see a chat function and a Q&A feature.  The chat function is definitely a more social element, so if you want to tell me how good of a job I'm doing, that's where you pop that in.  If you have a serious question or a question for one of our panelists, please do pop it into the Q&A function.  I do ask that if you are going to ask us a question, please place the question at the top and then follow it with your name and the organization that you're here with.
So, without further ado, I'd like to hand it over to Fabrizio for some opening remarks.
   >> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD:  Thank you, Raj.  It's a great pleasure to be with all of you.  I wish everybody well, particularly on Friday the 13th, but perhaps it's fitting to have this discussion on this day.  The technology has brought us together but also given birth to new disputes, new borders, new barriers and a whole new domain, Cyberspace for violence and conflict together with health security and climate security, cybersecurity concerns have escalated into one of the central security policy issues of our time with very serious repercussions for the stability of our economies, our politics, and of our social structures.
Most of the efforts at the United Nations are focused on achieving the 2030 Agenda but several of the digital threats we face, the safety of our online systems, networks, hospitals, et cetera, can undermine the SDG's focused on improving social structures using technology.
The transnational and cross‑cutting impacts of digital technologies and cyber threats require new approaches that go beyond silos.  We cannot think of cyber solely in the context of armed conflict between states.  We have to think of it also in areas of sustainable development and economic prosperity.  We must consider cyber a whole of society issue and an issue for each one of us.
Technology cooperation across borders and promotion of technology access across regions of the world will rely on building mechanisms to enhance trust that digital technology is inherently safe and not compromised by cyber risks.  And, additionally, achieving universal connectivity, a paramount necessity for the 2030 Agenda also requires improving universal trust and resulting cooperation in technologies in an ever more digitized world.
This task comes before us as a time when geopolitical gridlock is again at a high and where political battles between superpowers also often play out in the digital arena.  Thus, the questions I think confronting us are basically three.  How do we deal with cyber in a more holistic manner and consider the linkage to the Sustainable Development Goals?  How do we ensure that digital technologies and Internet access for the unconnected 3.6 billion people who are by definition the most excluded and marginalized, how do we ensure those connections are safe and secure?  And how will stare the path forward in this unprecedented age precisely against a political backdrop of large divisions.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Thank you, Fabrizio.  Just diving in, to those who have been involved in the current round of cyber dialogues at UN, GGE and OEWG, what has this process been like thus far from your perspective, and what do you think are the likely outcomes, and Isaac, I'll start with you.
   >> GERARDO TENORIO:  Thank you very much, Raj.  Actually, many thanks for your question.  Very encouraged to put on the table many things, and let me express my gratitude to organizers for convening this timely and necessary discussion.
It's important to me to say that both the current open‑ended working group and the GD have represented at this stage some elements of success, and just to share very briefly, the first of these elements of success from my point of view is to keep the multilateral fora, and UN in particular as the main platform to discussing and advancing commitments in this regard.
Other elements of success, from my point of view, it's that these both processes have allowed us to better express the knowledge and importance of previously agreed norms.  Actually, it has been very visible and very interesting of how the norms agreed from the DGE track are encouraged to be applied at the open‑ended working group track, that's very interesting.
Of course, to increase attention and interest to actively involved in these discussions, is also an element very visible of success of both processes.  For many countries the open‑ended working group has opened a door to make visible priorities and needs in local and national priorities in needs and that's very important to consider at the international level.
Cyberspace issues, for me are not any more a discussion reserved to big players, to military powers only, or big companies, both for those, all for all of those interested in peaceful uses, promote stability, et cetera.
The opportunity to advance more cross‑cutting dialogues also, it's important to recognize from both pro processes.  It's important to see how we have found more dialogues with policymakers and tech community, and even within the UN and linked to the, as was said, it's interesting how these interactions have been strengthened and also our discussions and our approach with other relevant stakeholders, with private sector, with Civil Society, with academia.
At the national level, just let me put it on the table, these at the national level, these processes have encouraged us governments to get more ‑‑ to get more discussions, to get more dialogues with those sectors in order to consolidate national positions.  This kind of discussions and continuous involvement of different sectors have not been seen in the form that we have recently.
Then, taking into consideration these positive results from the ongoing processes, I have to say that I am confident to get results, to get important results.  Let me briefly share why I am being as optimistic is not only being optimistic for being optimistic, but why.  In this regard, it's important to me to identify that many concrete proposals have been already put on the table of both the open‑ended working group and the GDE, from repositories, international repositories of experiences to implementation guidelines to program of action or mechanisms to follow up the implementation of norms and previously agreements, such as the one presented by Australia and Mexico with many other countries.  So, we have on the table these very substantive and concrete proposals, then something is going to happen with them.  Discussions in both levels, they're reduced to any GGE or open‑ended working group have allowed also to identify the strong link between international laws, norms, CDMs, and capacity building.
For instance, as was said, even considering that we are having first committee discussion in the national security discussions, it is now clear the coherence with this with advancing the 2030 Agenda, for instance, and also we have seen many issues important like gender issues or access, the universal access, et cetera, and the importance of bridging the gaps even when having this first committee or international security discussions.
So, of course, questions and differences on international law applicability have ‑‑ we are facing, but we have now many, many voices that we believe we can push for having responses.  Thank you, Raj.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Okay.  I think it's very good to start, it's very difficult to have a panel in 2020 without discussing the global pandemic and the coronavirus.  I think the impact of COVID‑19, I think it is not just physical.  I mean, it has completely changed the way that we interact with the digital world and we have a lot of us working from home, studying online, connecting through social media, more than we ever had before.
I think what's really relevant though is these aren't just necessarily temporary changes.  For a lot of people, it's going to be a consistent shift.  Like this is the new normal of operation, and with that an increasing reliance on Cyberspace.  And I also think what comes with that though is a changing nature of conflict in Cyberspace as well, and Raman, I'll start with you on this.  How has the pandemic impacted digital rights as more people everywhere rely on digital infrastructure in an effort not to spread this disease?
   >> RAMAN CHIMA:  Thank you, Raj.  Excellent question.  So in addition to looking into Asia‑Pacific region is to coordinate a global cybersecurity policy and what I see is interesting because there is the policy impact of governments responding to the pandemic and often is unfortunately often the case well‑meaning responses that actually result in harms to rights, but also sometimes the excuse of the pandemic to move fast and break things which also have an impact on digital rights.  But beyond that as you mention, there is the very simple fact that digital is everywhere, it's not just ‑‑ everything you do impacts digital rights.  Access Now is an organization usually called digital rights organization and we actually specifically said three years ago we are a human rights organization in the digital age, along with many other colleagues in this space, and the sort of digital security work we provide and the public policy person, and but the real heros in the organization are the people that work with digital security helpline, a free service any Civil Society member, activist, journalist can use globally to get free assistance proactive or reactive, and what's been striking is that the amount of increase activity they have seen in the pandemic.  April, that month our busiest period of the help line in existence and I think that's not the only benchmark and after that several months are the busiest in existence, and it shows you that digital security is critical to what everyone is seeing locally, it cannily the society actors, what's happening is they are facing newer issues and threats and let me put it this way.  For example, for business security organizations to look at rights of organization to look at human rights issues, they would normally be able to meet laws easily and best that conference nearly all virtual, and it is increasingly digital now and all of that requires them to be more careful about what we put out.  They're targeted from nefarious contactors from criminals to unfortunately sometimes even government actors that is the truth that needs to be said and they're increasingly held to deal with this with limited resources, incredible strain, incredible mental anguish and challenges during the period.
And what we see therefore is an increased need for digital security.  We provide that, many other organizations also do and we're not the only one, where in fact we're very proud to be members of City CIRT the Civil Society Computer Response Team Network, and the fact that a network like that exists shows you global society, the watchdogs that protect our societies and protect our governments locally they need to secure themselves.
And what I want to mention is we've heard about the fact for example that health care is targeted in the pandemic and that's a simple cybersecurity reality, but activists are being targeted, journalists are facing issues, they're also facing issues because they're often talking about digital law, abuse during this period.  And for example sometimes coronavirus tracking programs being used to actually conduct surveillance, and fake news laws being used to not suppress fake news on the coronavirus, but actively used to target free speech and expression, and you're also seeing unfortunately, sometimes the passing of negative cybersecurity laws by national governments saying they're going to improve cybersecurity but actually being used to target not just activists but security researchers and in order to leave that with you, what's striking to me is the very people we need to depend on more, the humans who make human‑centric cybersecurity and human rights rather more secure human rights community globally possible at this stage, security researchers, independent whistleblowers who discover vulnerabilities in software they're sometimes targeted due to badly crafted laws or laws deliberately crafted in a way to be able to target these people.
So, in addition to providing better digital security, we need to understand that cybersecurity discussions at the national level, we need to connect the two.  The technical community and human rights community are not separate are and you need to connect the two and not enough is happening today.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  If I can add to that for a second.  I agree with everything that he just said and that's absolutely right.  But the two things that have struck me as being ideally of note is one that as we become more dependent on technologies, we've seen criminals, states, and others attacking them and that's an unfortunate thing and I think it's a recognition of cybersecurity being more important, but two it goes back to something that Isaac was saying too.  It's important as the processes in New York have been, I think one of the challenges have been that cybersecurity is still seen as a boutique issue, not that important of an issue that the experts can deal with, like all the people on this call are people that do this all the time so we talk to each other, but we really need to convince the high‑level political leadership of countries that this is a real priority that they need to deal with.
And I think to extent there is any silver lining from the COVID crisis I think the fact there is greater recognition, including in developing countries that this is something that is really important, that it's not just a digitization but it's also protecting cybersecurity and how we might be able to get there.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  I think to the rest of the panel do you think this created a greater urgency or need to protect vulnerable institutions from cyberattacks?  Kaja, if I can bring you in here?
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  I had to unmute myself.  Yeah.  No.  I think I would agree with what Chris just said.  I think for sure it has really focused the minds in terms of, you know, governments around the world are, A, I think realizing a little bit more what critical infrastructures are and how connected everything is.  It's shifting a little what the perception of critical is as the last six months or I guess more now, we've all sort of started working online, schooling using increasingly online, and obviously the attacks on health care as Raman has mentioned, have been really prominent.
I think, in fact, today Microsoft just like an hour ago maybe, Microsoft just published a blog highlighting the attacks from state‑associated entities against health care institutions vaccine research, and that, you know, that has been a theme, I will say, in the last six months.  Right.  There have been others who have called this out as particularly problematic.
We have seen, you know, hospitals close down in the middle of the pandemic and things like that.  And while I totally agree with Raj and I think ‑‑ or I'm sorry, with Raman, I think it shouldn't be the only lens we look through it, but it is that moment in time where governments are much more focused on, okay, okay, this actually needs to work.
But I would also completely agree with Raman.  I think that we, you know, we've seen over the past couple of years the extension of particularly state actors, that are you know, like we originally looked at oh, how do we protect like the parties and electoral process it's within our demanding democracy programs since sort of the last election in the U.S. so 2016, and a service that we offered to the ‑‑ to those entities has increasingly expanded in the last few years as we realize it's much more, like the think‑tank community around it, the human rights activists around it, the journalists around it.  And so there is ‑‑ there is definitely something that both ‑‑ so both sides of the argument, both the attacks against critical like actual attacks that bring things down, and then also attacks that effectively are surveillance or ‑‑ or just trying to understand and find data that can be used against particular individuals have to be kept in mind.
So, I think it is a good time to focus on but also a good time to be vigilant.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Fantastic.  We touched on the necessity for health institutions and research institutions to be safeguarded during a health crisis.  Do you think there is official protections currently if place?  And if not, why not?  That's an open question to anyone on the panel.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I mean, I would say, no.  You know, I think it's just recently become more of a priority when folks understand, you know, I'll quote one of the former President of Estonia, Thomas, who always talks about the worries he has in Cyberspace and one of them is the integrity of information, he cares if there is a service attack but if someone actually breaks into the hospital and changes your blood type so the next time you get a transfusion you die, that's more serious.  So that could be a challenge going forward.
If you look back at how the UK's health system was affected, part of it is health systems and places don't have the budget or expertise to deal with this and we need to treat them really as an additional critical infrastructure if we're not already.
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  Maybe if I'll quickly add one more thing.  I think just to keep in mind as well is, you know, we're looking at the globe at this stage, you know, the finders, the varying levels of connectivity, you about and as a result there is also varying levels of advanced technologies being used, and so you know, so making sure that we not only look at the tech and sort of see how protected they are, or that it is, rather, and I would agree with Chris there that I think there is definitely more to be done, but there is definitely also a human element there and you know, ensuring that the humans who use this technologies are aware and know how to act securely.
I think it's ‑‑ I think that's where a lot still has to be done, and so you know discussions and efforts and things that Chris is leading in the GSEE around capacity building are critical components in getting us all to a better place.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Yeah.  Fabrizio, do you have a comment?
   >> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD:  Thank you.  One thing I learn when the pandemic is over, that day all of us will know how to use the unmute button.  (Laughing).
But,, no, I would just say we need to try to understand the security in a broader ‑‑ have a broader understanding of security threats that go with cyber.  There is a lot of focus on protecting the physical integrity of our systems, which is tremendously important.  But there are other aspects that have come to the forum about COVID that need equal attention.  You know, misinformation, defused on a scale never seen before, never permitted when we were limited to non‑digital media, cause deaths.  That's a security issue.
Fueling of exclusion, political violence, prejudice, hate causes deaths, that's a digital security issue.  And then finally, you know, the issue of not being connected against the backdrop of a pandemic, the unconnected in an ever more digitized world aren't foregoing a luxury, but they are foregoing everything that makes the first world move and will be left ever further behind.  That is also a security issue.  That's the biggest ‑‑ there is the World Bank UN study on this called Pathways to Peace that, you know, analyzes documents, the biggest creator of conflict, the biggest creator of violence is exclusion, inequality, marginalization.  And so security, I think we have to think of in a much more multi‑tiered and comprehensive way and not as important as that is, I'm not saying it's not important.  But as important as it is, not to think of it only through the lens of protecting our digital systems.  It's also about the insecurity that is inherent to the sort of anarchy that is privileged in the digital world.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Yeah.  I think one key takeaway for someone like me who is just digesting all of that, is like this isn't just a simple one‑solution fix.  There is so many things that require multiple responses from stakeholders and neatly leads to the crux of this discussion.  UN dialogues to what degree have they included multistakeholder input, and what the multistakeholder community is hoping they will achieve.  I guess more specific for Chris, Kaja, and Raman, from more of an outside perspective, what are the impressions of broader multistakeholder community when it comes to these discussions at the UN?  I'm going to start with Kaja.
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  Sure.  I feel I always have things to say.  No.  I think that's also a question in ‑‑ one of the questions in the chat, I think, which is making sure that we are able to open up this discussion to a broader audience would be incredibly helpful.  I think, you know, from a private sector tech company perspective, obviously these discussions impact us directly.  While there are discussions around state security, it is a reality today that a lot of the infrastructure and technologies are operated by the private sector, and the ‑‑ I think we're able to both provide, hopefully helpful input into those discussions, in terms of how some of the technologies work, how they interrelate, you know, what is the future trajectory as well as what are some of the threats that happen or that we're seeing on our systems effectively.
But and I think from that perspective, they're also hopefully able to be ‑‑ to I want to say help shape solutions in this space, and so you know when the last year in December, the first or the only, I guess, multistakeholder consultation happened within the context of the open‑ended working group, and I think that was a great opportunity.
We, you know, and we'd love to see more of that, more of a conversation between the private sector and government on some of these issues.  Some of the governments really, you know, would love to ‑‑ would want to call out Australia, Canada, in particular in this regard, and Netherlands, and particularly Mexico, I'm sorry, as well but really proactively reach out and consult.  But I think it would be good if this was a more formal opportunity for everybody to kind of be allowed to pick sort of each other's brains, I think.  And I also have views on Civil Society, but I'll probably ask Raman to talk about those.
   >> RAMAN CHIMA:  Happy to.  And to say that it's an interesting challenge in getting the processes, and I say this from a perspective normalization.  Almost a little bit outside because we're formerly ECOSOC accredited and have a coordination but even then we find it challenges particularly with open‑ended working group, and the panels actually made it harder, it's very hard, and I talk concretely, but being the fact that we're in a sense a cybersecurity provider, we provide security to society and other groups internationally, and we're auto user because we have to protect our own systems and networks along with many other society groups and advocate and we have particular points of view and also perform the job or Civil Society more broadly speaking the truth and that can be irritating but incredibly useful to be there and that's a good job of a policy analyst to speak truth to some of these issues.  
The challenge with the UN process is despite the attempts Kaja mentioned and many others as they are also dually mentioned, and it's really challenging because you want it to be useful and effective and to get states to agree to talk about stuff, they're not always happy to and there is disagreement about states.  I've been accused of being an optimist of processes and I probably say I'm still that.  I see the value of these conversations sometimes more so than individual states might be there, but the realities for the technical community, the people who deploy cybersecurity or do cyber day in and day out, it's actually very hard for them to engage even if they have regular engagement in the UN system.  Can't easily take part, can't provide papers, it's a challenge process to make available, and you have to spend disproportionately on people who are either based in New York or Geneva who can talk to people there physically, meet them, and even for a group like this with the pandemic and restriction on physical meetings a lot of access goes away and people who work with us find that frustrating as well, and that's a reality to acknowledge.
With some of the proposals past or being considered and refinements of the processes whether it's restructured OEWG or program of action that many states from EY to Global South have jointly worked on they think it should be in there talking to stakeholders and I give you an example that I find both interesting, a member of the Forum for incident response along with many governments and corporations and they're the big group you want to talk to in cybersecurity regarding advice across lands, and for us it's very even funny that as first member, we can participate in a limited way because of ECOSOC status and as ourself cannot speak and as a part of our delegation.  And that's why we should fix this, not only because we want it to be democratic, and it should, but there are useful perspectives of these groups and there are ways to improve that perhaps.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  And I would say just on the first comment especially, you know, there is this disconnect between the communities that some of the actions in the UN are trying to protect in those communities, for instance in the GGE one of the great forms was not attacking CSIRTs because they're like hospitals or ambulances of the Internet.  I gave a keynote and talked about this and almost no one in the audience had ever heard of that which is strikingly bad and we need to make sure there is a conclusion between technical communities and other communities and what's going on in the U.  In.  As much as we celebrated the December meeting and it was a great breakthrough for the UN, it still was just a small ‑‑ a small piece of advance and I mean the fact is if you were at that meeting, everyone read their statements on both sides and that was pretty much it.  
You know, so we really need a better chance for interaction for meaningful interaction, and Kaja mentioned some of the governments that brought or who have made it their point to assemble stakeholders and talk to them before they go into these negotiations.  That would be great.  And we know some countries aren't going to do that at all, about you if we can find a way to have more meaningful interaction, I think that makes a difference, and look I think there has been progress but not nearly enough.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Chris, you mentioned like making progress, and I just want to press a little.  Do you feel like the dialogues reflect the input of the private sector and Civil Society?
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I think to some extent, to the extent that countries are actually bringing that perspective in.  The GFC, the global forum on cyber expertise, we have and will submit comments to the OEWG to go through and how much weight the comments have, hard to tell, right.  The players with the most weight are the nation‑states because that's what the UN is organized around, so I do think that it's important for us to have some more meaningful input, but they can ignore that input.  You know, there is going to be debates between countries too, but if there is a way to get that input there, that just helps the whole process.
   >> RAMAN CHIMA:  Just to jump in briefly to say that that's one way for more discussions around this because it is a political process, decisions and consensus across states and for them to buy into it.  A lot of it is also implementation.  And the more people beyond just us that talk about this and take the discussion to actual national discussions about by the way what is your cyber coordinator saying or talking about this, what is the UN, what is the mission saying about this, these are important things, but even the cybersecurity communities within countries need to discuss it more.  I struck by once hearing someone who didn't fully know what all the states were saying not because they don't do fantastic job of it, but there is so much going on and that we need to take it there.  And for me it's important it look at UN conversations, it's happening, there is not a breakdown of things, which means you need more discussion and buy in and perhaps even a sharpening of special in the national gap because sometimes states aren't sure what their positions are, and it's fine for them to create them, about you we need to being a knowledge that they need help.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  Yeah, maybe one other thing, one thing I think is effective is the traveling roadshow of ambassadors and others going to various forums.  They came to the global forum on cyber expertise meeting and back last November and I think just having listening sessions where they know what's going on and they're talking to the community, they've been very dedicated to that and I think that's very helpful.  And anticipating, Raj, your next question, since I think it's coming up on in terms of what the global forum on cyber expertise hopes to really get from these processes.  You know, I do think and I was heartened when I participated in some of the meetings, particularly the OEWG, the number of countries that raised capacity building is a core issue for them, foundational issue for them.  The countries that mention the global Forum on cyber expertise that was heartening as well, the launch in New York in February alongside the OEWG meeting so it's important to have that community understand it.  I'd like to see some emphasis on capacity building especially as we talked a little bit before, having capacity building for cyber and not being seen as a separate thing but being integrated into the UN Development Goals I think that's really important because, again, it doesn't make it this outlying, this boutique thing but something that's core to everything that we're doing, and a way for countries to prioritize both donor countries and countries that need help.
And but I don't, what I'd like not to see is the UN trying to say that we have this, we're going to do it all, and we're going to be the ringleader of all of this, come to us, and we're the hub.  Because I just don't think that's going to work very well for all the reasons that we talked about.  First, it's just going to be states, second it takes a lot of resources to do this, and I hope what they would do is leverage organizations like the global forum on cyber expertise that is already working to coordinate these issues and others as well, and I hope that that's going to be the output to be more collaborative rather than this is just going to be a UN thing.
   >> GERARDO TENORIO:  If I can briefly add.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Yes, please.
   >> GERARDO TENORIO:  This discussion, I mean, at the mandate of these processes, yes, we do have this opportunity to inform on consultations or more formal consultations with relevant stakeholders, and I feel we need to institutionalize these kind of consultations.  We need governments working within the UN, we need to encourage to have on the mandates from the mandates from the very beginning this call to have consultations with relevant stakeholders.
But I just want to insist on the issue, on this issue at the national level.  It has been very encouraging for particular countries, and maybe most of the countries are unwilling to have this kind of consultations, but maybe they have not identified the correct sectors inside their countries, et cetera, and so with this international processes, having consultations, we at the national level, of course, are encouraged to have this kind of interactions.
So, I sincerely believe and taking into account our own experience, that the international processes have encouraged us to have better consultations and better communications, and maybe not most of the time, but institutionalized or standardized, but it will be helpful that from the Civil Society, from the private sector, from the academia, to make visible those successful experiences in this kind of engagement in some concrete conference and in order we, the rest of the conference, tried to accommodate to our own possibilities and our own realities.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Kaja, if I can bring you in on this one.  Historically, the GGE dialogues have included a very limited number of states, comparatively the OEWG is now open to all UN member states, so specifically from a capacity‑building perspective, how can we make sure that all states, all states are equipped to have a voice in this really important event?
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  I think that, you know, I think that's incredibly difficult.  I think that it's ‑‑ I think we sort of touched it a little bit on the panel already, but you know it's almost taking a look not only at the cybersecurity capacity building as a technical or domestic policy issue, but also ensuring that states are able to engage on some of these issues and in a diplomatic circle.
So, you know, there has been for sure a few initiatives that, the DIPLO Foundation that is an organization based out of Geneva has run trainings for diplomates on effectively cybersecurity, and Estonia a country has put on a training as well.  There are initiatives that the UN ODA has also put forward in terms of more like interactive online experiences, and I think that is the bit that is critical, right.
I think ensuring that the diplomates that engage in these discussions are able to not just necessarily report back to the capital and hopefully have someone there that knows what's going on, but also engaging on a, you know, in a meaningful debate, and I think it will ‑‑ that would just ‑‑ that is just I think a thing that will take time.  Partly, it will also take time because you know, it's diplomacy so people rotate, right.  So even if there is a breadth and depth of knowledge that an individual could gain or a three or four‑year period while they are, you know, the countries representatives in New York or Geneva, you know then they rotate out and there is a new person, and often times it's a new person that has never had exposure to this, so I think fundamentally it needs to become, as with many security issues, a core part of the training for a diplomatic career.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  Yeah.  And I would say back in 2011, which seems like a lifetime ago now, I was the first diplomatic office dedicated to cyber issues, I think in the world, and now there are over 40 of them which is a great advance because it means retreating this is not just a technical issue but as a policy issue, but Kaja helped co‑chair the task force on the GFC and I should say the members include nation‑states, include private sector, Civil Society, academia, include even some UN institutions as well, and so it's a very inclusive group.  And we looked at how to jump start this, what to do with norms and not negotiate new ones but help implement and help get people familiar with how to conduct diplomacy and putting out a number of things, including a compilation of where we are on CBMs, for instance, which I thought was very helpful.
So, we really need to beef that up, and training diplomates to understand these things, even though they rotate through, but the more folks understanding these are key issues for them going forward and not just technical issues but core issues of technical security, economic security, human rights, that's going to help us all.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Isaac, I would just like to invite you in on capacity building in the diplomatic sense.  Any thoughts been cybersecurity as a broader issue?
   >> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD:  I think there is a real change of attitude that I have observed around diplomates.  I don't have the length of focus that all of you have on these issues, but when I started first getting involved in this domain about four years ago, anything cyber related was considered a job for specialists, and you know ambassadors in New York who considered themselves top of their trade, who are they top of their trade, many are former ministers, many go on to become foreign ministers, and would have considered it something technical and not worthy of their attention.
I think that's changed radically.  Already prior to COVID and even more with COVID.  I think there is a growing understanding that this is no longer a separate issue but it affects the politics as we know it, it affects economics, development, human rights as we know it, and to remain ignorant is very dangerous.
And in Mexico, and now I have to praise Mexico.  Mexico did a series of events last year with our support basically to try to educate, and you can't tell senior diplomat es they need to be educated because they don't like that, but to have discussions on these issues with diplomates in New York and they were incredibly attended.  And I see the resonance when the Secretary General launched the Roadmap on Digital Cooperation, I think 150 or 160 states attended and most at a senior level, and so I think there is a big switch and I think COVID only accelerated that.  But having said that, I do think we have further to go.
I would like to put it the other way.  I mean, I spoke once to the head of Nokia about, he was preaching to us on the need for policymakers to understand much better how machine learning works, how AI works, how the policymakers are making the decisions but don't really understand it.
Then we got him in to brief the senior managers at the UN, but I made the point at the time that that's a two‑way treat.  Diplomates need to understand much better how technologies work, but those in the technological field need to understand much better how politics work, how sociology works, how human rights work, and I think there is a massive deficit, if I may say so, on that side and a certain sort of arrogance in the sector that believes that such knowledge is not particularly necessary, and that has to change too.  There has to be massive education on both sides of the divide.
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  And maybe if I add ‑‑ I would agree with that.  But I would also, you know, to add to that I think it's also ‑‑ so it's a question of, so both on the tech sector of both understanding how the process it's work, how politics work, how just government diplomacy works, right, as well as issues like human rights and ensuring they are integrated into the processes of technology development from early on.  I think there has been greater awareness, and I think we're still far to go, and I think but the other thing as well is to, you know, ensure ‑‑ find a way tone sure the tech sector is not just three or four big players, but actually bring in a slightly broader group.  And I completely understand that you'll never have the SMEs because they don't have the time, right, but ensure that you do have a slightly broader conversation because a lot of the technology that is profoundly impactful is produced by very small companies, and in addition, it's not just effectively companies from maybe three or four markets that are engaging in this conversation.  Right.  I think there is a lot of American companies, they're increasing now, Chinese company, maybe Russian, maybe two European, but getting an understanding of, you know, how these technologies interact in a Latin American context or in an African context, and you actually need to have people who integrate it and operate on the ground versus someone sort of from the West Coast of the United States.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  If I can maybe like pull this a little bit more macro.  Maybe beyond just the OEWG and GGE, and in thinking about the role the United Nations plays.  Fabrizio your office at the UN is coordinating a series of roundtable discussions including one focused on digital trust and security.  How do you see this initiative relating to the first committee working groups and are they overlapping or largely complementary?
   >> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD:  I think completely complementary and our process is reinforcing.  The first processes by definition look at this through the lens of registrants and national security and look at the context of interstate conflict.  What we're arguing is that the issue is much broader as I tried to stress in my initial remarks.  We need to look at this from the point of view of the Sustainable Development Goals, we need to look at this from the point of view of the health of our economies, we need to look at this from the point of view of the security of our human rights and that's the complimentary.
The other complementary is that it's meant to be a high‑level regulation and what we're trying to say is this is an issue, this is not just an issue for experts, as important as the experts are, but we need to elevate this to head of state level, and perhaps it's also the added value.  And furthermore, this is very much meant as a multistakeholder process, all the discussions we've had so far have been from a multistakeholder process, and the idea was born through a multistakeholder process, and we would see the advance as a multistakeholder process.  It takes a much broader lens, focuses on development of human rights, it's at a much higher level.  I mean, let's be honest.  How many people outside of very narrow circle of specialists know about the GTE and recommended working group processes as important as they are.  And the other would also be the political, the global political declaration would enhance the image and the knowledge of the important work that's happened and under the GGE and more recently the OEWG.  And perhaps we haven't explained this enough, but somehow, I think this idea of duplication or overlap is a little ‑‑ is a little strange.  I mean, those who are discussing nuclear arm's control in the 50s, 60s, and 70s, never worried that other groups that were talking about safe standards for nuclear power plants were somehow duplicating their work.  I mean, this is transformative to our world, and the idea that we can all settle it, all the issues that arise through the GGE and working group is in my mind not ‑‑ not likely to prevail.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Just to take it a little bit further, what or which organizations, rather, are included in the roundtable discussions?
   >> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD:  Well, the roundtable discussions are open.  So frankly it's those who are most enthusiastic and most committed.  In the particular theme we have roundtables around the different eight workstreams set out in the Secretary General's Roadmap and those companies, countries, Civil Society institutions that are particularly committed to it join, and there are no picks.  It's the people that show up, we have very constantly, but anybody is welcome at any time.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Thank you.  Isaac if I can bring you in on this next one.  Cybersecurity was notably included for the first time in convenings of the Security Council of recent months and also at the regional level the OAS has increased attention to cybersecurity.  How do you see these developments?
   >> GERARDO TENORIO:  Thank you, Raj.  Actually, let me just first to build upon what Fabrizio said.  Today, when talking about Cyberspace and digital environment, it's impossible, I mean, working within the relevant processes within the UN, it's impossible to see only the first committee or to see only the second committee or the third committee or the sixth committee.  Sincerely, it's impossible.  Actually, we need to be able as diplomates and as governments putting on the table positions, national positions to be able to see how all of these processes and efforts are linked to the very big goal of getting Cyberspace, a lawful Cyberspace and peaceful Cyberspace and open Cyberspace.
So, I feel it's necessary, of course, to break the silos.  How to do it?  It's very hard to respond.  But, of course, this kind of multistakeholder and interregional dialogues, et cetera, help us to try to break those silos.
Of course, I'm not saying that we need no mandates for each of the processes.  I mean, first committee processes, they need an international security mandate.  But the discussions, the efforts, and actually the results coming from each will have links to others.
And regarding your very important question on how I see these developments of the Security Council or the OAES dealing with the Cyberspace issues and cybersecurity, and I have to say that I see these developments as a result of two councils.  The of course the more interest on cybersecurity issues, but unfortunately, the increasing of cyberattacks in major incidents, not only in number but in their negative consequences.
So, I feel that it's important, of course, that the Security Council has had already discusses on these issues.  Nevertheless, it's important to identify and consider the Security Council mandates, that for me it's not necessarily the venue to prevent or to promote commitments to prevent, but to respond or to react, then I believe it's important, of course, to consolidate the previous steps, the prevention of conflicts and ensuring it, and that's why I feel that through the open‑ended working group, the processes will have opportunities to elevate these commitments in order to advance these previous steps to the Security Council discussions.
Regarding the regional level, thanks for the question because it's important also to remember that actually the UN Charter has an 8 chapter, and to regional roles and regional conversation and this is important.  Mexico recently OAES General Assembly, just a couple of months ago, promoted within the international law resolution an affirmation that the international law, it's applicable to Cyberspace, and also the norms development by the previous GGE have been to implement it.  Maybe it's not necessarily a very big step, but considering the role of the OAES has, it's a big step that the OAES has adopted this resolution with this scope to the international law applicability to Cyberspace and the norms of the GGE.
And then I feel that we also at the regional level, we need to have more interaction between the technical and the policy levels, and also to see how from the CBM's work that actually we have been advanced under the leadership of it in the OAES how to find ways to accommodate also awarding and capacity‑building and bridging digital divides from the regional security approach but consolidated also the path to ensure peaceful uses.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Thank you, Isaac.  I think now is a really good time to switch over to our highly engaged audience.  They've been submitting questions to us, so I'm sure you all have some interesting responses.  I'll just with, yeah, this one comes from Ruth, the Internet truly unprecedented or is it the speed of developments that make it different from past developments that disrupted existing structures?  In other words, are there no lessons to be learned from sailing the open seas, telegraphs, trains, telephony that we can use toward the Internet?  So, I guess a question more about are there lessons to apply to these developments?  Kaja?
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  I will lead off and then hopefully people can jump in because I'm not sure I have a super profound answer.  So, I think my perception is that it is much faster, right.  I think there is ‑‑ I would definitely, you know, if you look at the speed of how things have developed and how far we have come in the past, almost say like 15 years, you know, the 15 years ago we were almost ‑‑ no.  Yeah.  We were basically the first year of Facebook, a tiny small proportion of population used it, and the amount of the Internet usage was ‑‑ I think it was probably like one‑third of where we are now and maybe even less.
So, the adoption, the development, and the transformation that's associated with it that goes across the whole of society, I think it's very different to some of the things that sort of have gone before.  I would say there are definitely lessons to be learned and I think there is not even just lessons to be learned, but I think there are rules of the road that we have, there are laws that we have that just don't need to be rewritten.  You know, the international law, as it is, should apply.  International humanitarian law, human rights law, should all apply to this space and we just need to figure out what are some of the nuances and gaps that need to be addressed.
So, I think there is definitely strong foundation, but we just sometimes ignore them.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I think that last point is incredibly important.  So, you know, Cyberspace does have lots of differences to be sure, but we don't need a whole new rule set from what we've had for the last hundred years and since World War II to bring us safely into the century or more safely than we were, at least.
And if we have a whole different rule set for the Internet than we do for physical space, that itself causes instability and problems, so I think it's important for us to say how the Internet is really grounded in the physical world, and it is, especially with international law as we think about rules of the road and norms, we're applying some of those precepts to Internet things to be sure, confidence building measures is a concept that was around long before the Internet existed but that's important in this space too.  I think there is a lot of things that are direct parallels, and if we abandon those and treat the Internet as a free fire zone where nothing applies, that's very dangerous, so I think it's very important to keep us grounded in the physical world and what we've thought about in the past.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Thank you.  Next question comes from Andre Barrinha.  Despite the importance of the issues being discussed and the developments in the GGE and OEWG, the reality is that these processes remain fairly niche, largely invisible to the general public.  What else could be done to make these processes and issues more visible to a wider audience?
I think I might just add a little bit of something to that as well.  From a youth perspective, IP, young people are going to see the impacts of all of these discussions and these decisions moving into the future, so I think that's a really pertinent question and one of how can we make these processes and issues more visible to a wider and potentially younger audience?
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  Maybe I'll start with that just because this has been a mission of mine for years now, is to make cyber and cybersecurity not a niche issue but one and thank really transcends that and we need to put it on the political agenda.  Fabrizio is right that we need to make this an issue of world leaders, of Prime Ministers, of national security advisors, of generals, of parliamentarians, foreign ministers, and there has been some efforts in the past to do that like the global conference on Cyberspace that brought together foreign ministers and anterior ministers and that was helpful, but we have to pierce this vail and not think of it ‑‑ you don't have to be a nuclear engineer to understand the policy aspects of nuclear technology.  You don't have to be a coder, although you should have people in the background who know how these things work.  You don't have to be a coder to understand the policy implications here, and you know I often talk about our cyber group as the kind of tribe of cyber gypsies that move from place to place and we all talk to each other again and again, and that's great, but we're not the people that need to be reached.  We need to reach the higher levels, and anything that we can do, and it might be high‑level declarations, and it may be engraining ourselves in these larger conferences on security, like Munich Security Conference and others that they have a cyber track, but we need that on the main stage.  We need to make sure that this is not just some, again, throwaway issue but one that's core to the big discussions that are happening.
   >> RAMAN CHIMA:  I just want to add to that because some of the questions and people that we want to have positions on.  The leaders, it's often with their constituents.  What is your, if you're a candidate for office, what do you think about that?  And I joke of cybersecurity person, I hate using the word cyber because it can mean all the different things.  And as Fabrizio mentioned, it's important to understand the context of it, but somehow, it's easier to just hide behind the initial thing.  But more often than not, you ask them what is your position, they will craft it.  
So, we need to ask what is position of issues happening in cybersecurity or even what is your position of UN cyber processes?  Simple, but keep it going.  Even talk to local communities and that's conversations because often where I see the disjoint between what Chris mentioned the traveling community of cyber gypsies is what people domestically might say.  You talk to someone in Bangladesh on digital security for them, their meaning is very different, far more, I'd say, directly about how a particular law might be misused versus what we might be talking about in terms of confidence building measures or vulnerability disclosures, so that's bring that there and perhaps one of the space is the regional meeting, OEAC has done a great job and maybe others trying to do it, and of a cap union as to credit had useful discussions and done this and led by and also supported of the great work of the OEAC Chair and GGE Chair but we need more of and perhaps not only just depend on UN and perhaps as different stakeholders why not have the chat at regional level or across different stakeholders but to have more of that.
I keep joking there are already so many discussions on cybersecurity, and that's not enough.  We need more.  People for social policy, people with public health, people with views to come in there because some of the things is also to connect existing issues, and as Fabrizio said they coordinate across many areas and sometimes you can also have proactive steps, for example, on digital health, the digital identity, data pro section and cybersecurity in communities is tremendous but very hard to find them in one room.
   >> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD:  I fully agree with everything said.  I just would add one element and that's schools, education.  I happen to have three teenage kids who have been in education systems because I work for the UN in three different countries, and they learned far more than I learned about it, but they learn about coding, they do learn about coding.  They don't learn anything about the vulnerabilities that they're exposed to through the cyber world.  They don't learn anything about how this is changing politics as we know it.  They don't learn anything about what can and you can't do to enhance or threaten human rights.  So, I think, and when I learned about nuclear technologies at school, I didn't learn how to become a nuclear engineer I learned much more about nuclear in the context of geopolitics, in the context of transformation of economies, and so something has gone wrong there.  I mean, I'm not saying that they shouldn't learn to be coders, but it shouldn't stop is there.  It should be much more about the societal implications across the board, and I mean in particular on the many levels of security.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Fabrizio, that's a really good point.  Isaac, please, jump in.
   >> GERARDO TENORIO:  I'm sorry, thank you, just to add briefly.  Actually, I feel that we are facing, I mean, to the Cyberspace discussions from the international security perspective, actually we are facing what most of the international security and peace and security issues sometimes face to the public, that is they are not necessarily, I mean, interest the very first view, they are not necessarily related to day by day, you know, to the reality day by day.  Nevertheless, it's important that we, governments, private sectors, Civil Society, academia, to work together in the international organizations, of course, in order to translate to the public, to the general public that those issues are related also to the day‑by‑day reality because as we ‑‑ as much as we assure that this will do this, we will have this day‑by‑day reality also in a more safe and environment, and I feel that, for instance, they have been doing great job in order to disseminate, in order to spread the knowledge, but to a more specialized, that is a role, of course, but to a more specialized outings.
It would be important to launch from the GFCE, for instance, or from the cyber institute, and I'm not sending the message to Chris and them to do it, but maybe from those platforms to spread, you know, to not necessarily specialize, but to the general public, what it has been doing.
Of course, at the regional level, we have a lot to do, and also at the national level.  This kind of discussions, they are improving our way to disseminate what we're doing and what we're discussing, but also at the national level, we as governments, we are obligated to do this kind of discussions also at the national level with relevant stakeholders in order to spread the work that we are doing and trying to solve.
Finally, just we depend also on the possibility to get results, to get commitments and agreement because if we say, oh, we do have this very interesting process of the open‑ended working group in the GGE and the digital ‑‑ the digital agenda, et cetera, et cetera.  But we reached no agreement, we reached no substantive commitment and then it's, you know, it's unnecessary to the public to know that we do have these processes.
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  And maybe if I can just add to this because I think that was one of the questions earlier on more focused on health care.  But why these things are important.  You know, whether you look at the UNDG Report of 2015, whether you look at the Paris Call that was mentioned earlier as well.  I think all of these commitments, or even individual countries statement, right, they all build a set of normative roles of behaviors, so they build the idea of what allowed, what is accepted, and what is really not.  So, and there will always be people that break those rules, you know, like it happens in every sphere of existence and there will always be people that break the rules, but if ‑‑ but the vast majority won't.  If there is clarity, I think it kind of like brings the bottom up and we can all strive to do a little bit better, so I think that's the point.  The point is critical.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Yeah.  Next, just in the interest of time to try to make sure I'm on top of it, I want to get through some of these questions because there are some excellent questions here so if I can just ask for some rapid responses just to get through all of the ones that we have.  Fabrizio, something you mention add quick second ago was looking at schools and education and our next question sort of looks at the manifestation of how we can actually help them.
So, it's asked, journalists, secondary schools, education institutions, and marginalized communities such as refugees are new to the Internet world and have limited knowledge of the Internet.  Do we have some simple software tools developed to protect new Internet users from cyberattacks, and how can we best implement them on a wide scale to ensure their protection?  Chris, if you have any thoughts on this, I can bring you in?
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  Yeah, and I mean this goes to an issue that I think is really important.  It's not just the tech companies and others that we need to reach out to.  It's the sectors we're trying to protect, and I think journalists and others are often the ones that slip off the table so we need to make sure we're protecting them for lots of reasons.  There are some tools out there, and there is an organization called the Global Cyber Alliance that just put out a toolkit for protecting journalists and I recommend people check that out.  I think it's very useful.
I think we need to, especially with ransomware and other things we have to do more to protect schools.  In addition one of the parts of the global forum on cyber expertise is talking about skills and education which also talks about how we as some folks on the call, or on this session have already said, how we start indoctrinating people at a certain age to understand these are important issues, and so that's the policy part of it, but I think we have to do both of those things.
But again, the GFCE toolkit I think is very useful, and also it incorporates some of what is called the Center for Internet Security controls, a group that I've been on the board of, and I think those are helpful for folks, too.  There are practical things out there.  The other thing I would say when I was at the State Department there was a lot of funding through the Internet Freedom Program and Human Rights Program to protect vulnerable communities around the world, and to give grants to various groups to do that, and I imagine that's going to continue, especially in the new administration.
   >> RAMAN CHIMA:  Just to point something out as we go through City Cert.org many groups received support from technology and other organizations as well.  They're often the people on the frontlines helps the human rights community and journalists and many others we need to go to as well and the great thing about these folks, is they don't mind pointing to each other's work, they use materials and put it publicly on Open Source platforms and open copyright license terms so people can see it.  So a great set there and we need to do much more as well because for example in the public health space people have been trying to get stuff off for others to translate that, but there is a great set of people and encourage people to look at that and tell them how to do it better as well.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Moving on to the next question comes from Alexander.  For 20 years global stakeholders fought to ensure that DNS issues including DNS security were addressed through multistakeholder fora like ICANN, and specifically not the UN.  Why should DNS now be included in the UN cyber norms work?  Doesn't this undermine previous efforts and risk the security and stability of the technical layer of the Internet?  Tricky question.  Any takers?
   >> RAMAN CHIMA:  I can take a quick stab.  The most important example is many people have been cautious about specifically going into DNS as an element of this should be discussed and decided at the UN there have been discussions and concerns with states, especially you don't hear it.  Sometimes you have to know they have a concern, it might be posture, genuine, but let it come up otherwise, they're going to go ahead and do other things, But that's why sometimes the technical communities looking at these things carefully to make sure it's effective, doesn't necessarily mean to come up with another UN fora, but to my knowledge has not come up specifically here but again Chris and Kaja may have seen something that I missed.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I doubt you're going to get any consensus on the UN processes to try to take over the DNS system, and I think that would be a bad idea.  I think the way that's been built, the multistakeholder system is good.  Can it be improved?  Sure, it needs to be, it needs to be reflective of that, but I think it would be mistake for the UN to try ‑‑ and I think this has been true for many years to, try to take over that function, you know, we wouldn't have the Internet we have today if it were done by just a government‑only organization.
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  And maybe just ‑‑ go ahead Fabrizio.
   >> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD:  I just want to say speaking for the UN in terms of the UN Secretariat and not speaking for UN Member States and there is that distinction, there is absolutely no aspiration on behalf of the UN Secretariat to take this over, notwithstanding what Member States may discuss and decide, but there is no aspiration in that regard in the Secretariat.
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  Yeah.  I just wanted to add one more thing, and I think it's that we've kind of gone in and out of this throughout the conversation, but I think it's important for everyone to remember that there is sort of the normative conversations, which are, you know, conversations about agreements that are fairly, I'm going to say vague, even though it's probably the wrong word.  Commitments that states make at an international level, and then these then have to be implemented on the domestic level.  So, I think the difference between sort of the broad commitment and then the domestic implementation, I think it's something to keep in mind.  I know this doesn't answer the DNS question, but I think it's something that, it's helpful to for us all to think about it as we sort of continue this conversation.
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  But I would say the global commission on the stability of Cyberspace where I was one of the commissioners, recommended you can call it a new oral or articulation of the existing infrastructure norm I think it's better, of protecting the global core of the Internet is something that is a norm, a norm of restraint that states should not disrupt the global core of the Internet which includes things like the DNS system, so I think that's important.
   >> GERARDO TENORIO:  And if I may add, we would talk about breaking silos and it's important also to see what has been successful, what's happening or not in order to engage in the processes.
What I'm saying is that when calling to break the silos we're not trying to bring the IGF to the first committee and the first committee to the third or the GCFE to the first committee or something.  We do have many different platforms, and so some platforms, the multistakeholder nature or maybe the various specialized work, they have very important merits in each of their work, so we are not ‑‑ we have not tried to, you know, to overlap the mandates.  It's important to break the cycles, but to have the complete picture, but not necessarily to overlap the mandates and the work that actually have been doing the different platforms and doing good, I mean, having results such as the IGF, et cetera.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Just on behalf of the audience and their incredible questions, I want to say thank you, Chris, Isaac, Raman, and Kaja, looking and coming to the closing time of our discussion, I guess fortuitously timed because next week kicks off the next round of dialogues for the open‑ended working group.  I guess for the panel more broadly, what are the best ways for multistakeholder communities to provide comments and contributions even if it is informally?
   >> RAMAN CHIMA:  Just to flag, especially my colleague Kaja fantastic made a couple of suggestions here.  Please look in the chat because there are fantastic things people are mentioning from Anriette and others; but in addition, again, if you have it make it available, can you send it to the process but also send it to the states and also again many of us are happy to help and coach people who want to provide more inputs there.  But often the common positions, the more people agree on common positions and put them up jointly, again that tends to have more impact then.
But there is a process as well for informing in December that people are working on and I again that's very important to make sure it's effective and that's something that a lot of us are focusing on there.  But lastly, if there is a proposal from states that people have strong views on or believe should carry forward, speak up and talk to perhaps your own national policymaker or relevant political contact because there are agreements being made there and some of them may go over the line and I always recommend it is a good idea that a lot of people are behind, tweak it and improve it, and it will be more likely to get ahead there.  Also, something very concerned about, speak up and do that but again many are happy to help people who may want to do that.
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  Maybe I'll just add so the open‑ended working group has a website where you get a lot of the submissions, so I'm now going to remember where it is ‑‑ oh, there you go.  Someone pasted it.  There you go.  Thank you.
And so, you know, go check it out, that's where you will see a lot of the latest ‑‑ where the latest sort of discussions are, and you will also see all the submissions from both states and sort of the multistakeholder community more broadly, but then also, you know, Raman sort of alluded to it, but there are things afoot in terms of the preparing and more informal consultation in December, so if you want to know more, you know, I think email Shital, email me, or email Raman and we'll be happy to help with that.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Yeah.  Chris and Isaac, I might get your thoughts on this.  Through industry and Civil Society organize an ongoing dialogue to contribute to the UN discussions.  Should they?
   >> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER:  I think that's a possibility.  I don't think we should look at industry or Civil Society as monolithic creatures, right.  There are lots of industries, tech industry, non‑industry, even in the tech industry there is a lot of diversity and the same with Civil Society.
So just having one big session, I'm not sure is as effective as having several small one, perhaps, but I think we need to find new mechanisms.
You know, one thing that the global forum on cyber expertise is thinking of doing is convening a conference that's not just us, not just the GFCE but a number of these other stakeholder groups, including states, to have discussions around capacity building and some of these other issues, and we're looking to perhaps do that at the end of next year and hopefully things will be better then and we might be able to actually get people together in person.
And we're going to consider that at our annual meeting week after next; but you know, I do think that the more we can get these communities together and talking to each other and being more effective, yes, you know, posting comments is great, the GFCE is posting comments, and I don't know that the Member States read every one of those comments.  You know, it's ‑‑ there are a lot of them and it's just hard so we have to go beyond that and actually have an influence, and we can even convene, you know, different groups can convene sessions with some of the Member States.
I think, you know, doing things in New York where we have sessions with the diplomats there and folks participating in this, I think can be very valuable, so I think we need to be creative in how we do this.
   >> GERARDO TENORIO:  Thanks.  I will add, if you allow me, actually I will suggest something in order to get maybe more possibilities to ‑‑ I mean, to as governments discussing of the open‑ended working group or GGE to consider the inputs coming from Civil Society, from private sector from academia.  And of course, general statements, of course general positions, of course all what those sectors want help us in order to identify priorities at national, regional, and international level.
Nevertheless, sometimes it's also important that those sectors, because I mean it's just like governments, we have many Member State's voices then we have many private sector voices and we do have many Civil Society organizations' voices and academia voices, et cetera.  So sometimes it's good, it's helpful to see some statements or additions or suggestions to actually input and put it on the table already.
For instance, it will be helpful for the general processes to see how the Civil Society and the private sectors sees ‑‑ how they see the Program of Action.  The Proposal of Program of Action and how they see the proposal of international repositories and experiences, and how they see the implementation, review mechanisms if I may say, or disservice, et cetera.  I mean, if you go to the work page of the open‑ended working group, and also the Secretariat and the chairs, both the open‑ended working group Chair and GGE are doing great and you will see how many different concrete proposals, more concrete proposals are already on the table.  It would be good for the process in order to get something concrete, something substantive and also those sectors to say something on those proposals already on the table.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Thank you.  Fabrizio, I'll turn it back to you for your closing thoughts on what the stakes are as we look ahead.  What is the potential of digital technology to help fulfill the UN's agenda, and what leadership is needed from the UN in seeking to achieve this potential?
   >> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD:  Thank you.  I think the Secretary General likes to how mechanisms we handle two issues will determine more than anything else what our future looks like.  One is not surprisingly, climate change, and the second is the impact of digital technology, and there is no question that they can be a massive, and we're seeing that already, a massive force for good, force for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, from leapfrogs and access to health, and for leapfrogging and access to quality education, and et cetera, but it's also clear in the pandemic has brought that out that if not adequately managed, if not adequately directed, and in some cases adequately regulated, they can further inequality, they can spread hate, they can undermine social creation, and it's also clear that the technologies have spread at a far greater space than policymakers have been able to keep up, and that's true at most national levels, true of regional levels, and even truer at the international level, and these technologies, by definition, ignore borders, by definition mean that you can sit in one place and cause harm or good in a place completely across the world.  
So we need greater international steerage, and at this time where we're steering toward fragmentation of the Internet, but partially because of the international cooperation because of the lack of international understanding, I think there is a certain urgency notwithstanding the very fundamental areas which will always exist where we disagree on doing much more to visualize and articulate where we do agree to precisely try to undercut the trend that is dominant toward visualize the sort of balkanization of the Internet which if left to prevail will do great harm in terms of our ability to overcome the digital divide and make the most out of this incredible technology.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Well, here we are.  Thank you so much, Fabrizio, Isaac, Chris Painter, Raman, and Kaja.  It's been an absolute pressure being your moderator today and I hope that you enjoy the rest of IGF 2020 and a massive ‑‑ I'm sorry, how can I forget, a massive, massive, thank you to our highly engaged audience.
   >> KAJA CIGLIC:  Thank you, Raj.
   >> RAJ BURLI:  Thank you very much.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-11-%E2%80%93-ws202-digital-discrimination-during-the-covid-19-pandemic-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> Lidia, can you hear or are you using captions? 
>> LIDIA BEST: There is no captioning yet. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: You can do it on Zoom. It will be automatic. Well, there's no captioning yet. 
>> LIDIA BEST: It is now available. 
>> In the closed caption button it shows subtitle. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: We have a captioner. And we also have the streamtext. So two forms. 
>> I posted the link of the streamtext. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: The link for the captioning is in the chat box, Lidia. Lidia, hello. 
>> The captions are working. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Yes. The captions are working now. It was quite a job to get this sorted out. It wasn't as simple as sending me the link. You haven't met Christopher Lee. Are you understanding any of this, Lidia? 
>> LIDIA BEST: Hold on a second. I'm trying to set up my screen first. Thank you. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Okey‑dokey. Don't get the hump. We don't need it. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: Actually, Lidia and I have met. She's done a subject matter expert video with us. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Thank you very much, Christopher, for sticking in. I am now set. That's fine. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Okay, good. Did you meet Christopher ‑‑ you met before? 
>> LIDIA BEST: We met before, a few times. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I have never seen him in the flesh. First time.
 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: You have. At the U.N. there was an event two years ago. We hung out for a few minutes with a colleague of mine. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: That was like ‑‑ 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: Forever ago. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I didn't connect that with you until now. Got it. Okay. Anyway, Lidia, what I was trying to tell you, it was a little bit more complicated than just getting a link. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Okay. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: That was why I had to just deal with it. 
>> LIDIA BEST: I think it would be very good if our participants give feedback to IGF. I personally found it is a tiny bit confusing, but because I have done previous meetings it was easy for me to follow now. But, yes. It's definitely using online is much more confusing for people, especially when you are not used to a different way of doing things. Each organizer is doing things differently and set up different and that's the problem. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Luis is listening to you. Luis is IGF's technical man. He's got it. He's taking it in. He was helping me this morning.
 
>> LIDIA BEST: Anyway, how are you, Christopher? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: No sound, Christopher. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: I'm doing very well. How are you? 
>> LIDIA BEST: You're talking to Andrea or me? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Everybody. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Okay. It's okay. We are locked down. We are still having to work from home and things like that. I don't like it. I don't like it because there is no schedule. There is no, you know, kind of plan for the day which we normally have. It is about kind of ‑‑ yeah, you could say we could have adapted since March. 
It still is unsettling. Today it was a very good e‑mail from my company saying we know how unsettling this is with constant changes. This is the rule and now we're doing this, now we're doing something else. One moment I'm working two days a week in the moment. Another moment I am four days and another moment, I am not anymore. You cannot plan anybody. It is not possible to plan. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: Amazing how stressful it is for everyone. It's unbelievable. We're struggling over here in the U.S. We have these things going on, too, between presidents you could say. It's a lot of tension. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: No politics, no politics. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: No politics. 
>> LIDIA BEST: But I can imagine. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: Hopefully everything will work itself out, you know. We have several more months, I believe. 
>> LIDIA BEST: It's not just unsettling for you guys but for everyone, even in Europe because of the ‑‑ it's not politics, but there is a famous saying. If America sneezes, Europe ‑‑ the rest of the world catches a cold. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I think that's very true, very true. Lidia and I are both in the UK. We are technically in lockdown. So our rules are not as bad as the first lockdown. We can go food shopping. 
What else can we do? We can go exercise in our garden. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: Outside, yeah. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Yeah. We can go to the doctor. Or to the hospital. What else can we do? Lidia? 
>> LIDIA BEST: We could do all those things previously. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Who is coming on? 
>> This is Gabrielle maybe, our host. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Who just came on? 
>> This is the host. We have two hosts. And Megan probably. 
>> I'm Megan, hi. 
>> Megan and Gabriel, can we look at you for a moment? 
>> My web cam has a big crack across it. 
>> All right. Gabrielle, I see you. The captioning is covering your picture. Can I move ‑‑ 
>> Luis? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I'm going to have everybody turn off their cameras except when they speak once we get going and get everybody on. I don't think the bandwidth will sustain. I'm in the middle of the countryside which has lousy internet. 
>> All right. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: We may do that. Nice to meet you, Gabrielle. So you are with IGF? 
>> Yes, please. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Okay. I'm just the chairman of the session. It is actually Lidia's workshop. Oh, Fernando is coming in a minute. Hang on. 
>> If you don't mind, two things, Andrea, if I can interrupt you. Paulina is already there. I'm sorry for the background noise. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Luis? 
>> Yes. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Fernando from F123.org says he's having difficulty to log in. He's blind. Can someone send him a Zoom link via e‑mail? Can you send me a link ‑‑ a special link so I can send it to him? 
>> I cannot send directly. Zoom will send to him directly. We need his address, please. Maybe put it in the chat and I will send an invitation. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Do you want to do that, Lidia? 
>> LIDIA BEST: I'm just putting in chat. 
>> Just to tell you, Gabrielle and Megan are part of this community capacity building, volunteer people working. Doing a great job for this IGF. I wanted to introduce you to Andrea. She's the chairwoman of this session. Just wanted to acknowledge each one with each other. 
They are here to help you, Andrea, and team. Everything is ready. I hope you have a very good session. I'm always behind the scenes if you need anything at some point. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Okay. If we need you, we tell them and they tell you. 
>> That's correct. That's correct. I will send this invitation to Fernando right now and I will pass the host role to Gabrielle and Megan. They make a great team. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: We have another problem. We have Masahito who is online. He can't get on. Hang on a minute. I have to talk to him. 
>> Masahito is a speaker, a panelist? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Yes. 
>> Just promote him. 
>> I just did that. 
>> Yes. He will be there shortly. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Can you see him? 
>> He will join very shortly. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: So who do we have left? Paulina is on, correct? 
>> Mm‑hmm. That's correct. Masahito is here as well. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I don't see him. 
>> You can ask to start video on his name as the host. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: How do I do that? 
>> No, the hosts will do it. You can be made a co‑host, Andrea, if you prefer so. Do you want to be a co‑host of the meeting? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I don't understand. I'm just running the meeting. Oh, there. The only problem I have. Hi, Masahito. I guess I have to hide the subtitles because they are going over the pictures. Masahito is there. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Can you make me a co‑host in case of problems.
 
>> ANDREA SAKS: The hosts will do that. Please make Lidia a co‑host of the meeting. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: Also I'm going to show a PowerPoint deck. As long as I can share. Sometimes it locks you out from sharing. 
>> Okay. 
>> LIDIA BEST: So does Masahito.
Masahito will be as well sharing his slides. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: ‑‑ share screen. There is a share screen button down at the bottom. 
>> Just to clarify all of your panelists can share with the share button. Okay? Christopher, you can. Lidia, Masahito, Paulina. Just click on the share button at the bottom and share what you want. Your screen, your screen with sound, any application, anything. Thank you. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Paulina will not be speaking. She is just supporting reporting later after the meeting and so on. So what we have is Luis, Shadi. Oh, Shadi is in the chatroom. 
>> Perfect, thank you. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Could Shadi come on as a picture so we know he works? 
>> He will be there very soon. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: We have MATJAZ ‑‑ he says the captioning is okay. We have Masahito. Hey, Shadi. Yabba‑dabba‑doo. 
>> Hey, Andrea. Hey, everyone. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: We have ten minutes before we start. I just wanted to say we are going to turn off our videos except for ‑‑ Lidia, do you want to stay videoed since you want to be the co‑host? Lidia? 
>> LIDIA BEST: I don't have to really. In the webinar, no. Not really. It's the speakers which will be on. Luis, is that how you set up normally? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Yes. That's what we do normally, Lidia. We know that. I just asked if you wanted to be on with your video. 
>> LIDIA BEST: You are the chair, Andrea. You should be on. Because we follow you. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Exactly. What I was going to say to everybody who was on ‑‑ is Fernando on? 
>> Is Fernando on? Okay. No. I mean, is webinar has already started. I cannot just send directly a link for him, but I will do the necessary so he can receive it in the next minutes. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: We have started? I thought we didn't start until 12:10. 
>> It starts at 12:20. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I mean 12:20. It's 12:15. Okay. But we have started. Basically we'll do a roll call so everybody can speak. That is who in the bottom? I'm going to turn off my captions here. Hide subtitles. 
Paulina. I see Paulina. 
>> PAULINA LEWANDOWSKA: Hello, everyone. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I have never met you in the flesh. That's great. 
>> PAULINA LEWANDOWSKA: I couldn't connect to use an American phone firstly. After that, I couldn't start video sharing. But I am on the other device. I hope that it will work. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you very much, by the way, for taking notes and being responsible for the report and taking the captioning down. Have you got the captioning link? 
>> PAULINA LEWANDOWSKA: Yes, I have it. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Shadi, I want to make sure I can hear. Shadi, can you ‑‑ I've got Shadi, I'm sorry. Fernando? Can you speak so that we know your video works ‑‑ I mean your audio works? 
>> Fernando is not on yet. I'm doing the necessary, as I said. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: We'll wait a few minutes to get him on. 
>> Yeah. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Can he hear me or not yet? 
>> He's not in the session yet. 
>> LIDIA BEST: I sent an e‑mail, Luis, because Fernando sent an e‑mail to the group e‑mail. I added you to the e‑mail. 
>> I have the link for Fernando. I have the link for Fernando. Can you just send to him? Okay, I will. I will copy you, Lidia, as well. Lidia Best and Fernando. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I have to use two iPhones to keep track of everybody. One sec. 
>> I just sent Fernando a direct link. He should be able to join. I will leave now and join as a participant just to be sure he joins. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you very much, Luis. 
>> No problem. Lidia, I copied you on the mail to Fernando with the direct link. Okay? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Lidia? 
>> LIDIA BEST: Oh, yes. Judith came on. Can you upgrade her to panelist ‑‑ oh, you are so fast. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Judith is on. Right. What I'm going to ask everybody ‑‑ we're going to start in a second ‑‑ is that you are certainly okay to go on with your videos. If you are speaking put your video on. Because we have so many, when we are not talking or doing that we'll ask you not to have your video on. Is that okay with everybody? 
Unless you need it for lipreading. If you need it for lipreading you get to keep it on if that helps you. 
Lidia, I presume you are going to stay on, correct? 
>> LIDIA BEST: Yep. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Paulina, you're going to stay on, correct? Or not? She's off. Okay, fine. 
Okay. Well, all right. I just want to test vocals for a second. I haven't heard Fernando speak yet. I want to be sure that we can hear you. Fernando, can you turn your mic on? 
>> LIDIA BEST: Not here. Not yet. 
>> He's just coming on. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I know that voice. I will say everybody say their name and pop themselves on so we can see you. We've got Christopher Lee. Can you introduce yourself saying I'm Christopher Lee? 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: I'm Christopher Lee. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I've got you as the last speaker. I hope you don't mind. 
>> Can you hear me? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Yeah. All right. 
>> Andrea, can you hear me? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Yes, Fernando. I can hear you. 
>> Is my video okay or still off? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: We haven't seen your video yet. There you are. Oh, we see somebody else here. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Your presentation, failure is always an option. Like at NASA, failure is not an option. You do the opposite. Flip it up. 
>> I know. I know. I apologize for my problems here. Looks like everything is okay now. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Lidia, I'm going to ask your help on something. You know what my office is like. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Okay. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I can't find the order that we decided we were going to do. 
First of all, welcome, everybody, to workshop 2000 ‑‑ 202, Digital Discrimination During COVID‑19 Pandemic. That's a mouthful. 
We sort of changed the order because we had a synchronization of how the subjects would work best because we have an idea of what you have ‑‑ what you are going to speak about. 
This is what I can't find. Lidia has ‑‑ what you wonderfully wrote and sent to everybody, unless I can get it up really quick. Maybe you could read the order for me, please, of the speaker order. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Where do you want me to get this? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: You wrote it. 
You wrote an e‑mail to everybody. 
>> LIDIA BEST: I don't understand what you want me to do at this moment. Can you please say again. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Pull up your e‑mail or I'll have to print it. I can't find the ‑‑ 
>> LIDIA BEST: You want me to send ‑‑ 
>> ANDREA SAKS: No. I want you to ‑‑ we can do it live. I want you to read the order of the speakers for me, please. 
 
>> LIDIA BEST: Okay. Hold on a second. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I might as well do it. I thought you would have it up. Just a minute. I will get it. Just a second. If you've got it faster though. Yeah, send me an e‑mail fast. I can't find it at the moment. Never mind. We were going to start with you anyway. 
What I would like you all to do is when it is your turn to speak, we all have ten minutes to speak. I'm not going to speak for much longer. I would like you to turn off your videos unless it is your turn to speak so that we can serve the bandwidth. The point is the first speaker is going to be Lidia Best. The second speaker is going to be ‑‑ 
>> LIDIA BEST: Fernando.
Failure is always an option. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I'm sorry? Oh, thank you. Failure ‑‑ go ahead and read it out. That will be easier. You do it. Read out the list. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Shadi with I just added web accessibility because Shadi usually talks about this topic. Masahito with the use of video remote interpretation during COVID‑19. Finally, wonderful wrap‑up from Christopher Lee which will be digital accessibility rights, evaluation, index presentation. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Okay. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Then we will have question and answer and Andrea will do closing remarks. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: As per usual. Welcome, everybody. We have 27 participants. We have a chat box which we have a wonderful remote moderator who is Judith Hellerstein. Put your face up for a second so we can see you. 
>> You can see my virtual face. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: That will have to do. When we come to question and answer period, Judith is in charge of the chat box. She will take your questions there. Instead of everybody jumping in. 
We decided so that we had more time for people to speak and can make sure they had sufficient time we would use the time after everybody has given their presentation to have questions and answers. If you can put them in the chat box or do a raise hand then Judith will tell us who is next and what's in the chat box versus the questions. Is that okay, Judith? 
>> Yes. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you. 
>> Are we putting questions and answers in the question and answer pod or the chat? Andrea chat is better, I think. Don't you think so? 
>> Well, the question and answer pod ‑‑ that is correct, but for some reason the IGF turns off the question and answer. Our virtual host, can you turn on the raise hand feature? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: That's Gabrielle and Megan. 
>> Yes. The raise hand feature is off. 
>> Sure. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you, Gabrielle, Megan, whoever is doing it.
 
>> You can put questions in the ‑‑ see, this Q&A pod, everyone can see the questions and they can rate the questions by ‑‑ so there is a feature in the Q&A thing, a little check box, the hand, where if you think a question is really good, you could click the hand and it moves up higher on the list so that the questions that people think are the best ones get raised up higher. So if we could put your question in the Q&A pod, that would be better. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: That's fine. That would be good to use that afterwards. It covers up the whole screen. 
>> Well, with the Q&A pod, you can close the pod so you won't see it. But it won't disappear. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Correct. I was going to say while we are having the presentations if anybody wants to make a comment that everybody can see, and we now have 32, put them in the chat box. That would probably be the best thing to do is to put it in the chat box. 
>> Comments in the chat and questions in the Q&A. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Right. But if somebody happens to put a question in the chat box, can you make sure you double check that, Judith? 
>> Yes. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you very much. Judith is very competent on all of this. 
Anyway, I would like to introduce people and have them flesh themselves on the screen in no particular order. I'm Andrea Saks. I have been doing accessibility for a very long time. With IGF since 2008. I'm chairing this meeting with a lot of wonderful people I have known throughout the years. We have Lidia Best who is the chairman of the National Association of Deafened Persons and also is the JCA, joint coordination activity on accessibility and human factors at that time ITU. 
We also have Shadi Abou‑Zahra who is basically a web expert and is also for W3C who has worked with us over the years and will be talking about web accessibility. They'll give you titles when they come. 
Then we have Masahito Kawamori from Kio University, he's a professor there. He's the rapporteur for question 28, the health question, and question 26, the accessibility question in the International Telecommunications Union and he'll talk about video remote interpretation, VRI, which is basically sign language. He'll go into detail about how to do that at a distance which is particularly interesting during COVID. 
Then we have Fernando Botelho. He leads the F123 initiative and that provides high performance software and training and technical support for people with disabilities. He will explain. He is basically helping blind and visually‑impaired people. 
Then we have Christopher Lee who is ‑‑ do we call you a president or chairman of IAAP? 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: Managing director. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Oh, my God. I got it wrong. That's normal. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: That's all right. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Managing director of IAAP. Also an associate of ‑‑ IAAP stands for the global initiative of inclusive ICTs and G3ICT ‑‑ which I never remember what that stands for. There we go. Who have I left out? Have I got everybody, Lidia? Shadi? 
Anyway, we're going to start the proceedings in this manner. Each speaker will give a presentation. They have to do their own slides if they have them. Hopefully keep to a minimum ‑‑ you have ten minutes. I've got a timer, but try to stay within ten minutes. And then afterwards, we will have questions and answers for everyone and Judith will, in fact, probably run that pretty well. She'll give the questions out and we will recognize. 
If you know who you want to ask a question to, please specify. Otherwise we'll let the panel choose which question they would like to answer by just saying so. 
Are there any questions that anybody has on how we run this or suggestions to make it easier for you? Okay. Right. 
The first speaker is Lidia Best, her title is ‑‑ Lidia, can you see? 
>> LIDIA BEST: Yep. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Go ahead. The floor is yours. Give the title of your presentation, please. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Okay. Thank you very much, Andrea, and thank you very much for everyone who joined the workshop to our discussion and suggestions on the way forward. Especially related to the pandemic, we are still in unfortunately. 
So I would like to bring in the topic of people who have hearing loss, deaf or hard‑of‑hearing, and how they have been affected and are still affected by the pandemic. 
Just to give you some idea of numbers from the UK which I am from is about 11 million people of 64 million of the population have some sort of hearing loss from mild to profound. Not everybody is going to interact with the services the same way. 
But worldwide, just to give you an idea, it is approximately 65 ‑‑ over 65 years of age, maybe one‑third of them have major problems with hearing loss, disabling hearing loss. 
One of the main aspects of hearing loss is individuals' ability to communicate with others. It's to a different extent depending on a person's hearing loss. 
Now the majority including myself prefer face‑to‑face communications but because we can lipread. I'm sure many of you have noticed the situation with masks. Before the pandemic struck this is how many people have just gotten by with going to visit with a doctor, services and so on just by making sure we have a face‑to‑face appointment. 
However, the pandemic striked and everything ‑‑ the rules of engagement have completely changed.
Everything is now online. Everything is now remotely. So the options of going and having a face‑to‑face meeting is not possible unless you are digitally aware and, you know, skilled to manage, for example, we have ‑‑ the actual webinars. 
So what I would like to say is the different services have been suddenly set up online, on the websites or the telephone numbers have been given out to everyone. Please call this number and we will be able to support you. Health services as well have changed and suddenly all the telephone calls have been made not only for appointments but for actual telephone consultations with a doctor which is stressful. 
Many people were not able to access it because for many different ‑‑ for using the telephone itself without lipreading and contextual cues it is sometimes not possible to conduct such important conversations with the doctor. 
So what we have also as another context situation is office of national statistics in 2019 has issued an interesting report in which it shows what others over the age of 65 years are consistently ‑‑ noninternet uses. What we mean by noninternet uses, those who do not use internet at all or haven't used it for the last three months. 
So hard‑of‑hearing people, deaf, people with hearing loss who don't use sign language well have been thrown out of the comfort zone to user vises or different ways of communication we were never accustomed to which has made challenges to the national association of deafened people. 
We have tried to come up with training online to try to encourage them to use it.
While some people have actually got on the platforms, got on the digital services, there are still some who didn't. There are some who, for many different reasons, cannot do it. Therefore, it is very important that when we look at services provision in general we need to look at how people interact with the internet, how people interact with all the different services and provide the range of ways of contacting 
For example, between the ICTs members say we have managed to give our doctor to give us e‑mail address so we can make appointments via e‑mail. Not many doctors in the local practices do that. They prefer that you call them or maybe use the online service. Not everybody is able to do this. If a person isn't able to do this, how are we going to be able to contact? 
Therefore, in the updated guidance is important. We need to understand how people choose to interact. Choice is important for people with hearing loss because they interact in a specific way with other people. 
For example, if someone is a decision‑maker and the service provision, local or national government we need to look at a different range of ways of being able to contact. Via SMS, set up an SMS service which provides only the message from you but doesn't give me the opportunity to respond back as a text message because it is not going to work as well. Don't ask someone immediately to make a call. 
There is also a way of going beyond immediate solutions which I am showing and presenting right now. There is also a longer term solution which we need to look at. We will not stop most likely using the telephones and organizing different services via telephones. 
Therefore, we need to improve telephone relay services including in the UK. But it has to be, for example, text service which we have to a limited extent in UK, a video relay service which people need to use in their language. Lastly, captioned telephones which is a service which is much easier for many older people to use than, for example, going online. 
We do require for everyone to think beyond the simple, easy solution. Think about filling in all the cracks which are happening everywhere and hopefully this will make sure nobody falls behind in our planning. 
So my plea to all decision‑makers or planners, think about what else you could do to ensure that everybody could be included.
Thank you. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you, Lidia. It's extremely important that the deaf community, hard‑of‑hearing community is being left out in the planning that governments are doing. We'll take questions for Lidia when we get to the end of all the speakers. Thank you very much. 
The next speaker is going to be Fernando Botelho who actually runs ‑‑ oops. Am I there? I don't have to be there. There we go. Gotcha. There you are. You're actually on camera now, Fernando. If you would like to explain what you do and carry on, and what title did you give regarding ‑‑ we were trying to get people to give us titles. So what title would you like to give your particular presentation? 
>> The title I was using was meant to be provocative. It was "Failure is Always an Option."
Of course failure is not an option as far as our priorities or needs are concerned as persons with disabilities. 
However, I wanted to highlight the fact that failure is not an option only when there is preparation and conscious effort to make sure that things work out as they should. I apologize if this was a little annoying for some people. 
It's important ‑‑ I think COVID‑19 reminds us that whatever cause is not pursued with systematicity, cooperation, it rarely is achieved. 
So let me just bring up a couple of facts. First of all, I don't have slides for you today. I want to have more of a bit of a conversation.
The situation of COVID‑19 has highlighted the tremendous deficiencies in the accessibility of distance learning infrastructure and content. 
So if before we had challenges when people were attempting to take certain courses and even at the university level, distance learning, now we realize that when it comes to elementary school and high school, the challenge is even greater. 
It's not just education, although education is incredibly important. You have other very strategic, very important services like unemployment forms online, stimulus checks and other forms of government assistance. Assistance has not been accessible in many, many cases. And we have had people facing extraordinary challenges, not just the stress level and the difficulties everyone has but in addition to that the ones that are specific to each disability. 
I would like to look at this not so much as what's happening now as important as it is. We need to use these opportunities, I think, to look at accessibility more strategically. 
Historically, we have faced cycles. If you look at using blindness as an example which is the area where I am most familiar with, we have had ‑‑ when mainframes on many computers were the most ‑‑ the prevalent technology in the 1960s, 1970s, they were for the most part inaccessible to the blind. 
When they became accessible through the use of microcomputers, microcomputers themselves were only partially accessible ‑‑ personal computers in the 1980s. 
When those were becoming more mainstream and more useable by the blind we had graphical interfaces like Windows which make them inaccessible again. We had a few years of very bad accessibility. When we finally got more equal, more levelled field in terms of accessibility, once again we lost it when everybody started focusing on the web. When that started getting better, we had the emergence of interactive pages, Ajax in the web 2.0. 
Then we had, you know, almost at the same time more or less we had the emergence of smartphones as a new platform again having difficulties, particularly with Android platform. 
So we have these cycles coming again and again and again. We are never ready for persons with disabilities. Just about never ready. We need to have more of a structure ‑‑ more strategic approach to this so that we don't have years of falling behind. 
As we have seen with COVID‑19, digital technology today is no longer a luxury or a convenience. It is an absolute necessity. A lot of the services that are being offered online are not complementing what you might get in the physical realm like a library. They are replacing them. 
So what can we do? By the way, Andrea, I had plans to set up my timer here and I forgot to turn it on. So please let me know when I'm running out of time. 
So what approaches might allow us to avoid this constant cycle of accessibility and inaccessibility which leaves us behind for so long. 
For example, Facebook was launched in 2004. They only had an accessibility team in 2011. That doesn't mean it became immediately accessible. There are issues to this day, but it was a gradual process. In internet time, to have seven, eight, nine, ten years of delay is absolutely unacceptable. 
So what might be an approach to avoid these cycles? I think that what we can do is obviously improve education. Education of the technical people that are behind, but also policy makers that need to better understand the issues of not just accessibility, but of the digital world. 
The consequences of different policies like copyright, like digital rights management ‑‑ in other words copy protection. And the implications for the objectives we all have of having a democratic society, having free speech and all that, I think policy makers are not as well‑prepared as they should be in terms of how well they understand the technology. 
So education all around. Then we have regulation and delegation. 
Regulation is what a lot of governments are realizing is that the internet has become incredibly important and they are looking at large influential companies online as a need for better regulation. It doesn't mean that we are going to block or cause problems for innovation. But there are day‑to‑day activities that today take place online and they need to be ‑‑ the rules need to be better understood, better enforced, better designed for this new era. 
Then there is delegation. I think there is enough complexity in the technology and its interaction with the day‑to‑day activities of all of us ‑‑ those with and without disabilities ‑‑ that we cannot have a situation where any single government agency, any single private corporation or, for matter, any single association of individuals ‑‑ you know, civil society entity ‑‑ really makes all the decisions. We need to have ‑‑ in this we have an excellent model in the way internet standards were developed and continue to be developed. 
A modern way of cooperating where you are including not just the technical experts, but you are including people who understand about disability, who understand about social issues, about free speech, about the limitations and this or that other right when it affects the country or the society as a whole. 
We cannot have an effective design of technologies if we don't have a very good balance between all of these interests and all of these needs. 
So that was a little fast for me. But for you maybe not so much. Do I have a few minutes more or should we move on? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I think probably if you would like to wrap it up in one we will be perfect. Thank you, Fernando. 
>> Okay. Wonderful. Just a small correction. I am no longer leading F123. F123 was an organization that was a for‑profit company. When I registered for IGF, that was accurate. Now I have closed F123. I will be working with the disability team in UNICEF in New York. So I will continue to work with disability and technology, but now in a different position. I hope it's okay that this time around I am neither representing the private sector nor international organizations. I'm in between one and the other. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I think that's wonderful, Fernando. Congratulations on your new future. I know that you'll impact them tremendously. I think they need you in New York. 
>> Thank you. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you very much for your talk and what we'll do is have questions for you at the end as we will for everyone. 
>> Perfect. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: So I do want to ‑‑ I'm not showing myself because everybody can hear me just fine ‑‑ oh, except some people might like to lipread me. I'm sorry. I'll put myself on. 
What I would like you to do is close your video, Fernando. The next person to speak is Masahito Kawamori, a professor at Kio University. 
>> MASAHITO KAWAMORI: I think Shadi will go first before me. I think Shadi was planned before me. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: You're correct. I did a dyslexic. Forgive me, Shadi. He's absolutely right. I'm looking at my notes and I have made a boob. Excuse me. Shadi Abou‑Zahra, would you like to put your video up? We'll be talking about web accessibility. Shadi, I don't know ‑‑ you do everything in W3C. Perhaps you would like to take the floor, explain what you do and how this impacts COVID‑19. Thank you, Shadi. Take the floor. 
>> SHADI ABOU‑ZAHRA: Thank you, Andrea. Congratulations, Fernando. Great news. 
So, yeah. I want to actually tie on and continue where Fernando left off. Maybe to say unfortunately failure has been an option for too long, to continue the thought Fernando had started. 
So I work for the World Wide Web consortium, W3C, which is an international standards body that develops core standards for the web. So it was launched in 1994 by Tim Burners‑Lee, inventor of the World Wide Web and has been developing technology such as HTML and many more. We have heard about that. The web continues to evolve to become really the primary source of information, digital interaction. It's kind of like the interface to the internet in a way. 
Mobile apps are using web technologies very often. Web services, we see now softwares that are fully web‑based where you don't even know the difference between when the desktop is and the web. 
This is all good because it gives us many opportunities that were unprecedented before. There is really a huge opportunity for people with disabilities in having an accessible web. 
However, unfortunately, the web is far from accessible and many studies show that. We are making progress, but we are far behind many targets that governments have set themselves that we have all pledged we are far behind. The U.N. convention on the rights of persons with disabilities, right? 
So we are behind on promises and a collective understanding, a commitment to human rights. And for too many years. The Web Accessibility Initiative exists since 1999. The latest version WACAG, web content accessibility guidelines which is recognized as the international standard for web accessibility is used in the U.S., in Europe and many countries around the world. It exists since 2008. So we have had so much time and things have not been progressing to the need. 
Now with COVID, we see it even more. We see how suddenly everything has moved online whereas before people said it's not a priority, we'll do it later, we'll fix it later, it's not so important. You can call us or come by if you can't access it online or something. Now, that's not an option anymore. Everything has moved online. Health care, information about life and death ‑‑ I will be dramatic and put it that way. It's really information about emergency situations, emergency about what you need to do to be safe that's often not accessible to people with different kinds of disabilities. 
We have heard about people who are deaf and hard‑of‑hearing. We have heard about people who are blind, but there are many, many, more different types of disabilities. People with low vision, people with cognitive and learning disabilities, people with physical and mobility impairments. So really have a broad spectrum of accessibility. The accessibility standards address these. 
Yes, they are constantly evolving. We are improving these standards as technology evolves, but there is a lot that we could have done already. Now people with disabilities are being even more excluded because now in the time of pressure we hear very often, well, we are so busy, we need to get the website up, we need to get this online course up in time and we don't really have the time or resources to focus on accessibility now. 
So, again, there is this delay, exclusion where we are seeing things. The school of my nieces suddenly went online. I had a look at their online learning platform, for example. It's far from anything near accessible. 
So, again, what I'm trying to say is we have had so many opportunities and we keep putting it away and we keep delaying this. And now at a time of crisis, when it should be most needed and most apparent that it is essential, it is being delayed again because there isn't time, there isn't resources. We'll fix it later. These kinds of things are continuing to exclude people with disabilities. 
Now, on the upside let's propose some solutions because not only throwing problems down the road. Fernando mentioned a few that I completely concur with. I think education is one of the most important things. We still have people involved in IT and I mean throughout, be it the managers, the designers, the developers, the QA testers. All these people who were involved in IT implementation, development, research. Even content authoring do not learn about accessibility. I mean, just like architects graduating and not knowing anything about accessibility. 
This is exactly why we have so many buildings are inaccessible. The same happens in IT. We have all these people involved in IT that are year‑for‑year learning the wrong things. Then we try to run behind that freight train and retrain them and tell them, no, no, no, the way you learn to do something is wrong. Here is the correct way to do it and to try to retrain them. We constantly are running behind that train rather than to have accessibility built into the mainstream education, how IT is taught from the beginning there is accessibility awareness. 
But I think an even bigger point is the lack of participation of people with disabilities. Fernando mentioned that. It's a really big issue. I am a technologist focused on accessibility and standardization. 
One of the most important things throughout is the involvement of people with disabilities throughout, be it in the design of products and services, be it in the standardization, be it in the policy development, all the areas that Fernando mentioned and others have talked about. All this we need people with disabilities at the table. This is also part of the U.N. convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. Nothing about this without the famous slogan of the disability movement and it's really essential, really important. 
I mean, nobody would imagine the women's movement or the gender equality without women involved, right? We do have lots of discussions on disability, lots of designs without the direct involvement of people with disabilities. That creates, I think, a whole slew of problems. People try. They have good attempts, good intentions, but they don't understand the users. They don't understand the direct participants. 
So I think I will leave it at that to focus on two key points really ‑‑ the advocation, including accessibility throughout education and particularly IT to make sure that people are aware of accessibility and know how to address it in all these capacities. 
I mean, much of accessibility is not rocket science. Much of accessibility is feasible and standards and technologies and solutions exist already. It just needs to be implemented. 
The second, which is maybe even more important, is the involvement of people with disabilities throughout. Andrea, back to you again. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you, Shadi. I couldn't disagree with anything you said. Nothing about us without us. It was the deaf community that created that particular motion. Because the deaf community screamed and yelled for the Americans with Disabilities Act so long ago. They were the beginning of the change that made it possible for those of us with disabilities ‑‑ incidentally, I now get to join. I have to wear hearing aids, but I can't find them. So yell, everyone. 
Anyhow, I would like to move to the next person. We will be doing ‑‑ for those of you who just joined we will be doing questions at the end. 
The next person we have is Masahito Kawamori from Kio University who is a professor there and the rapporteur for question 26 and 28. His subject is the use of video remote interpretation. Masahito, can you put yourself on? Thank you. 
>> MASAHITO KAWAMORI: Hi, everyone. Thank you, Andrea. Can I share my slides? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Yes, you can. Go right ahead. 
>> MASAHITO KAWAMORI: There you go. My topic here is about the use of video remote interpretation during COVID‑19. As you may know, I would add to what Shadi and Fernando touched upon and I would concentrate it more on solutions or concrete examples of actually providing accessibility. 
Due to the COVID‑19 pandemic, the practice of physical distancing or social distancing makes it difficult for a sign language interpreter to physically present with a deaf and hard‑of‑hearing person whenever they go to an office or government or hospital. 
So it is now almost imperative and essential that remote sign language interpretation or what we call video remote interpretation, VRI, be implemented. 
Many meetings including medical consultation has gone online, just as Shadi mentioned. Many schools and classes are online now. Persons with disabilities, especially deaf and hard‑of‑hearing people cannot participant fully without VRI. 
In short, lack of VRI will lead to discrimination against persons with disabilities. This is against the U.N.‑CRPD as Shadi mentioned. VRI is not just for deaf and hard of hearing people. It can also be used for visually impaired persons when they want to check small things ‑‑ just very small things but very important for them. 
So how does VRI actually work? This is an example that's actually implemented in Japan. So on the right‑hand side you can see a hearing person, say a doctor, and in between there is a smartphone which shows a sign language interpreter. Also on the left‑hand side you see a deaf or hard‑of‑hearing person who can be a patient visiting a doctor or talking to a teacher or parent talking to a teacher. 
So this smartphone can provide VRI service with remote sign language interpreter somewhere far away. For actual implementation at ITU, international telecommunication union we have published a technical paper on web VRI, which is a guideline on how to implement a safe and secure VRI system using standards. It is expected to support telemedicine, online education, and emergency and disaster resilience and others as well. It is based on web RTC standards of W3C and IETF. W3C is the organization Shadi mentioned. It is the body that standardized web standards. 
So web RTC standard can provide web‑based VRI with end‑to‑end encryption and secure communication channel which is suitable for protecting persons with disabilities when they communicate their very important personal information over the web. 
Also VRI or web RTC can provide an easy‑to‑implement community‑friendly VRI. It can be web‑based, so many people find it easy to implement. 
As my conclusions, I would like to say if implemented widely globally, VRI, especially web VRI will enhance communication not only for deaf and hard‑of‑hearing people, but also for visually impaired people and more so even. 
VRI, along with good ICT infrastructure, should be part of the immediate plan of every nation because this is very important not only for a small number of countries ‑‑ I mean it's all important for every nation. More importantly, just as Fernando and Shadi have emphasized, the failure to do so on the other hand, especially during the COVID‑19 pandemic since it is a question of life or death will result in the discrimination against those persons with disabilities involved. So that's my conclusion. I would like to send a message that this is a very important part of accessibility and also part of UN‑CRPD. Thank you. That's all. Back to you, Andrea. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you, Masahito. I'm very grateful for you to ‑‑ there you are. I can see you. We have you now in full. Thank you very much. Definitely appreciate the fact that you have explained about VRI so that the rest of the world can actually know that this exists because that is so important to communicate directly with persons with disabilities and let them be involved. 
The next person ‑‑ I'm just going to keep moving because we can have an open discussion when everybody speaks. I have been taking note of the chat box. Judith is going to read some of the important issues in there and I have told people in the chat box if you want to have your comment read out, we can arrange for that also at the end. 
So now we have Christopher Lee who is from G3 ICT. There you are. Christopher Lee works for ‑‑ well, actually ‑‑ I always have to ask you. Right. You're the president, right? 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: Managing director. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I can never remember that. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: You can call me whatever. It's fine. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I can call you whatever. I know everybody and I can make mistakes and nobody will beat me up. 
So why don't I let you identify yourself correctly and you just go right into your presentation. Thank you. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: Sounds good. It's excellent to be here today with this panel. Quite impressive names on this panel. I really appreciate being included. 
I am Christopher Lee with G3ict which was mentioned at the beginning. We started a nonprofit organization in 2006 to support the convention on the rights for persons with disabilities. G3ict focuses on policy development and four key areas. Focus on institutional advocacy. We have events, one is enabling every year in D.C. except for this year. It was all virtual. But it's in June usually. 
Then we also focus on education and certification which is what some speakers have talked about today. The importance of education specifically universities and I think Shadi brought that up as well as Fernando. There is a lot of cross‑over of what I'm going to be talking about. 
The core of the presentation is really focusing from a holistic standpoint of we have a lot going on around the globe in regards to accessibility. Some of it's going well. Some isn't going so well. How do we track that? How we get kind of a pulse on what's happening regarding digital accessibility as well as the built environment. So what I'm going to be talking about is the index, a service, a product from G3ict which is the umbrella. I'm the managing director of the professionals, a division of G3ict. 
When we focus on the core area Shadi mentioned it's the education piece and the certification piece. People with disabilities and people without disabilities need to know more about accessibility from the digital and the built environment. IWP focuses on the accessibility profession as a whole globally. So that gives you an idea of who we are and what we are about. 
So I'm going to go through slides here. The first slide is really ‑‑ just encapsulates what's already been said. There is nothing new on the slide that the speakers haven't addressed already. We know that due to COVID‑19 digital services need to be accessible and the issues have come around in showing that they are acceptable. They have grown very quickly and expanded to the people needing access in education and the workplace. This is mobile apps, television, documents. And the index I'll dive into addresses that. We try to monitor what's going on around the globe. 
The next bullet point for accessibility reasons I will go through each bullet point. We know that there is a wide range of disabilities. It was mentioned already. It's not just individuals who are blind or hearing impaired.
It is cognitive disabilities and so on. We have to make sure we include all people with disabilities into the work that we do. 
We know that as has been said, solution standards exist regarding digital barriers, there is still implementation around the world that needs to be done regarding the standards and guidelines. I'll get to that in a second. 
Impacts on COVID‑19 related to services across the board. It's all sector, all industry. There is not one that's left out. I think that's important to keep in mind that when we think about digital accessibility it's important that we bring people with disabilities in and make sure they are engaged in finance, health, retail, tourism. That's a challenging aspect of digital accessibility. There are so many different needs. 
So the survey is the DARE index. Digital accessibility rights evaluation index making up that acronym. We just released our third version ‑‑ full version of it. It represents 137 different countries which obviously makes up 90% of the world population. The concept of the DARE index was going to advocacy groups, going to panels led by organizations with people with disabilities to get their voice to ensure that they are telling us, being G3ict through this index how the country is actually doing in regards to digital accessibility. How would you rate your country? What are the standards and guidelines in place, are they being implemented? That's the concept of the index. It is evaluating the country in itself. 
So to give you a snapshot and there is a lot of data here. So what you are seeing on screen now is a grid. On this grid it focuses specifically on specific areas of the DARE index. One of them being TVs, web, E‑governance and smart cities. On the grid to explain it when people can't see it, there is no policy either. The country has no policy, no implementation. Minimum, partial, substantial and full meaning the percentages go that way. 
With TV, no policy ‑‑ I'm going to snapshot a couple. 39%. At web, no policy, 42%. In regards to E‑government and small cities, you're looking at 50%. If you go across the grid regarding countries that are fully addressing policy you only have 1% in TV, 1% in web, 0% in E‑government and smart cities. I will say G3ict has a division that focuses just on smart cities and digital accessibility. 
So this gives a snapshot of where we are standing now in regards to accessibility around TV, web and e‑government based on advocacy groups feeding back to us. 
The next slide is focused on legislation supporting digital accessibility. We have heard already from panelists how important this is. There is legislation out there. Is it being implemented? This grid talks about general law protecting the rights of persons with disabilities being one category. Reasonable accommodations being the second category. And the legal definition of accessibility includes ICT. It's broken out to two columns. Percentage of countries, law, regulation, policy from 2018 to 2020. 
So what is the difference we have seen? Just to give you an idea regarding general law protection, in 2018 we were 83%. Now based on the DARE index and the data we are getting back, we are at 89%. 
Regarding reasonable accommodations defined which is important in 2018, 64%. In 2020, 68%. We have seen a little over 2% increase in two years. 
And legal definition of accessibility includes ICTs, we were at 49% in 2018. We jumped in 2020 to 59% based on the feedback we got from 137 countries that came back to us regarding the data. So, again, we are seeing movement which is exciting. A lot to be done obviously based on the last slide and this slide. But there has been positive movement in the last two years regarding the data that we are collecting. 
Now, regarding the next slide is the opportunity of closing the gaps in capacity to implementation. So focused on the implementation piece. You have standards, guidelines. Laws but you don't implement them. Doesn't do much good with disabilities obviously. 
This grid has countries who are in the process or resources in place or countries with processes or resources in place is the key area of this. You know, different areas in the sense of process involving people with disabilities and policy‑making. We have heard about the importance of this already. 26% of that in regards to country in the process or resources in place. 
The next category is ICT accessibility courses. This goes back to, I guess, universities, colleges, internal organizations that have courses whether it's a full blown course like IBM has courses for their individuals. Microsoft has courses regarding accessibility within their internal organization. Right now we are looking at 38%. ICT accessibility courses available in major universities or offered by professional education services around the country. So a combination of about 38%. 
The next category is government agencies, focus points on accessibility ICT. We are at 39%. Then references to international accessibility standards, we are at 44% based on the DARE index. 
So that gives you a snapshot of what we are seeing with the DARE index. I want to show you something just a second. This is my last slide. So this is priorities to build on accessibility. We talked about solutions. Shadi mentioned there are a lot of options out there we've got. The solutions have already been brought up. 
But we've got to make sure momentum in ICT accessibility supporting legislation continues to be a positive trend there. We need to continue to advocate that. That's one of G3ict's goals is supporting legislation. 
We have to make sure digital accessibility solutions exist. They must be made available to build an exclusive, accessible and sustainable digital world. So we know that. Key areas that we focus on obviously including people with disabilities. We have said it several times. Adopting accessibility standards. Getting countries to adopt these standards and really promoting them, making sure they know how to do it from the implementation standpoint. 
What I work on with G3ict we talked about training and certification, ensuring if they are not getting it in the universities, individuals that are needing to learn about digital accessibility as well as the built environment from an architecture standpoint and so on are getting it some place. Certifying people is critical. 
That gives you a little bit of the DARE index. So what I'm showing now is the website of G3ict and the country index. DARE uses a competition standard. It rates countries on how they are doing. I can put it in the chat, this particular website. If you drill down to the website it is in different languages regarding the French, Spanish, English now. 
But you can actually see the different regions throughout the globe. What you're looking at now is the flags of the different countries. You can drill down on each one of the 137 countries that reported through the DARE index. Look at how they are addressing accessibility. I think it is important to see how things are shifting with the country where they were two years ago versus where they're at now. 
So the bandwidth now is slow. Here we go. I'm drilling down now on South Africa and where they're at now. My time is pretty much up, but you can get a good idea of where your country is at in specific areas regarding key country facts, laws and regulations, the total DARE index score. You can look at that and where it stands and the specific areas we are pulling information from. 
So with that being said, that gives you an idea of what we are doing at G3ict in regards to trying to track all the different issues that we are dealing with accessibility in the digital age right now. I'll turn it back over to you, Andrea. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Okay. Got the mic on. Thank you very much, Christopher. 
What I would like to do because all of you have touched on extremely important ‑‑ I have to start my video. Okay. I'm getting instructions. What I would like to do is get a picture of everybody who was a presenter, please, on the screen. So people can see you when they ask a question. I think it is important. I don't have to be there. Thank you. 
We have Lidia, Christopher, Shadi. Where's Masahito? Masahito? Where are you? There you are. Have we got everybody? Right. 
Okay. Judith has been in charge of the chat box and I think some questions have come in there. There was one question in the special box, but that's difficult to manage because it covers up the screen. But can you hear me, Judith? 
>> Sure. Yes. So ‑‑ 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Do you have any ‑‑ wait a second. Let me ask you a brief on how it might be good to do it. Oh, there is Judith. She's in charge of the questions. 
Now, if anybody has a question, she's going to read it out. If you put it in the chat box she'll read it out and then if you want to select a specific person to answer it, you can by looking at the screen and saying, okay, I would like such and such to answer that. 
Okay. Can we put all the other speakers back up, please, Luis? 
>> Yes.
So we did have one question in the Q&A pod that Shadi answered. I just wanted to also read it out. 
Mataj was asking about templates and guidelines for how to teach and educate students and programmers. Shadi answered it and gave a link to the page on the web accessibility initiative page ‑‑ W3C page and their developing curricula for designers, developers, authors and others involved in web projects. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Can we have Shadi elaborate please on the question? 
>> SHADI ABOU‑ZAHRA: Sure. I mentioned very briefly we are developing open curricula. We are seeing around the world different types of courses and training with very different quality. Some of them are really good. Some of them are not so good. We often have requests by, for example, university professors will say, you know, I teach computer science to students and I would love to teach about accessibility, but I'm not an expert myself. If you can give me materials, I can include accessibility in my courses. 
And so for that we are developing curricula which are modular and you can combine them to fit different kinds of training and different courses. So I provided the link. I'll read it out loud. W3.org/WAI/curricula. Thank you. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: We will probably ‑‑ we will have a report later and we will put that web page in the report for you, Shadi, so that people can access you and your information. In fact, everybody will be available ‑‑ will be allowed to ‑‑ if you don't object, all the speakers can be in the report with their e‑mail addresses so people can ask direct questions. 
>> We have another question. Axel asked can AI be a game changer for digital accessibility such as for screen‑reading features. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: That one should go to Fernando. 
>> Yes. I think AI can definitely help. It's very hard to say how far it will go in the short term. Everybody says that we'll basically have totally smart machines eventually. 
But it's hard to tell how far it's going to go. We have seen, for example, self‑driving cars. They are taking longer than expected to come around and in the context of what we use, web pages and online digital documents and so forth, AI depends a lot on context. 
So if you have images and that can be anything from a photograph of the galaxy to photograph of a dog it becomes more difficult than it would be for a car, for example. The car is always going to be expecting streets ‑‑ street images. 
So I think, yes, it will be much more helpful initially in specific contexts. So, for example, I hope we have some AI to read us graphs. Graphs, it is a limited universe of possibilities or much more limited than, you know, anything. And I think it's an area where you could have AI helping us make things more accessible. 
So I think that's going to be a much more promising area to have specific areas of interest where you have a limited universe of possibilities and then AI could definitely help us out. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I saw Shadi raise his hand. I know he wants to say something. Afterwards I'm going to ask Masahito who is in standards. Please, Shadi, you first. 
>> SHADI ABOU‑ZAHRA: This is a provocative question. Thank you, Axel. Really have to respond to that. 
Yes, my personal view, I think all technologies ‑‑ the more technology we have, people with disabilities rely on technologies. My wheelchair uses carbon fiber used in, I don't know, cycling ‑‑ professional cycling and professional racing because every gram I save will save my shoulders. 
With AI again we have amazing opportunities to do lots of things. But at the same time like with any technology ‑‑ and I'll sound like a broken record ‑‑ without the involvement of people with disabilities, we also run a lot of risks. AI bias is one of the things that's very, very worrisome where, you know, we have seen all sorts of things like AI‑based employment systems that will actually add to exclusion rather than support inclusion because they amplify bias that's already existing in the society. 
We have seen simulated cars ‑‑ thankfully only a simulation ‑‑ that would run over wheelchair users running backwards because the self‑driving car didn't recognize that situation, that scenario because there isn't enough data about people with disabilities. 
So, again, like with all technologies it's a two‑edged sword.
Coming back to the point, nothing about us without us, needs the involvement of persons with disabilities to make sure we get the benefits of AI and don't have technologies that are inaccessible that we have to chase behind and retro‑fit and make accessible again. 
>> I agree completely. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I think I will put the question to Masahito, please. 
>> MASAHITO KAWAMORI: I totally agree with Fernando and Shadi. It is important that ‑‑ I think AI will become definitely a game‑changer as Axel asked, especially in the area of perception. Because right now I think many of the perception areas, I think AI has already surpassed some of the human capacity faculty already. 
But it's still not perfect. It's not 100% accurate. So that means because humans do err, it is the same with AI. So I think it is going to be ‑‑ you know, we have to have sort of a good management as well as Shadi said, the involvement of persons with disabilities. Probably the practical way is sort of a hybrid ‑‑ human and AI. So the human can be assisted by AI technology as well as AI can be helped by human beings. 
That's actually what happened with machine translation a few years ago. Many years ago. That's what's happening with, for example, captioning telephones in the United States or captioning itself, you know. Right now we are seeing it. It's not 100% automated, but it is helped by AI. 
So I think it also applies, for example, to object description. So AI can be used to describe scenes, objects so that audio description can be made machine‑trained. So that's one thing that will be one of the game changers in accessibility. But I do agree that's going to be a big change. Thank you. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you, Masahito. I'm going to change the subject slightly. 
We've got a question from Pauline ‑‑ I'm going to say this wrong. Paulina Lewandowska. I will be corrected by Lidia. This is directed at Lidia. 
Now, do you want to read this out, Judith? Have you found it? 
>> Yeah. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Go ahead. 
>> Okay. She asked a question ‑‑ is ‑‑ 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Just read the whole paragraph. 
>> Okay. Her comment is that video conferencing platforms help in online meetings in school, work, social life. Some of them have automated captioning, but still they're not perfect. But the problem raises when a hard of hearing or deaf person is attending the meeting. Automated caption feature is not accessible in natural languages or they are not good. Can Lidia say more? What are the steps taken to improve automated captions by platform providers and how do you evaluate these activities in this direction? 
So after Lidia goes on, I will ask Shadi to also come on because a lot of these are also what he's talking about with AI and the platforms. They directly answer that question. So, Lidia. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Thank you very much, Paulina, for asking this question. I am in UK and I know I'm lucky to live in UK and lucky I'm using English language proficiently. I am able to get access to both automatic captioning as well as the professional captioners such as the ones we are just following now. 
Therefore, I have much more opportunities as someone who is from Poland. I am from Poland as well as Paulina. Polish language is not as developed in the automatic captioning as, for example, English. English has always been, in a way, kind of much more moving forward, having much more developed. All the work was mostly around English language. 
There are two ways of looking at it. For some people automatic captioning is useful and useable.
Especially if you've got some hearing to support themselves, they are happy. 
But there are some people who are completely deaf and they have absolutely no possibility of hearing anything. When we really rely on accuracy and making sure that we actually understand and they can fully participate in the meetings. 
However in UK, I can ask for captioning from a professional captioner if I need such thing. 
Now, in polish language and any other languages, yes, I have come across, for example, the situations where the captioner would translate through Google into the language but the structure of Polish language isn't the same as English. It doesn't come out in the same way, for example, if a Polish speaker is speaking and to actually understand. 
So there is a need to focus as well not just on automatic captioning and further developing automatic captioning to make sure that it works for everyone. But also to develop the professional services in a similar way as we have in the UK and USA with captioners who are able to support the ‑‑ provide the services. 
Lastly, there is also a need ‑‑ I think it was evaluate. The question was about evaluation of the activities. At the ITU ‑‑ and Masahito will as well be able to confirm that ‑‑ we are looking at developing standards or a way of actually being able to measure how good, how accurate is captioning. 
At the moment we can only go by training which is provided by captioners and having examine and this is one of the ways. But we need something completely independent so organizers of the services also get the confidence but when they are asked to provide a service, automatic or nonautomatic, they have the confidence that this will meet their needs of a person who is asking for it. 
Hopefully this is what you were looking for, Paulina. Thank you. 
>> Thank you so much, Lidia. Andrea wants to say one thing before we go to talk about the standards issues for Shadi and the ability of trying to train more platforms to better use AI. Andrea? You're muted. 
 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Okay. I'm back. The reason why I have asked to intervene is we originally had this workshop on digital discrimination during COVID‑19 pandemic. I want to have you guys focus a little bit on that when you answer questions and the ramifications and the detriment to the many different populations. We have 2 billion people who have disabilities. 
So we want to make a point of trying to give a message out to people who are managing COVID‑19 and helping everyone get through this. So that was my only point. 
So if we go back to the question for Shadi, please, would you like to repeat it, Judith? 
>> Yes. Thanks so much. I don't need to repeat it, but I think what we want Shadi to talk about is something he talked about a little bit before and how to get the engines better trained to look ‑‑ find different situations and learn more, get more experience in learning the different languages so they can do better on AI captions. 
>> SHADI ABOU‑ZAHRA: Thanks, Judith. And thank you, Andrea, for the reminder. I think COVID is a very important aspect of this. 
So there is much debate whether AI will be a revolution or evolution. We are in a transitional period right now. 
Now, just to highlight, imagine that in every sentence there is a word that ‑‑ I'll just be silent. You are missing one word.
That's 90% accuracy. That means one word in a sentence of ten, every tenth word gets missed out. 
Now, in a normal situation you are ‑‑ I don't know ‑‑ watching cat videos on social media, maybe that's acceptable to have, you know, some words missing and lower quality of service. But when you're talking about health hazards and risk and emergency situations such as COVID but there are many other emergency situations in terms of crisis, where that is not acceptable. Even 95% ‑‑ look at how many words we are just using now. And imagine even if you go to 99%, every hundredth word could be a really important word to understand the context and what is meant. 
So I completely concur with what Lidia is saying and we should not forget there are lots of languages that have very little support for technology. Not all languages have the luxury like English does or French or Spanish or, you know, many of the other mainstream languages. There are many languages that really have very poor technology support. 
So in that case, the quality goes even further down. So my feeling is that it's important to promote these technologies and promote these tools. But I think, as Masahito was saying, maybe to support the captioners. Maybe as a support tool to support the captioners and have the human combination still be in so that it reduces the effort on captioners rather than trying to switch from one to the other straight away. Because right now the quality isn't far enough but at the same time if there is no demand, no use of these technologies then also the improvement or the gap will be more difficult to address. 
So there needs to be a bit of a combination and I think we need to think of the context and think of the situations where it's acceptable to have certain levels of errors and where it's definitely not acceptable if we want to be inclusive. 
This, by the way, also applies to the question that Axel asked earlier about AI for image recognition and for screen readers. The same here. There will be situations where maybe it's a help and maybe it can be a long one. When screen readers started their quality was actually fairly poor. Through the use, they could improve over time. So we have to start somewhere, but at the same time we have to really understand that even small errors can have very big impact on people's lives. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: I'm going to interrupt again, if I can, because talking about languages, we haven't mentioned at all sign language. Sign language is an extremely important language because every country has a different sign language. 
I'm asking Matjaz who is deaf, who is in the chat box to make comments we can read out that deal with sign language and the emergency situation regarding COVID‑19. So I have given him a little project because there is enough time for him to do that. 
But one of the things that's happening in Japan ‑‑ so I'm going to direct this to Masahito who has been working in Japan with sign language. I think we need to put some energy and some focus on the problems that sign language users have with regard to getting services and help, especially during COVID. 
Masahito, would you do that for me, please? 
>> MASAHITO KAWAMORI: Yes. Which sign ‑‑ sign language or interpretation? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: My question really deals with we were talking about different languages, or Shadi was going in that direction. We haven't been talking about sign language discrimination during the time of COVID‑19. 
So you've been working with this in Japan. So I wondered if you could just share with us what some of the problems are and what's not being recognized regarding sign language. 
>> MASAHITO KAWAMORI: Thank you very much. Well, I think one of the discriminations that we have to realize is that on the part of the people who help persons with disabilities. Because they have a preset ‑‑ assumed, assumptions about how the deaf people would react, how the deaf people would think, things like that. 
One of the things that comes from during this assumption during the COVID‑19 situation in Japan is that the sign language interpreters do not, in Japan, want to use video remote interpretation. They want to go help deaf people physically on the spot. 
The problem is if they want to go to the hospital and help deaf people, hospitals refuse them. They do not allow them to be on spot. So the deaf people have to be online and talk to the doctor online, but the sign language interpreters don't know how to get online and there is no way they can do because they refuse to do so. 
And that is because sign language interpreters in Japan believe that face‑to‑face sign language interpretation is the way it should go. They do not allow sign language interpreters to provide interpretation online. So that's sort of a discrimination, I think, from the part of sign language interpreters' side. 
So I think it's not just sign language interpreters. Many times I think on the part of people who help ‑‑ who are supposed to help persons with disabilities have certain preconditions or assumptions about people who need help and they do not allow them to be included in the rest of the society in a sense. And they have sort of an outdated concept of disability and they think, you know, those people with disabilities should be separated, should be different. And they have special needs and those people who have been traditionally helping them are the only people who can help them, help those persons with disabilities. 
This is what I learned when I tried to introduce telephone relay service in Japan and video remote interpretation in Japan. I'm still struggling. So that's ironic but true. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you. I will ask Judith to read out some comments in direct relationship to what ‑‑ shall I just do it since I've got him? It's for web, for TV and other audio‑visual media, sign language needs to be ‑‑ I know where he's going. We have been talking about this and I have been working with him on a declaration between sign language interpreters and the world federation of the deaf. And there is not enough representation through web, TV and others partly because there is a different sign language in every country and not all sign languages are trained in international sign, which is not a language. It is an adaptation. 
Matjaz agrees with you there is a strong use of VRI, video remote interpretation. Now there is one person who hasn't been speaking and I'm going to go after him now. That's Christopher Lee.
Would you like to interject a comment or two at this point, please? 
>> Before Christopher does, one thing I think that we should state is that we need to have in those countries laws that help regulators or other people say that guarantee a certain amount of sign language or certain rights. Without that, companies are not going to do it. They say it's too expensive, this will work. We need laws and regulations in effect. Without that, you are not going to ‑‑ companies are not going to want to do it. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you, Judith. I'll switch over to Christopher and remind everybody that actually I believe we have only five minutes left. Everybody has been really doing well. Christopher, please make a comment please. You have been too quiet. It's not allowed. 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: So there's a lot of comments I want to make. Regarding cognitive disabilities when we talk about language sometimes the most simple thing you can do is deal with plain language when you're actually dealing with content. And just as we write things up, do things, it can be complicated for people with cognitive disabilities. Plain language is an easy check if we can focus on that. 
Back around to digital accessibility content, we have challenges still with publishers out there in regards to digital content. Publishers that are creating content that's not accessible. It's something we really need to be focused on. You can have all the platforms you want that are accessible. But if the content itself incorporated into the platform isn't accessible, we're in trouble. 
So advocacy work in this area, professional education and certification which is one of the things we are working on now. They have pivoted with certifications that will bring to the market this year and actually really kicking it off next year is an accessible document specialist which is really needed out there. It's not just for academia or K‑12, just dealing with documents within organizations and so on. How do you create accessible documents? 
So I think AI can be part of that regarding imagery. But we have a long way to go in this area. It's been going on a long time and more advocacy needs to be put toward it. Those are my couple of words.
 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you. We have supposedly run out of time if I look at my computer. I just want to ask the captioner would she give us five minutes to wrap up, please. She'll answer me in the chat box. 
Caption First, by the way, has done our captioning and they are fabulous. Also, Luis has been doing all the help with the technical aspect from IGF, and he has been fabulous. He kept us online and has been helping us look at everybody. Yeah, we've got everybody. I want to just take an opportunity to thank everyone. The conclusions are still yet to be made. 
I think what I would like all of you to do is to ‑‑ oh, wait a minute. Somebody has come in with a message. Matjaz says we propose to use the interpreters for our own sign language who are interpreting the session under another web RTC session in parallel. Also, okay, Luis says thank you. Luis Bobo is our technical help and is thanking the panelists. And we are getting thank yous from different people who have been listening. I want you to know we had over 30 people listening which is great. I thank all the people who tuned in to us. 
We have gotten some good information. There will be a report on all of this. The conclusion is, in my opinion, and this is all this is worth, is that we need to do more, especially now during COVID‑19, to include persons with disabilities in fact in the messages that we sent out for radio, for TV, and all the government agencies that purport to help people during this particular critical time which is very serious for everyone, but especially for those people who don't get direct communication. 
One final sentence from everybody starting with Fernando and then we'll wrap up, okay? Fernando? Wait a minute. I can't get you unmuted. I can't get ‑‑ 
>> Can you hear me now? 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Go, go, go. You're fine. 
>> My sentence is no technology can substitute for human behavior. In other words, we need to have our priorities right. We need to cooperate to get things done. Technology is not going to do that for us. Thank you. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you, Fernando. Masahito? Your one sentence stretched as usual. 
>> MASAHITO KAWAMORI: I would like to pick up where Christopher left off and also Shadi. I think it would be great to have sort of a standardized platform for education. I think EPUB, daisy and W3CO will have good platforms. Maybe we can work together with your organization, ITU and W3C to provide accessible educational platform, online platform for standard‑based platform for education. That's my last sentence. And proposal. Thank you. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Shadi, since he mentioned you, would you like to go next with your last comment? 
>> SHADI ABOU‑ZAHRA: To respond to that and the COVID situation, now more than ever, yeah, we have been waiting long enough. And the pandemic should not be a reason to prolong the implementation of accessibility but to actually accelerate it because it is now needed more than ever. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you. Christopher? 
>> CHRISTOPHER LEE: Yeah. I want to say so much. I'm going to hold back. Leadership. Mentoring. We have brilliant minds out there in regards to accessibility in all areas that we have talked about today. We need to foster mentors and leaders in the area of disabilities and we need to do it soon to help with acceleration because some of these folks are moving on and retiring and it's a scary time. So my one sentence would be let's focus on leadership and mentoring also. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you. Lidia, last but not least, you were first and now you get the last comment. 
>> LIDIA BEST: Thank you very much, Andrea. I think everybody who has spoken before me put things in the right context. All I want to say is this: COVID‑19 has been a massive wake‑up call for everyone. Let's use this opportunity to focus our energies and move things forward and work together not just for technology, everything, but look at the combinations of it, too. I'm sure this way the human factors will come into technology when they are taken into consideration we will definitely move forward. Thank you. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: And guess what. I have Judith here. I'll thank her and let her come on and read exactly what she's written about what you have just said. That's all you get to do. We have to close down. Judith, go. 
>> Thank you so much for this excellent panel. If you want to hear more about these issues, accessibility is doing a webinar with Lidia on it as well as Kristen Vogler and Mark Wheatley on this issue. About Christopher Lee's point, people don't know how to make accessible pdf's and images. It's a real shame. People need to be taught. It is also a standards issue in that scanners no longer have the option to save it as a document because of copyright issues and that's a real shame. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Thank you, Judith. That's a very good point. I want to say thank you myself. It's been an excellent panel. I have enjoyed listening to everybody. It's nice not to do so much talking. From me to all of you, thank you very much. Thank you to the captioner. Thank you to everyone who joined. Thank you to Judith who has been an excellent moderator. Thank you to Paulina who has been watching as well who is our remote moderator from Poland. With that, I'm afraid we have to close. 
But let's hope we can do this panel again next year at IGF. Thank you very much. And Luis, thank you for helping me learn how to get on. 
I'm dyslexic and they had to train me to get on this because it was hard. Don't forget dyslexia whenever you make something for the web. Make sure that those of us with reading and writing difficulties can get on, too. Thank you. 
>> Thank you, Andrea. 
>> ANDREA SAKS: Oh, you're welcome. I'm waving to everybody. Everybody is waving. Listen, we'll meet again soon. I love all of you. I know all of you. It's been a real pleasure to have you on this panel. Thank you. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-11-%E2%80%93-ws259-building-inclusive-digital-economies-in-emerging-markets-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> So please understand that this is recorded under the United Nations rules and regulations, participants or attendees please should use the Q&A to ask their questions and answers will be given to you.  The moderator will call on you, and signify by raising of hands.  Thank you so much.  Enjoy the session. 
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Thank you so much.  And thank you everyone who has joined us, my name is Anna Kompanek, and I'm the will director of the global programs at the Center for International Private Enterprise or CIPE.  We are based in Washington, D.C., but work with organizations around the world, in all time zones, or most of them.
We have an excellent and eclectic panel today.  And our topic is building inclusive digital economies in countries around the world.
The topic obviously has been very important and taken seriously and advanced many many countries for a number of years now, however, the COVID‑19 pandemic has brought much greater ‑‑ even much greater attention to this issue.
Bringing possibilities for recovery and growth during and after the pandemic, but also highlighting in many respects amplifying the preexisting elements of digital divides, such as differences in access and connectivity, levels of skills and also existing legal and regulatory framework in a given country, as well as the issues of compettability of those frameworks, between countries, Regions and globally.
As we seek to advance the digitally driven economic growth and seek ways to make it inclusive, that is our topic today.  That is the conversation we want to bring also to IGF.  And I'm very pleased to introduce our panel, who will help us do it today.
We'll have Juliet Nanfuka who is the research and communications officer at the collaboration on Internet, ICT policy.  And Juliet is joining us from Uganda.
Then we have Rainer Heufers who is the founder and the executive director of the center for Indonesian policy studies or CIPS and I learned as of last week, CIPS is the winner of the prestigious freedom award which is has been awarded ‑‑ given to an accomplished thinktank by Atlas Network.  It comes on the heels of your excellent work on removing the trade barriers on the food market.  And next we have Mary Rose Ofianga who is joining us from the Philippines.  Rose is a member of IGF MAG and both rose and Juliet are open Internet leaders.  They are part of a program that CIPE and two of our organizations launched jointly a few years ago.  They were in the initial cohort of our program, working on various issues to advance Internet freedom around the world and I have a link in the chat here if you are interested to read more.
Last, but not least, we have Nicole Primmer who is senior policy director at the business and Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development at the OECD joining us from Paris.
Welcome, everybody.  Thank you so much.  It's very nice to have you here.
Let's go straight to our first question and a very basic question.  I will ask each panelist to briefly introduce the work related to promoting inclusive digital economies, starting with Juliet.  Juliet, go ahead.
>> JULIET NANFUKA: Hi, Anna.  I had to all the panelists and the attendees.  Great to be in this shared space with y'all.  My name is Juliet, I work with the collaboration and the national ICT policy in eastern South Africa.  It's a mouthful.  And this is an area that we are really excited about, the area of digital economy, because it echoes what we want to do as an organization, and that is to promote effective and inclusive ICT policy in east Africa.
So while we have been doing that since 2006, we have more recently, through partnering with CIPE come a bit more aggressively and more intentionally into the world of digital economy, but we have been looking at some of the trends shaping the digital economy, and the accessibility through are the lens of financial regulations that more recently have emerged in a couple of countries in East Africa.
And this is potential regulation through content.  One would have to patron a website or to pay to register and freely run the website.  We see that as a restriction but also the form of censorship.  And it does have an impact on digital economy in the sense in that it's restricting the freedom that one has to more readily be online.  In Tanzania, it's a $3,000 cost to simply be online.
We also noticed or did a bit more work around the social media taxation that emerged in Uganda in 2018 and it's been seen in other countries, active, more readily ‑‑ or more readily considered.  So it's something that we have been tracking, including it's detrimental effect to digital inclusion for women more especially, for persons with disabilities, and the topic of persons with disabilities have also been doing a whole lot more work in that area as well, through the lens of what is the telecommunications sector doing to enable their community to be more readily online to readily engage in terms of content, economic opportunity and education online.
They are providing assistive technologies or not?  And what are the gaps?  What needs to happen to bring in or to broaden digital a bit more digitally inclusive economy or digitally inclusive online arena for more than the current community that we have online.
But also, we have been working alongside CIPE on developing a roadmap to ‑‑ to reform with regards to the digital landscape in the continent.  This is something ‑‑ a journey that began at the forum ofment net freedom that we host annually in Ghana and it's been bringing together various stakeholders in person and more recently online to help shape what future of digital economy in Africa looks like.  Who are the players?  Who is currently in the community?  And who is being left out?  Where does the digital economy currently stand and where should it go?
We are quite excited on the way it should go and it's great to be part of these conversations in seeing who else is doing what in the areas, but also looking for areas of collaboration, which is at the core of what we do, especially when we look ‑‑ look at it through the lens of multi‑stakeholder collaborations which is fundamental in our opinion to the establishment of the really successful digital transformation in the continent.  So it's an exciting time at the moment, which I will save for future, later questions.
Right now the continent is in the phase of multi ‑‑ of metamorphosis and I believe we are at the right place to shaping the part that it should take.  Thank you.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Thank you so much, and indeed we will have the opportunity to talk about ways to collaborate and act in a multi‑stakeholder way.  Let me turn it over to Rainer.  Go ahead, tell us all about your work.
>> RAINER HEUFERS: Thank you, Anna, and thank you very much for inviting me to this panel.  It's a pleasure and honor to be here.  I'm representing the Center for Indonesian Policy centers.  Don't be deceived that you see a German speaking here.  The only foreign face here.  I feel Indonesia.
We have a slogan that says Indonesians should be free to prosper and this freedom means that people need to be able to engage in the economy.  It means that they need to be able to actually build their own wealth and as what Juliet just said about her continent, we also face the situation like that in Indonesia, where there are regulations.  There are hurdles that make it harder for people to actually access the Internet for their own eCommerce and visions.
I want to share the screen briefly and just show you two slides.
Just hope you can see that now.
So we are a nonprofit policy think tank in Jakarta, seeking these economic opportunities for low‑income Indonesians but I'm sharing with you the one image on the right‑hand side, showing how eCommerce is jumping in this country of 270 million people, just last year it grew by 11% to a size of $44 billion and much more is expected by all estimations.
An interesting thing is that during this crisis now ‑‑ so you can see that so many new consumers are entering the market.  You can see that more than half are not from the urban areas.  We see a major drive into the digital sphere.  You see healthtech and Edtech really coming to the forefront but it bears risks and we need to make sure that the place remains open, while we also address the risks for the consumers.
Just giving you another image here.  Hold on. 
Yep.
So that's basically what we are doing.  We are a think tank.  We are a policy or thinktanks and we work with policy papers and policy briefs and they cover various areas.  We have been looking into the fintech sector the Indonesia which is adopting very much the Chinese model of epayments has really penetrated the market here which is working quite well.  Again, comes with risks and we looked into this in the paper ‑‑ the top paper I mentioned, there which was done in cooperation with CIPE.  And we are looking into food safety issues because as Anna mentioned just now, we are working on food security issues.  We are looking to food safety because since everybody is now ordering food online, there are new challenges for food safety and we have been looking into this.
Digital consumer rights.  We have a landscape that's so scattered with overlapping of different agencies and ministries and we are looking into these issues.  Co‑regulation is coming out very soon.  We believe that everybody needs to be in constant dialogue on issues and also entrust other players than just the government to actually enforce certain regulations.
Women entrepreneur was something that I was reminded of when Juliet was just talking, because we see at the moment there's this drive to regulate the digital space, and when the government tries to regulate that, they would ‑‑ in Indonesia, they would request everyone to have a license to actually sell online, but getting that license is complicated for microenterprises, and most microenterprises are run by women.  So they would suffer from licensing requirements and other things, which we are addressing in this paper.
We have other policy briefs.  I don't want to talk about all of these, but you see that we are addressing most of the relevant issue in this area.  So so much for introducing CIPS, the Center for Indonesia Policy Studies.  Thank you so much for having me.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: We will go deeper on a number of topics that you mentioned.  Rose, over to you.
>> MARY ROSE OFIANGA: Hello, everyone.  Again, I'm Rose.  I'm a community builder for tech community here is located in the southern part of Philippines.  I'm also an entrepreneur and environmentalist.  And so as Morgan mentioned and Anna mentioned, I'm also a member of the IGF MAG and democracy leader.  And as a community builder, I organize community events and capacity building for the tech start‑ups.  So we can promote the digital entrepreneurship in solving specifically social and economic problems in the CP.
So as part of our community activities with the coaching the mentoring under the entrepreneurship and the government‑funded incubation program.  And we have people who want to build their online presence.
Right now as an entrepreneur, I have seen how important it is to be connected to the Internet, and also to know how to optimize and leverage the power of the Internet to innovate and solve social problems and come up with digital solutions.
Apart from that, in this ‑‑ right now, especially during the pandemic, we know how important it is for businesses to connect with the Internet to grow our business, and achieve our business goals, especially for micro and small and medium enterprises.  Imagine those businesses that are in traditional marketing and then suddenly we have to shift the digital platforms because of pandemic and now we have seen mainly businesses have closed and there's a risk for bankruptcy and business failures.
So during this time, I think it's the best time to ask our governments, our ‑‑ you know, our ecosystem how resilient our economy in doing business, using Internet platforms.  Right now in the Philippines there's a typhoon, which is far from us, fortunately.  So it's like pandemic and there's also a disaster at the same time.  So it's a matter of asking how resilient are we in using our digital platforms?  Do we have the right infrastructure to connect those people who are now affected by the quarantine and the disasters at the same time.
So right now, as we ‑‑ we shift to digital platforms, we do webinars and online coaching and mentoring, just to cope with what is going on right now.  There's a lot of organizations here in the Philippines in general who are providing free webinars and free conferences, even many people are reaching out to entrepreneurs to do coaching and mentoring to help them build their ‑‑ their ‑‑ our online presence, and to help reach our market even though there's a lot going on.
Hopefully we can share more about what is going on here.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Thank you so much, Rose.  Nicole?  Go ahead.
>> NICOLE PRIMMER: Thank you, Anna, and thank you, everyone.  It's really great to be here.  I'm with a senior policy director at Business at OECD.  We are the official industry representative for the organization, and I also want to share my screen just to give you an overview of what we do.
Excuse me.
Okay.  Is that working okay? 
Okay.  Great.
We are located in Paris, and as you know, OECD is an organization of 37 of the developed countries in the world, but, in fact, the OECD is functioning as ‑‑ to develop guidance for the world globally.
A business at OECD, we have the industry and employer federations of the OECD countries but also a number of non‑OECD countries.  We have over 30 policy groups.  We're enabling businesses of all sizes and really focused on growth economic development and social prosperity.
As we just heard, what is the focus at the moment obviously is how we can develop effective policy responses to COVID‑19, across all of these policy areas to ensure that we are resilient and that we have both resilient response, and inclusive response, but also looking forward to the recovery.
Over the past several months with the onset of the pandemic, we have been developing policy briefs across all policy areas, trade, investment, tax, digital, employment, et cetera, trying take a holistic and integrated approach to these issues.  And obviously, digital is a theme across all of these issues, whether it's trade or tax or investment.  It really has been the source of both economic and social continuity in the crisis, and we have been focused on all elements of the digital ecosystem to make sure that we can reinforce the elements needed to ensure that we have the inclusiveness in this content ‑‑ the continuity and the crisis.
We recently at OECD participated to their annual meeting with OECD ministers, and issued a report on our ‑‑ which is available on our website, focusing on strengthening international coordination to recover from COVID‑19.
And from the business community, we were advocating at the top line really this emphasis on international cooperation in coordination, the need for a whole of government policy approach, open markets for trade and investment and importantly, public and private partnership.  We want to emphasize that we need to be working more closely than ever on issues to respond in this current crisis.
Just a brief overview of our work on digital.  We have a committee on digital economy policy.  You see at the top of the page just a general objective of the committee, working to advance the responsible use of digital technologies looking at mitigating challenges of COVID‑19, and importantly, again focused on resiliency and informing timely government actions.
And as we heard from the earlier speakers, we are very much focused on ensuring that we have the appropriate governance and regulatory frameworks in place from at all levels from the local to the international and ensuring that they are connected up so we can have the inclusive growth that we need and at this moment, the inclusive recovery that we need.
As I mentioned, digital policy, as you well though, it's cross cutting.  Literally, it is the major issue featuring in all of our work across disciplines and that's one of the great strengths of the OECD is that you have an organization that's focused on both evidence, ensuring that we have evidence‑based policies but also bringing together in a multidisciplinary way experts from across the various policy disciplines to make sure that we have a very integrated approach and holistic approach to policy making.
In our work on digital, we have worked with OECD in something that's called the OECD going digital project.  This, again, is developing an integrated policy approach and they have also developed something called the going digital toolkit, which allows countries to benchmark their performance across different policy areas.  Importantly, we work with OECD to develop the instruments.  As you may know, OECD is setting standards for digital economy policy, that we hope will benefit far beyond the OECD membership and there's some core disciplines such as privacy, digital security risk, broadband connectivity, et cetera.
And on the horizon, obviously is the issue of data.
And in this case, this is ‑‑ from the OECD perspective, but also from our perspective, again, working across committees to reinforce the different agencies and stakeholders that need to contribute to this work, and in the context of the COVID‑19 crisis, OECD has also set up a policy hub on COVID‑19 and digital to which we can participate.
And then finally, just to note on the previous slide, we have been developing a number of policy briefs specifically focused on COVID in the digital area we have Recommendationed, general policy recommendations which I will point to later, and then focused on connectivity and digital security.
And just as a last statement, we are dealing at the very high level of policy making, but it's our members, whether ‑‑ whether it's the member organizations or the companies that belong to those organizations that are really on the ground, you know, having impact and working with the other stakeholders and colleagues like yourself to implement the recommendations and the guidance that they are working on at OECD.  So thank you.
Thanks.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Thank you so much for your remarks.  Just a note to the audience on how the rest of the session will go.  So we'll go for a couple of rounds of questions, moderated by me and in the meantime, to our online participants if you have questions, please type them into chat and we'll be happy to get to them towards the ‑‑ in the second part of the session.
But let me kick things off.  So let's dig a little deeper on something that was already mentioned in the remarks by some of you which was the impact of COVID‑19 pandemic, in particular on small businesses, on entrepreneurs, and the global south.  And in that context specifically, how can the digital economy support their survival and eventually the recovery?  Rainer, could I go to you first?
>> RAINER HEUFERS: Sure.  Thank you.  Thank you, Anna.  Yes, indeed.  We're facing an unprecedented crisis, at least in the last couple of decades.  So the fact is that we had surveys in Indonesia that showed almost all microenterprises have lost revenue, about 50%, actually, of their revenue during the crisis.  So that's ‑‑ that's really a profound change.
That puts them at much risk.  There are horrible estimations that show up to 60% could really go out of business.  So, I mean, this is really a dramatic scenario that we are facing for micro enterprises?  Why is this?  Obviously this is because of the restrictions that they are facing.  That is social distancing.  That is necessary to fight the virus.  But obviously, many of them live off tourism, office workers that would go and they would sell things to them from lunch to transport, to we don't know what.  Entertainment, general services, et cetera.  So the service sector in general is really badly hit.
And in countries like Indonesia, many emerging countries, it's really the informal vendors and businesses that thrive in these settings and are now affected when people stay at home, work from home, and have things delivered online.
So the solution obviously as we are talking here in the governance forum, the digital governance forum is how can they go digital to participate in the boom that I was talking about earlier.  And that's a complex question, obviously.  Because we have to first of all, think about the entrepreneurs themselves what does it mean?  Does it mean marketing their goods?  Does it mean advertising them on Instagram or any other local platform?  Sometimes it's just that.
Sometimes they would produce goods that into Ed to be deliver ‑‑ they need to be delivered then then there's the big question of payments.  So we are talking about a complex question here and to what extent is the business digital?  100% or just partially?  Just to give you a little idea from my side on the programs that try to deal with this, ‑‑ I must say I'm very skeptical when it comes to government programs here because we often see that the administrations are not really quite familiar with how companies work, what entrepreneurship needs to really provide the guidance.
So the best is the cooperation and I just want to highlight one program that we have in Indonesia.  There is this right share company Grab in Southeast Asia and particularly in Indonesia also, and they have these so called grab assistance.  These are drivers who help you go shopping for you.  So you basically ask them to go somewhere and buy your groceries and bring them back.
Now, Grab has cooperated in a couple of districts of Indonesia with the local governments to make sure that traditional markets would be part of that.  So the drivers would not go to the big supermarkets.  They would go to the traditional vendors and that way, I think there are 26,000 vendors included in that program.  So that's a way how the government can cooperate with the big business, the online business to actually help the smaller businesses to be able to participate in the economy.  I think that to me is something that should be further discussed.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Thank you so much.  And indeed, that's a great example of thinking outside of the box and trying to come up with solutions that are more inclusive than, perhaps, just usual thinking on those issues.
Let me turn over to Rose.  Rose, you already began telling us a little bit about the situation in the small business in the Philippines in the context of the pandemic.  Can you expand on that?  And also give us the digital economy perspective of what kind of needs are you seeing?  What kind of programs or trainings do you find most useful?
>> MARY ROSE OFIANGA: Thank you, Anna.  I think as Rainer presented, the small businesses have lost their profit and we already know that we see much of the affected businesses through the quarantine to get the people to go out and the business as usual.  So there are closures of several businesses, especially those who are brick and mortar shops and those in the tourism and the entertainment industry.
Yes, this business had to play off employees and working hours became limited, right?  And their risk of ‑‑ as I mentioned, the business failures.  So we notice the urgent need for the traditional businesses to shift their business model online, to continue to do the businesses with their customers and clients.
So for some, this has been a challenge because they were not ready for digital transformation, and their business model was not designed to reach out to the digital customers.  And it was business as usual, and I mean for some business as usual for them, because, again, their business models were designed to be a digital platform.
In our city, because people have to survive from losing their job or closing their businesses, we have to look for another alternative to survive and make a living, and it became a good thing, sort of, because I have ‑‑ as I have observed, people in our community and our locality became more entrepreneurial.  Every day people are selling whatever they think they can sell online extent that you can already order fish and eggs, you know, and these are, sold by your neighbors that you couldn't imagine selling whatever online.  Almost all of my friends want to learn how to create social media ads for their products online and even myself, I learned how to sell ground coffee on Facebook, because I ran out of ground coffee.  Before I used to buy ground coffee.  I have to source it from the local market, otherwise I won't have my usual coffee energy.
So one of the realzations that I had was there were big companies, like in other parts of the world, big companies are closing out.  They are stopping their operations like airlines, transportation, hotels and restaurants, but on the other part of the world, there are people who are thriving during the pandemic.  These are the micro enterprises and I think Rainer mentioned this already.  Those people who are selling basic goods and services are thriving in the local economy.
And the access of the Internet has become a necessity for everyone, not just ‑‑ it becomes a utility.
And because it's the only way to reach out to the market, and if we don't have any other choice, but to go online with the go digital, but the question is how capable and proficient are these businesses to use digital technologies?  And that becomes one of the challenges for those who are not able to come up.
I could see two types of businesses, those businesses that are connected to the Internet but they do not have enough skills to maneuver or navigate their business in the digital market by using the digital tools.  To be honest, it's not easy and it gets overwhelming if you have to learn all of these things at once, given the urgency of the matter, right?
And second, there are also businesses who are having the difficulty building their business online because there's no good Internet connectivity in anywhere location.
So these businesses are the ones who are left behind in terms of switching out to their new market.
So it is two kinds of businesses.  I can see that there are different solutions.  One is the capacity building to help them navigate their business online aneurysm out to the digital market.  And then the skills that they need to reach out to their market and to really compete for their existing, you know, markets who are already in the digital platform.
But also this is a costly thing.
It becomes costly for them to keep them trained and people who can do the job for them.  All throw, there are freelancers but there's a balance of should we get revenue or more people to do these things for us.
The second thing is better access to the Internet.  Of course this has been a long discussed issue.  At least in a simple manner, they can connect to the potential marks and clients at least on social media or any platforms that are free to ‑‑ to pose their products online.  So the eCommerce platform is very useful to the microenterprises who are just starting their business online and it is very important that we de ‑‑ the design of the platform is easy to use and navigate and secure.
But also for the people to be able to use the digital platforms when they are connected to the Internet.  And of course as mentioned by our colleagues.  So the digital security is another issue that is arrived from the eCommerce platforms.  There are many being developed right now and some of them are not secured, if not most of them, so while collecting data from online customers.  So apart from that this microbusinesses are online sellers are just using the social media and they have our personal information for everything transaction, like our addresses, our mobiles, names.  They have all of our information, where to find us, you know, and there is no existing regulation to make sure that this online sellers are making sure that our data are secured and our privacy is being protected.
And apart from that, there's logistics issues as well, because here in our city, we have curfew and a limited number of days that we can go out.  So there have been, like, people are making sure that their basic needs are met.  And so the employment. ‑‑ the employment are down and people are using Internet but the Internet connectivity or the speed of the Internet is not improving because we still have the same infrastructure.  It's not easy to add up additional infrastructure just because it's pandemic, right?  So the speed of the Internet is the same.  So many people are using the Internet.
So ‑‑ well, here in the Philippines, we just have to do what we can do, and as a community builder and with the community, we just continue to provide online trainings and reach out to people who need mentorship.  We share ‑‑ we share information online and we have groups on social media, where we can ‑‑ where we can share information and share free trainings and in terms of regulations with the government, we noticed that, you know, selling event plans are being regulated now, because even plants, you can find it online.  People are, like, getting plants wherever they can find it in the forest and put it in the pot and sell it for like $100.  The government has noticed that one and they are trying to regulate all of these things.
And even those who are selling online that have no business registration from the department of trade and industry, they are also tracking that and they make sure that people who are selling online has business registration.  So myself, I had to register my coffee business so that it will be legit.
So, yeah, that's it for me.
Thank you.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Great.  Thank you so much, Rose, and actually your remarks lead us very nicely into the next question I wanted to explore with the panel, and that is the question of regulation or lack thereof, too much, too little.  So the ‑‑ another issue that has been exposed is also not new, but comes down to the policy barriers that participants or aspiring participants in the digital economy face, that may prevent in particular the smaller businesses, the businesses owned by women, from being able to do business online.
Nicole, I would like to turn to you and see what insights from your research on the policy issues you may have.
>> NICOLE PRIMMER: Thank you, Anna.  I wanted to point to two programs that we're engaged with, with the OECD and also with our other business colleagues.  And the first is a program that was launched last year at the OECD with the support of business at OECD addressing digital for SMEs and really, the objective is to ensure that we can address some of the barriers that SMEs are facing, whether it's gaps in digital connection or more.  The project was launched last year.
It aims to first of all, as OECD focuses on to develop a basis of analytical research, to get a good database on this particular issue, working with business partners, second of all to create a network in order that SMEs can share experiences and bridging between large and small companies and finally to set up a network and a policy dialogue.
It's a new project.  SMEs are not new to the OECD but this particular project is new.  Obviously with the onset of the pandemic, in 2020, the focus has also shifted on towards SME digitalzation in response to the COVID‑19 crisis.
I wanted to just point to some of the work that is ongoing, looking at the impact of lockdown and disruptions on supply chains for SMEs and GPCs and this is one particular barrier, which we have raised in our recent discussions with the organization that one of the challenges that the pandemic has imposed is, in fact, this fragmentation of global value chains.
So this, in particular, will impact the smaller businesses where the capacity is less, also in the digital front.
The ‑‑ we all know and as you mentioned, there's been a significant rise in eCommerce with the onset of the pandemic.  So, again, the ‑‑ the project looks at the impact of how SMEs are participating in eCommerce, and what our regional and sectoral issues that they are facing and what are the specific barriers.
They are also, in terms of sharing SME experience, as a mention, the project is quite new.  I'm giving you a vision of what is ahead, as opposed to what is already identified, but they are looking to develop an extensive database for SME digitalization and data experiences and for, many many years in the work of OECD, the focus has been on the digitalization and how do SMEs also globalize.  I think this project brings together those two objectives very well and allows us to more concretely see what technologies can be in place and then what are the policy recommendations that we need to ensure that we can both digitalize at the local level but also as necessary expand cross border.
There will be a ministerial coming up that will be addressing these issues that will be hosted by Korea, and that will be organized, of course, in the context of the ‑‑ the virtual context that we are all living under.
I also wanted to mention that we're, of course, very focused on education and training.  This is obviously a fundamental issue and a significant barrier for not only firms, but also for individuals.  And in our work, we are focusing on both skills and competencies for digitalization, and being ‑‑ ensuring that, you know, our curricula today, they are focusing not only on what we call modern disciplines such as technology and entrepreneurship, but also to make sure that we have the soft skills that are necessary for individuals and for firms to thrive and be competitive in the current economy and also in the recovery ahead.
With that we support and work with an organization called Gan Global which is a really interesting organization that's focused on work‑based learning.  It's a business‑led initiative, and OECD is also a partner, together with the ILO, but it's really looking at promoting and advocating apprenticeship and looking at the classic skills such as skills mismatch, and ensuring that we have access to the quality skills.  And I raise that because in this particular situation, of COVID‑19, and in digitalization, I think that this particular initiative has taken on even more importance.
Beyond our OECD community, what the Gan has done is set up a number of global networks.  Presently there are 17, in oceana, and Europe, and several other regions and these are really where we get into the hands on the ground, country approaches to promote work‑based learning.  And that is ‑‑ we also want to say that in this environment, you know, we need to break down some of the ‑‑ also the barriers in terms of apresent sisship and approaches to acquiring the skills we need beyond the traditional approaches.
So those are just two of the initiatives and we'll be really happy to continue working with you as the SME project develops.  Like I said, it's in just its first year of launch, but I think it's really April example of a very prog Matic approach coming out of OECD that business supports and also an approach that will go beyond the OECD membership itself.
>> PARTICIPANT: Excuse me, Ms. Chair, can I ask you to give me the floor.  I'm from Russia, my name Anna Nestrerova.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Yes, our issue is time.  We will take some questions ‑‑ questions and answers at the end, but if you have a really short intervention, maybe just one minute.
>> PARTICIPANT: Okay.  Okay.  I can wait.  No problem.  Okay.  Thank you.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Back to the policy issues, and, again, encouragement to everybody in the audience, if you have questions or comments, the best way to make sure that everybody sees them is to put them in the chat, because simply, we will not have enough time to yield the floor.
Back to the policy issues, Juliet, I know you are ‑‑ well, you are based in Uganda, but you work across Africa.  So your view really is continent‑wide.  Tell us what barriers do you see that, in particular, impact SMEs and women in access to commerce from the policy perspective?
>> JULIET NANFUKA: Thanks.  Thanks for the question, Anna, and for the contributions from the other panelists.  It's been very interesting listening.
So across the continent, we see different levels, for example of affordable, of Internet penetration.  So different countries have been met with different dynamics, however, in the current, across them all, of course is the gender dynamic, where we see women more disproportionately ‑‑ disproportionately affected than male counter parts.
But courtesy of the pandemic as has been mentioned earlier, everything is came to a standstill.  But largely online went on without feeling the pinch of the shutdown.  But when we look at countries such as Uganda, which are very based in the agricultural sector, which is very informal and a bit removed from the digital economy, we saw two‑tiered dynamic, where there was a bit of an exploitation of the farmers because they are unaware of the market that has been placed on their prices because of the shutdown, the lockdown, rather, but at the same time, there was an emergence of a bit of digital literacy amongst some who saw the opportunity and were able to tap into it.
But this was, again, very much along gender lines the second point I'm talking about, those who were able to tap into the digital opportunity.  And this played itself out across the continent, the countries which have a bit more of a larger informal sector.
So ‑‑ but putting agricultural sector aside, there was still an emergence of other online opportunities that were explored which to some extent policy supported but also did not support.  We thought that the online tax would be removed, but it stayed.
And we saw it apply to NetFlix, and to YouTube channels, those kind of dynamics were coming up where in other parts of the world, people are generating an income by uniting a YouTube channel, by running ‑‑ by running a YouTube channel, by running an Instagram account.  Here not so much.  But also adding to that is some of our policies do not readily accept the interactions between the banking systems across borders and this was that dynamic.  For example, PayPal, may not be readily available here for all, as it is in other parts of the world.  So there's been a lot happening at content generation level and the economic level and also perspective policy level.
Uganda introduced just this past December, the data protection and privacy act, it's definitely been a Godsend because we saw during the pandemic, there was the call for the bike riders, we call them border, borders to collect the data and the phone numbers of all the passengers.
This is me handing over my phone detail to a complete stranger where no idea of where he's taking then and how we would store them but there's a gender dynamic in that respect, because some people's data, contact details are collected and then suddenly strange men are calling them, especially the women received such calls.
So while there was some policy progressive steps were made during the pandemic.  Ideally with such a law, we should not be imparting our information with every random person to catch a ride and especially someone that we simply picked up on the street because we stop the bikes and hop on to them.  That's an issue that emerged.
At an affordability level, there was no reduction to or no position made on the removal.  Social media attacks which previously had seen 5 million people people drop Ott the anyonette.  In this would be an opportune time, instead welcomes them back on and encourages them to pursue online.  Some parents, paying a social media tax is not on their priority, especially when their jobs are the risk and when their health was uncertain.  That small policy shift could have done a whole lot more for a country like Ugandan than if it was removed than keeping it on.  So while people have largely worked around it, it still remains a monkey on the back, considering that we are going into eel elections ‑‑ elections, including the states are using social media.  So we see a bit of a Jekyl and Hyde.  We don't like social media, but we want you to use social media.  So those are some of the dynamics that we have seen.
Also the content production level as mentioned at the start of the session across the world we have seen a whole lot more content being generated, massive amounts.  We have been seeing TikTok videos and accounts created on a myriad of topics.  YouTube channels being created which are challenging the media, as we come to know its as NetFlix emerged with a new breed ‑‑ or a different breed of content.
But in some countries we have been witnessing restrictions to the use of such platforms such as YouTube.
We have been seeing restrictions to the content that is ‑‑ that people would like to share on platforms and this comes in the form of the state saying you must pay the state in order to be online.  Your content must go through the state first before it is posted online.  Those are some of the dynamics affecting countries such as Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, amongst others during the time of COVID.
Some of these policy notes were in place before the pandemic, but their presence became a whole lot more felt during the pandemic.
Nonetheless, we see the production of growth in the content, and so there's still an opportunity in that area, as much as there is with regards to digital economy.
So some of the things we have been following and Rose mentioned it, the plant community, which has taken on a mind of its own, as you can see behind me.  I'm living in a forest.
But what does that mean in a country like Uganda, which is removed from some of these conversations but has just as much economic opportunity.  We have the field.  We have the climb and the soil and everything.  But we are so far removed.
It also brings into question, the issue around ease of trade within the continent and beyond.
While it's much easier for some to trade beyond the continent, it's not as easy within the continent.  So some of those policy conversations have, you know, come up a whole lot more now than they were previously, especially when the ships stopped traveling, suddenly some senties didn't have access to the service that producing or supporting and yet right next door there's a supplier available to do it and these are some of the discussions that we have been having as part of the work alongside CIPE on interregional economy, what should that look like through the lens of digital transformation?  What are the opportunities that should be exploited in that respect?
So generally, there is a lot that is happening and we are on the right past with the introduction of data privacy regulations in more countries with more conversation around cybersecurity but also the conversation on issues such as continent regulations because all of them are interrelated with each other and they cannot be seen in isolation.
So as much as it's been a difficult time, it's also a time of opportunity that we need to utilize a whole lot more and keep in mind of what is happening in other countries.  A country like South Africa behaves differently than a country like Congo with less Internet, but many more resources that should be tapped into to support the economic development of the country.
So I think we are sitting at the cusp of opportunity, but our regulations and policies are holding us back and that's where the sitement actually S. we need to get beyond this.  Thanks.  Thank you so much.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: We are running short of time, and let's combine a couple of things, perhaps folding the one question that I see in the chat, and then Ms. Neserova, ask your question or make your remarks, but very, very briefly, please.
>> PARTICIPANT: Thank you very much, Ms. Chair.  My name is Anna Nesterova, I'm are from Russia, and I'm the founder of national BT.B platform and I would like to briefly just highlight the economic situation during COVID pandemic 19 Russia and just a few words about eCommerce as one sector that can contribute to an inclusive economy during the COVID‑19 emergency.
You know many lockdowns implemented across the world have required consumers to exmore online purchase and options, you know?  In Russia, for example, more than three months of lockdown from March until the beginning of June, caused the eCommerce sales to exceed 10% of total retail sales.  Nowadays eCommerce is also supported to be one of the drivers of SMEs development and in the framework of pandemic online trade has become a life preserver for micro and small and medium enterprises all over the world and in Russia also.
In addition, eCommerce is a way to support the SMEs in a Roe mote and rural areas.  This is an opportunity to improve the standard of living in regions and it helps small and medium sized enterprises participate in the global economy by reducing transaction costs and unders the geography of the supply errs.  And eCommerce breaks the barriers as it also provides opportunities of cooperation with international economies, across the globe.
Finally, it is fast, cheap, convenient and allows enterprises to conduct business notion and conclude construct and discuss will deal details online.  Also with the development of digital economy access to etools becomes the placing for the active involvement in the mechanic process of whole population, including women and having access to the Internet, women should be able to use all modern tools for personal and professional development.
And one of the goals of the economic empowerment of women is to engage female enterprises using these digital tools which can be one of the additional sources of growth.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Thank you so much.  I'm afraid ‑‑ I think we all agree with the very valid points you made.
But I want to make sure we have time for the last final round of intervention from our speakers.  And, again, feel free to speak also to that particular aspect of eCommerce as an empowerment tool.
I wanted to make sure that we had time to touch on two things.  First a multi‑stakeholder dimension of local and regional or international collaboration that you have seen or that you would recommend or that we key as possible to advance the digital economy from the policy perspective or through other interventions or approaches.
And Nicole, in particular, when I turn to you, perhaps you can also address the question that came through chat, which has to do with the nature of the OECD itself, and maybe you can explain a little bit better the distinction between being ‑‑ OECD as a membership organization, versus OECD as sort of a global player and standards and research organization and also how it's not just government focus but there's input through your organization, for instance into how the OECD operates.
And then as I give the floor to all the panelists, at the conclusion, I would like to ask based on our discussioning in our own capacity or on behalf of your organization, is there a commitment that you could undertake during the next year to pep achieve some of the goals that we ‑‑ that the IGF supports in terms of digital economy inclusion?
So first, let me turn to Rose.
Thoughts on multi‑stakeholder collaboration and then any commitment that you would like to make.
>> MARY ROSE OFIANGA: Yes, I think one thing that has to be considered is to activate the policy that will provide guidance for the local business communities that are going digital to make sure that they are also consumer protection policy and that is streamlined and having a good site and payment quickly and with proper terms and conditions at the same time, to protect the ‑‑ I think fear in the Philippines we have consumer rights law, and ‑‑ but I think we have to strengthen that one and protect the sellers' rights as well.
As business entrepreneurs we are also, like, we are giving up our investment and it's very important for us to have a ‑‑ and ecosystem that would help us thrive in this digital environment.  And the sect thing that is very important and Nicole mentioned this.  Mentioning that the integration of the is very important and I want to see a policy that will integrate with the primary education, I think from the primary education and not just the entrepreneurial and the soft skills that are needed to thrive into the digital environment.
The last one I want to point out is the second to the affordability of the Internet connection because right now in suburb or urban areas we are highly impacted with the COVID, pandemic, especially with the education.  We transition our education into online.
As a mother, I have seen how it is very ‑‑ how it's difficult and challenging for mothers to teach their kids because the teachers aren't around them and the teachers won't be around to teach the kids and the areas not connected to the Internet, they have to learn on their own.  They have to depend on their parents to each them.  We call it the modular education, Chi think really impacted the quality of education, if we are not online.
So aside from the entrepreneurial community and the economy, I think we have also to think about how we can maintain the quality of education that we are transititioning to the digital.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Thank you so much.  Rainer, go ahead.
>> RAINER HEUFERS: I believe there needs to be multi‑stakeholder dialogue on all levels.  We have a good example in Indonesia.  We have 50% of people unbanked.  Epayments are incredibly important to financial inclusion.
In the elenders ‑‑ time, I'm talking about elending, they needed handful data from their customers.  Maybe not the phone numbers to call the women afterwards but they needed other data.  They wanted the contacts.  They want the GPS data.  They want to know how many social contacts would you have and they would call your friends later in your contact, in your address book to say why has this person not paid us back?  So very embarrassing social pressure.
So they went beyond what was okay and beyond what was allowed then abused the data to a certain extent.  But they need the data for credit worthiness.  This is a real dilemma.  Therefore, what you need is a proper dialogue where business players come together with go of the players and also with civil society and academics to figure out what is necessary and we are exploring very much the area of the regulatory sandbox, where you can try out certain things in a safe environment and Singapore passed the data protection act after applying regulatory sandbox even in the area of data protection and so I believe that this is something that's really worth while exploring on the national level.
On the international level, I know we are running out of time.  The Indonesian president has idea hub.  It's it's in the G20 in Argentina and the Indonesian government is pan pushing this with Italy and Canada and their unicorns and their governments on how to foster the sharing economy.  And we need something on the national and international level.
And I have an idea for CIPE, ba because CIPE, I believe this could be an interesting topic where think tanks can inspire each other with the experience that we have in different countries.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Great.  Thank you.
Nicole, over to you.
>> NICOLE PRIMMER: Thanks, Anna.  I wanted to pick up on the point thujol yet said.  That as challenging as it is.  COVID is putting a lens on the most challenging barriers and issues discussed but our goal is to come out of this stronger and doing things better and as we have been discussing in a more inclusive way.  Thanks for those positive comments as well.
Just on multi‑stakeholderrism.  In the community on digital economy policy at the OECD, they really pioneer on this particular point and in 2008, after ministerial, there was a decision by the leadership to include both civil society, and the Internet technical community on the committee itself.  Generally we just have business and the trade unions and in some cases consumers.  I think this has really reinforced the work on digital so.  We can take a truly multi‑stakeholder approach so you have trade unions, technical community and civil society which is really the hardest job to bring across the very, very diverse civil society community to that work but we work very closely together.  We are well coordinated and I think it strengthens the quality of the instruments coming out of OECD and I wanted to mention we recently in September just held a round table on regulatory stand boxes and one was the Singapore personal data protection commission, and this was a very concrete, I think discussion.  We appreciated going out beyond the OECD countries and coming into the conversation and we had the deputy commissioner as one of our speakers and this is one of the more concrete projects we will be taking forward.
Finally to the question in the chat, yes, the OECD has 37 countries at the moment.  But in it is truly a global organization, working not only with other international organizations and the international financial institutions, but within the OECD itself, you have programs, for example, called the global forum programs where whether it's on competition or digital security or taxation, you will have 100 plus, 150 plus countries around the table.
If we look at the current project only digital taxation, for example, that is being taken forward under the G20, we have an inclusive framework with 137 countries on equal footing.  So yes, it is a challenging issue on one hand, but OECD has made sure that its outreach is broad, and what we are looking for as well from business is to make sure that that evidence base is truly representative and legitimate for the many issues that we are addressing.
Thanks.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Thank you, Nicole and last but not least, Juliet, your closing thoughts on multi‑stakeholder collaboration at the level of your choice, plus any comments that you see and contributing to the outcomes that you want to see.
>> JULIET NANFUKA: As the same suggests, we are all about collaboration.  It's something that we truly try to push through in all that we do.  Unfortunately, its not always returned.
But nonetheless, it's an ongoing journey.  We are seeing more collaboration, in not all issues but on issues such as data protection collaboration which we contributed to all the way up until the enactment of the law and we still continue giving feedback to the eventual law that was passed.
We are working on the regulations and it's good to see the multi‑stakeholder collaborations and the commitments taken a bit more responsibly positively than they previously where.  We have various regulations that have passed without any consultation whatsoever.  Often to the detriment of the community online and often those indirectly related to the community online.  So we still have a long way to go on that.  And that is at the international level, not only in Uganda but other countries as well.
Nonetheless, there's a bit more ‑‑ at least much more stakeholder involvement today than this was a few years ago.  We also see it at platforms where we share spaced such as the forum which CIPE has attended and more recently we have been seeing more interest from state entities in attending this forum, but previously they kept their distance.
It gives us access in the use and perceptions in areas such as the African continent free trade agreement.  It comes into force ‑‑ it was supposed to come into force this year but due to the pandemic, it's been pushed out to January.  We see that as a fantastic opportunity to engage in the multi‑stakeholder level with all the actors involved and there are many more today than previously.
I have been mentioned content creators have become a very key part of the digital economy they are driving trends and conversations in the same way that the media has been doing all along.  So we are keen on seeing much more interaction at the national, regional and international level as something as excites as the African continent free trade agreement, which has been the largest of its kind.  It's exciting to be actively and more intentionally pursuing a more inclusive society at an offline and online arena.
So that is something that we are fully committed to and something that we look forward to continue doing.
>> ANNA KOMPANEK: Thank you so much, and many thanks to all the panelists and to the audience for your patience.  Clearly, we ‑‑ we're past the time, which is a good indicator that the topic has richness to it and I'm sure we could have spent another hour at least talking about it.
Thank you all once more for your contributions.  Thank you for your questions and we look forward to continuing that conversation through other channels.
Take care, everyone.
>> JULIET NANFUKA: Thank you very much, all.
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-11-%E2%80%93-ws266-sustainable-netgov-by-design-environment-human-rights-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
     >> MICHAEL OGHIA: Hi, everyone. Thanks for joining. We are waiting a few minutes because one of our speakers is having trouble joining. As soon as she joins, we'll get started.
Thank you for your patience. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Hi, everyone. I don't know who our host is. Could you let us know? Who is our host? 
>> Hello. I'm here. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Hi. What's your name? 
>> Claudia. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you so much. We also have one other individual who should be joining as a panelist soon, hopefully soon. His name is Wizad. Please promote him to a panelist if not already. Thank you very much, Claudia. 
So thank you, everyone, for joining. Pia, you are just in time. Do not stress at all. I told everybody. Everybody knows people are having ‑‑ especially new people are having trouble joining for the first time. Do not worry at all. 
So I think we can go ahead and get started. Give me a moment, let me pull up my notes. 
So the very first thing I would like to do before I go into my welcoming ‑‑ and, Claudia, if you don't mind, please do promote everyone who is in the room to a panelist because this is a workshop. I fully intend for everybody to participate here if you would like to, of course. This is not a webinar. I will make that point again. 
>> Sure. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you so much, Claudia. Hold on a second. I realized my connection is not in my PC, my Mac. Now you should be able to hear me better. 
Wonderful. If there is no further ado, I would like to get started. 
Welcome, everyone, to our workshop. Thanks for joining us. My name is Michael Oghia. In the context of this session, the hat I'm wearing is that of a steering committee member of the internet rights and principles coalition, one of the IGF's 23 active coalitions. They have been prioritizing the subject in line with article four of the charter regarding the right to development. 
This session seeks to build on events in Paris in 2018 as well as Berlin last year and others where we have demonstrated how internet governance, environmental sustainability and human rights are interconnected. This workshop also builds on our DC session held on 6 November this year, so about ten days ago, along with a session that the association for progressive communications held last week. 
So why this topic now? The urgency surrounding this area now has never been greater. Internet dependent technologies are an integral part of our daily lives and more so considering the pandemic. Yet ICTs, information and communications technologies, have a direct impact on the physical environments locally, regionally and internationally. While these technologies play a central role in global efforts to find solutions to tackle the climate crisis and promote environmental protection as well as sustainable development the growing demands of an interconnected society are contributing to unprecedented levels of energy consumption, conflict mineral mining, E‑waste and the dumping in the global south as well as negative effects on vulnerable natural landscapes, communities, human rights and more. 
One of our principle arguments is that much of these problems, many of these problems rather stem from a lack of consideration of sustainability in the design of ICTs. We now face a situation where we need to create sustainable technology for tomorrow but are still working with the unsustainable business model's lack of long‑term holistic design thinking and inadequate policy frameworks that have essentially defined technology, ICTs for the past 20, 30 years if not longer. 
This is further exacerbated by the silo'd nature of communities, discussions, networks and solutions seeking to address the topic. Many organizations, researchers, governments, companies and more are working to address some aspect of technological sustainability which is great. However, they often do not communicate across sectoral partitions and often don't know others working on the topic exist. They don't know others are out there working on the same topic. 
Now, a lack of a holistic approach to the topic is problematic for myriad reasons, not least because of three critical elements. One, there is concern that there are so many ‑‑ there is concern that there are so many piecemeal approaches to the topic the impact will be limited due to no clear consensus as to how to move forward or measure process as it relates to the sector as a whole. Number two and closely connected to this is that the extremely limited funding and resources available that is needed will not be adequate to realize goals especially if it is spread across and not necessarily in a coordinated or in a way that's not being accessed in a bit more equitable way. 
Three, this IGF has underscored how the scope of our work is incredibly important. While I have already recognized two aspects in my earlier comments, the two being ICTs for sustainable development and sustainable digitization along with the sustainability of ICTs themselves from their production and consumption and their underlying infrastructure. Those are two key points within the scope. But this topic also broadly includes the importance of three ‑‑ data such as climate and environmental data to track progress, data for lifecycle assessments, and the availability of public data sets. So that's a third aspect. 
Then of course there's four, the sustainability of ICT organizational operations like carbon neutrality efforts, sustainable procurement. That's all important but still within its own subsection of the broader topic. 
Then of course, five, sustainable web design. All of these things often get kind of conflated is the word. They get conflated with each other. Being clear about our scope is fundamental to communicating effectively especially among various organizations and stakeholder groups and, of course, measuring our own progress. This is why concerted multi‑stakeholder efforts that are cross sectoral are vital to transition from insufficient retroactive fixes to more permanent, sustainable and holistic solutions, ones that protect communities, the planet and even bottom lines as well as translate policy recommendations into on‑the‑ground action. 
Just quickly before we get to the speaker introductions I just want to stress the objectives of the session. 
I want to emphasize that much of the logic behind this session and our advocacy at the RFPC for the environment track is many conversations are happening but mainly in a siloed and not multi‑stakeholder way. We want to highlight the interconnection between the internet, sustainability, the SDGs and human rights, and how we can ensure that sustainability is fully integrated into the design, manufacturing, implementation and procurement of internet‑dependent technologies from raw materials to data storage and energy consumption to disposal at the end of hardware lifecycles. 
We also want to address broadly ‑‑ not necessarily just in the session, but in general, generate substantive recommendations for how to break out of the siloed approach into ICT sustainability and use the IGF and NRIs to create space for cross sectoral dialogue, multi‑stakeholder policy solutions. 
Above all ‑‑ and I have said this, but I want to stress it again. Above all we want to have a frank and honest discussion. This is not a webinar. This is an IGF workshop. We are not here to agree with each other. We encourage dissent and challenging of ideas, especially since we consider this session to be an idea lab of sorts. Like a laboratory where stakeholders from across the community and external sectors come together to address the topic holistically it is a component often missing from a conversation. 
Having said that, I would like to quickly mention how we are trying to drive this conversation. The speakers will introduce themselves. I'm very happy to say that joining us especially to address the environmental activism and youth components of this topic is Weronika Koralewska joining us from Poland to offer a government perspective like an intergovernmental approach as well as an activist approach we have Alexandra Lutz who is joining from Belgium. Then it is a great honor that Pia Wiche is joining us from the private sector and the lifecycle assessment community, joining from Chile. 
Hopefullily soon enough and I don't see him yet, but hopefully joining us will be Wized Yao based in Nigeria working on community approaches. With that said, I would like to go ahead and open the floor to our panelists ‑‑ rather our key participants for the first round of interventions. You all have five minutes. Weronika, we can start with you. 
>> WERONIKA KORALEWSKA: Thank you, Michael, for this introduction. I'm Weronika Koralewska, an environmental activist trainer, educational program designer, youth worker and vice president of the Agri perma lab foundation which is an international NGO from Poland. 
While designing this panel we thought about one of the guiding questions to be how we can drive the action and I actually thought that it will be useful to rephrase this question because we know that all the knowledge and skills are already there during all the IGF environmental sessions, in tomes, publications, research we have heard the solutions are already there. They are here on all the levels. User equipment, data centers, network. We have indicators based on lifecycle assessment, ideas of circular economy, ideas for obligatory open repair environment. We even have knowledge and skills of how to write a program, code, and framework so the software works more efficiently. It's really amazing how much knowledge and skills we as a community already have. 
So then the question is why is the action not taking place? Why is it not happening? In my opinion, the reason why we get stuck with all these skills and knowledge ‑‑ 
[ Background noise ]
 
>> WERONIKA KORALEWSKA: Sorry. Yeah. Why we get stuck in this process of pushing for change is that there is elements missing which are values and culture shift. I believe we are avoiding an honest discussion about values and I see three critical elements in this area in my opinion. 
The first element is many times we are ‑‑ instead of solving problems we are kind of masking them. I think we should face the fact that everything comes at a price. Each stakeholder group needs to face this question. We as a society need to think what kind of environmental price are we willing to pay for implementing which technologies. 
For example, probably business would lose part of the profits. The government would lose and the economy would lose part of the GDP and maybe would need to shift from the growth paradigm to the degrowth paradigm. Maybe the consumers will lose some of the comfort. We need to have the honest conversation about what are our values. 
The second critical element I see in the sphere of values is I would say ethics instead of compulsion. We have this compulsion to just go for the new thing instead of fast, cautiously research it. Is it environmentally okay? So we have a compulsion to create new, new, new things instead of being more cautious of our impact on the environment. 
The next element I see in this area of value and culture shift that's needed is we need to tackle the problem of diffusion of responsibility. I see in our conversations many times different stakeholders are pointing fingers at each other. The government says it's the business's fault. The business says the consumers want it and the consumer says, but the government allows it and the business produces it. So is diffusion of responsibility, lack of accountability is a big problem. 
With that said I leave the floor to the other panelists. Thank you. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you and thank you for being right on time.
That was perfect. Now we are going to move to Alexandra. Are you ready to give your first intervention? 
>> ALEXANDRA LUTZ: Thank you so much for the introduction and thank you for what you said, Weronika. It shows that the conversation is going to be great. 
I work at the European parliament more specifically on questions on digital sustainability and also circular economy and other things. So what we can see from our perspective is we will take it seriously the rule as a regulator. 
Basically, the point ‑‑ someone gave me this image the other idea. If you have three foxes in a market of chickens, are the chickens really free? It was to say, well, now we have rules in place and the rules need to really make good things happen by design. So if you have rules in place that push bad behavior in the first place then people aren't going to be able to do it really. 
I like what you said, Weronika, that we have to ask ourselves what values we actually want to put at the center of our actions daily and of our rules. 
So what are our priorities?
If today the priority is to make good bottom lines and make more products, make profits, et cetera, I guess we are on a good track. If we have values today being sustainable, just, fair, to ensure inequality isn't rising we need to rethink a bit the rules 
The point is to say how do we ensure those rules are really embedded in the market currently. It's not to say we have to make so many rules if no one understands them. We have to make sure it is easy to do the right thing and to consume in the right way or design products in the right way. Today what we are mostly lacking is to say clear information on how to do better. So I think on the one side you have businesses who want to do similar practices, but the easy thing today to find practices because the questions haven't been asked. There is not like a central way of saying I'm on a good track and analyzing how sustainable digital practices, technologies are. So that's something I would like in the intervention as well, Mike, saying if you have not harmonized data sets and don't know well what is the vital impact is it harmonized, et cetera, what do we take into account? Just energy consumption, material part, also the impact on biodiversity, et cetera, then we are asking different questions. 
So I would say it is a really good thing this conversation is happening today. There is a real track on it this time and many conversations had really the chance to happen already. So this is a conversation we need to continue to really get all the people around the table and to be able to say, okay, what are our priorities? How do we achieve them? What should each stakeholder group do to go in that direction and how do we ensure the rules make things easy to be sustainable by design in the future. I'll give it back. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you. That was brilliant. Thank you so much for that interesting perspective that we'll definitely get into in the discussion. 
Now let's go ahead and move to Pia. It is my honor and pleasure to have her here. This is her first IGF. So really inviting a newbie. This is wonderful. The floor is yours. 
>> Thanks, Michael. Thanks, everyone for being here. Weronika and Alexandra for setting the theme. I'm going to add a third element to this discussion and that's data. In the ICT sector we work with data a lot. That's pretty much what's driving the energy consumption. It's how we store it, how we manage it and what we do with it. 
I work in a special type of data. That's lifecycle data. I have been an environmental sustainability expert for over a decade and helped pretty much everybody from individuals to countries to become more sustainable. Now I have the pleasure of chipping in to this conversation and perhaps helping this community become more sustainable as well. 
I would like to share a couple of slides so you can see what is going on from the lifecycle perspective. I hope you can see it in full screen. Is that good? Fantastic. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Looks great. Thank you. 
>> This is my iPad. I can't use it anymore because the apps aren't being updated for that. There it is. A wonderful piece of equipment that's completely dead although it still turns on. Don't make fun of me, but I had one of the Windows Nokias. I didn't have apps and I didn't care because it worked well. Fell to the ground, broke the glass and I couldn't fix it because we didn't have technical service in Chile to fix that type of phone. It was discontinued. 
These things were killed by design. I still have them because they are great examples of what different parts of the sector has for hardware and software. If you are talking about a battery, you have the chemical content which will cause environmental impacts and the management chip. How many of us haven't saved a phone just by resetting it because the battery was dying. Reset it to factory settings and it works again. That's simply crazy. 
We have the wafer. That's the processor, CPU. So you have the instructions for how it works and then the wafer on which it is mounted. Both things impact the environment in different ways. It actually defines how you are going to be using the equipment. 
We have the hard drive. You can choose how to use the hard drive. You can design it for longer and with better materials so it lives for longer. Same thing with the software design. I just talked about my iPad not working because of software. Even the keyboard. The type of plastic you use for the keyboard and the way you control the keyboard also make changes for how long it will be used. 
That's the key word here. How long. The longer we use a material the better it is for the environment. 
We also have ‑‑ there's a lot of things going on around recycling in the ICT sector which is fantastic. We have this data which is great. Literally a gold mine to have electronic waste. Recycling is cool but not enough. If we keep generating garbage basically we are going to continue generating environmental impacts over and over again. So actually from the lifecycle perspective what would be even better than recycling is to change the business model around ICT so that we can make things last for longer, change the way we make money out of the sector basically. 
Weronika said a few minutes ago that the solutions are already there. We know it. This week we are launching green up, our web‑based app. Amazing because it will be in the cloud and we are an ICT group. So we have technology‑saving technology. The solutions are there but scattered. When you're starting to take hold of power that you have as a decision maker anywhere you are in the value chain you're going to need examples. You're going to need success stories to implement into your design so that things can last for longer, things can lend a better service throughout their lifetime. 
And we are putting all of those solutions in green up. If you want to have access to the tool, follow the QR code. Sign up and as soon as it gets launched you're going to have access to that. Basically my contribution to this conversation is going to be how do we use data to define what's most important to look at in the beginning so that we can tackle that 20% of issues that are generating 80% of the environmental impacts. And that we can ultimately take a sustainable planet to live on. Back to you, Michael. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: That was brilliant, Pia. Thank you for that. I think you said Greenup is in Spanish at the moment which is fine as well. It is another reminder to connect with communities that aren't just primarily English‑speaking. Thank you so much. We'll come back to so many of the good things you talked about. 
Our last official intervention is going to be given by Wized. Can you speak? 
>> Thank you very much. Can you hear me? Good afternoon, good morning. Like Pia, I'm going to add another element to the question which is to look at the agency of individuals for change. If we want to change society, if we want to change the way things are done it's actually a critical factor. 
Not every device that we see are products of specific ideas. What we see now is most digital tools are designed specifically to maximize profits with little interest to the consequences they produce. Of course we know often they have negative consequences on people. We consume bandwidth, energy and so forth. We produce E‑waste. That is bad for the sustainability of the environment. 
But people aren't just robots. They respond to crises when they find them. So I think within the context in Nigeria I see responses by communities for the way in which technology is in communities. One is the respect of the use of energy ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: You were cut off for a second. Can you hear us? I'm sorry. His connection tends to come in and out. So just a good reminder, too, that we might be in the same boat but not in the same sea. Here we go. 
>> Okay. Just like connectivity, energy is in extremely low supply in most developing countries. Therefore, people need to use generators and that means diesel‑based, gas‑based and that's pollution in the environment. So communities are responding and moving away from diesel‑based energy sources to solar‑based solutions. So in one central place where a number of consumers come and make use of it. That's one response to the crisis that energy is creating in our community. 
The second is about increasing the presence of waste generally but E‑waste. People are responding to movement around recycling of waste. This recycling is not done specifically or from perspective of the economy. 
One from the U.N. campaign on sustainability of the environment. Another is a fact that people see recycling as an economic activity. So also helping to lay a foundation within the society. The third response for me is about the repair and reuse movement that's coming up in Nigeria. Right now over 8,000 people are within the movement, computers, handsets and so forth. 
Incorporating training or repairs into the secondary school curriculum. Again, with a previous response, this is not a response of economy. It is an opportunity and people are cashing in. So this element, for me, illustrates first the fact that inherent in the response of the people we can see elements of the economy coming up and will provide a foundation for the national capacity for embracing the economy. More importantly for me it illustrates that people are not just using technology but are responding in a way that they think of the problems. Thank you very much. Over to you. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you so much. Also for everybody was on time and I appreciate that. 
So what I would like to do now ‑‑ those were fantastic opening statements. There is so much to get there. I have a couple of questions myself. Just a reminder to anyone not speaking to please just mute yourself so there is no noise. 
I have a few questions. Clearly some of the things that you all mentioned, almost everybody mentioned to some degree an element of the business models. So clearly economics has to be part of this conversation in one way or another. Regulation came up quite a bit. Obviously Pia and Wized talked about the circular economy and that's one of the primary tools used by the circular economy. So there is a clear overlap there. Does anyone have for this round any opening questions they would like to get clarification, anything that struck you as interesting that you would like to ask about? 
This also extends to the panelists themselves. If any of you key speakers would like to highlight or mention anything that you all have spoken about as well. 
Raise your hand if you'd like. You can raise your hand in the chat. Hi, good to see you. If anybody has any questions, let us know. Otherwise we'll go into mine and I'm fairly certain you don't want me to speak for an hour and a half. I promise this has to be the most civil and less rambunctious IGF I have ever been to. 
>> Michael? 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Yes. 
>> I see a question. Hi, there are many viable approaches in terms of recycling E‑waste. A lot of emphasis given to the lifestyle aspect of using it. Do you think in the future innovative ways will evolve to tackle E‑waste? 
So maybe because Wized was speaking about it, you want to go first? 
>> Okay. Thank you very much. We have a history in terms of ideas on technology. So it's to say there are more innovative ways to evolve as we move around. It's very clear even in terms of the extraction, travel, materials for waste that the efficiency can improve. We can have ways to reduce energy consumption. You could have waste that's much more clean in terms of the handling of products. Recycling. So I'm optimistic and confident that we will have more innovative ways in the future to tackle E‑waste provided that profit is not just the central motive driving technology. Thank you. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you. That really ‑‑ oh, great. Daphne has a question. Please unmute yourself and just introduce yourself. 
>> Thank you so much. My name is Daphne. I'm from the Netherlands. One of the U.N. youth ambassadors this year with Michael as my mentor. Hi, Michael. 
Anyways, I was wondering how can we start the culture shift? I have a conversation with so many people about we need to be more environmentally friendly and with regards to ICT and everything. But it's always like one ear in, one out. How can we actually establish such a culture shift? It's a big question but an important question to ask as well. Thank you. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Go ahead, Pia. If you would like to take that. 
>> Yes. I would like to mix it with the previous question. I see that a lot of people are tackling their desire to be more sustainable from a recycling, zero waste perspective. I think that's kind of the last place we should be looking at which is our waste. 
A more powerful way to look at sustainability is to look at our consumption patterns. Things we can do right away to change dramatically our impact on the planet is first of all consume everything we have. Our homes are filled with things that have been stored there forever. Your Honor first challenge I have set for myself and for others is, okay, finish up everything you have. That also comes to technology. So use it until it's gone. Until it is broken. This connects nicely to the previous question because a more innovative way to tackle E‑waste is to think of the way we produce the materials and things like the fair phone are helpful because you can easily change just the part of the device that is not working anymore. That could severely reduce the impacts of the device we use. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you. Would anybody like to comment as well? Or anybody in the chat, feel free to speak up.
Otherwise I have a couple of questions I would like to ask based on the first round. Go ahead. Please. 
>> ALEXANDRA LUTZ: Great questions to start with. On the culture shift it's not something that happens overnight. That's why usually what I think is people ask how to be more sustainable. Sustainability is just not something made of unrelated actions that are sporadically there. It's not just things on the side. It has to be the main focus and to be really the aim at the end. That's why in terms of economics if you have just the idea of saying, hey, we need to see ‑‑ English is failing me. Doesn't matter. The point is just to make more profits and see how much product and service there is every time. That will be the aim and at the end things on the side. 
Maybe the point is to say if everyone has enough and we can't go beyond without endangering our way of life, planet and us with it. Then it becomes a different conversation. How do we achieve that? I think changing the law and also things that guide our actions is important. If you say sustainability is a cool value it becomes something else. I think that's being done more and more in terms of concrete things we can do. It's basically product design. 
If we say, okay, you cannot use a material with this and this impact and we can measure it and change the conversation. For now it's like impacts we don't take into account in the price, for example, or in terms of being able to sell it Ortiz for it. So we can change this and it becomes something else. I think people are ready for the cultural shift because it becomes a marketing argument to be sustainable. It's an avenue to go there. The question of E‑waste, thank you, Mohamed, for this one. It's a bit the same. 
First when we design a product to be able to think about the end of life during the design phase. So as Pia said, you can easily dismantle it at the end.
For now again it's easier and cheaper to mine more materials than to produce one or having long and durable products. Also incentives. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you, Alex. Wized, do you mind muting yourself if you are not speaking? Thank you. Weronika, can you try to keep it to maybe a minute, minute and a half just because we have one more question before we move on to the next round of interventions. 
>> WERONIKA KORALEWSKA: Sure. I just wanted to comment on these two questions. Without the recycling versus focusing on durability, I have noticed and I think it is a common experience that the possibility of recycling gives a false sense of security and lack of responsibility because, okay, if I recycle it, my hands are clean and that's it. But that's not the issue. Because devices are not fully recyclable usually. The highest percentage we can get is probably 70, 80%. Then the energy that was used to produce it is the other thing. 
About the question about the culture shift, well, we are part of culture. We create the culture every day through our activity, public activity. I will just mention it now quickly because later I will come back to this point. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you. One thing to mention is as much as we emphasize the need for engineers and manufacturers and miners to be involved, so should the marketing departments. Because that's a big part of setting the culture, setting the expectations, talking about values. A lot of that is reflected in the marketing practices that underpin the business model. That's just something to keep in mind. Leonard, you have a hand up. We can come to you before we close this part. 
>> Thank you, Michael. I want to build on the culture discussion. But just as introduction I'm also one of the internet society youth ambassadors this year and also working with major IT company so I have two hats in this discussion. I think that's why I'm also asking the point that I'm going to raise now which is I think a key issue with the culture debate is like the overall perception of sustainability as a problem. 
I still see in the day to day discussion it is perceived as a luxury problem. People in the Euro‑centric context have the ability to discuss these issues because they are not such fundamental problems as in other parts of the world. Within that area of sustainability, the field of digital sustainability is even smaller and even more backing in terms of seeing the severity of the problem. So my question is taking into account there are other crucial problems in the world such as half the world's population lacking access to internet, how can we still ‑‑ how can we convey the urgency of the problem of digital sustainability without coming off like two from above, so to say. That could be a major issue to address. Thank you. 
>> I would like to start by saying the sustainability market is a luxury market because people are willing to pay more to do better. That's just sales. But it's not something I agree with. I don't agree with sustainable things being more expensive. Absolutely not. Then they never go mainstream and we never tackle the problem. 
Going deeper into your question sustainability isn't a luxury problem. It is a need. Even more for those countries not as advanced as Europe. Because they have structural issues. 
I will tackle the issue of food. We think of organic when we think sustainable. In fact, it is not just about being organic. It is about a sustainable production system in food would be one that doesn't make people sick, that provides enough nutrients, and that looks after the environment. Of course that makes money for the farmer. 
But the way we have developed our food systems is not really going in that direction. Sustainability especially for agriculture‑based economies that are currently sick, poor, and malnutritioned. 
So just to change your mindset. That's what I wanted to add. Please, the other panelists, you may go on. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Does anybody have anything to add? If not, I see that Shawna has her hand up. I did say we were going to close this round for interventions at the moment. If it's okay, keep your hand and once the next round is over we'll come back to you. Does anybody have anything to add to Pia's comments in response to Lennart's question? Oh, thank you, Shawna. I'm glad we have the chat. Please unmute yourself and feel free to speak. 
>> Thanks, Michael. Can you hear me okay? 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: I hear you great. 
>> Just to aI really appreciated your question, Lennart. It's something that's come up within APC network. We have a member in South Africa and they have set up a community network, a mesh network so they can really develop connectivity in the community. But one of the reflections they had is that ‑‑ I mean, they are so focused really on basic human rights issues with access to clean water, access to food, employment. So issues of environmental sustainability. Not that they are not relevant, but they are not as at the forefront. So actually just this year APC is supporting a member of ours, computer aid who develops solar learning labs which are basically shipping containers that have been transformed with solar panels on top and usually eight to ten workstations inside. They are working with the network to set up a solar learning lab in the network and trying to understand from each other the learnings from the community connectivity models and the understanding from the setting up of the solar living labs to really make ‑‑ to understand and make it relevant to the community. I think it is something we need to look at and not that it's a privilege to work on this, but that there are so many other things people are dealing with. I think it is important that we make it relevant to people who are trying to be working on it. Thanks. 
Michael, don't hate me. I just want to add a little comment. I truly believe that technology and the internet are the solutions to these issues. If we want to improve access to water, we can use technology. To improve the way we are pushing food we need to use technology. All of the other structural issues, even transparency can be helped with big data, with the internet. So all of these issues require this group of stakeholders to take action on that. And to do so in a sustainable way. You guys are the solution. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Alex, if you have a final thought and then we'll move to the second part of the discussion. 
>> ALEXANDRA LUTZ: I agree that it's the most dispossessed people who ‑‑ when it comes to sustainability. I would say it's mostly not countries from the north that have problems in E‑waste. It's also that there are problems with competing resource usages. Today we have a definite number of metals needed for the transition. Mostly solar panels, et cetera. They are also heavily needed for technological devices. To do both you have to see where you are going to put those resources. So maybe you can have some countries which will do a great smart city and everything, plus ecological transition and others have none of them. 
It's also questions we have to ask ourselves. It will basically also make some people's lives harder than others. Then also, yeah, on the technology need it is always something we need to ponder to say, okay, where do we need technology and where do we need less? I know, for example, some groups said, yeah, we need technology now to do sustainable AI and climate change. And yeah, we have to use it to be more efficient in the way we do industrial agriculture. Coming also from a perspective where we do have to go toward a more stable practice and not put more pesticides but to do none of them and defer that. Technology will not help. Maybe it would help to find new ways to do it. So it depends on how you use technology. It's not mutual. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you, Alex. I'd like to think this is actually a good segue into say the second part of what I really hope this discussion can get to which is essentially what can we do to help drive change within the current ‑‑ to the current paradigm within and among our respective communities and networks. What I'm trying to get to is, okay, we are working on this here and there. Maybe we are not talking to each other. Maybe our colleagues aren't talking to people they should be. One thing I find with myself is I'll reach out to people and they struggle to understand why am I talking to them? Why am I trying to get in touch with them? Because they don't work on ICT sustainability. Yes, but maybe they work on conflict minerals, mining. Maybe they work on something else. 
The idea being there is so many layers of integration within this. That's why we talk about the holistic nature of it. Trying to see aacross the the board how those things are connected. What can we do to spur change within our networks and communities and get people to talk more. This is the first time with Pia we have a lifecycle expert in the community. 
With that I want to give it back to the panelists. Say three to five minutes, if you could make ‑‑ I know it's short. We're good, but you have three to five minutes to make key points on that particular question. I'm sorry. I forgot to mention let's go through the same order we went through. Weronika, we'll start with you. 
>> WERONIKA KORALEWSKA: Thanks, Michael. If the question is what can we do to help change and what can our respective communities do, I represent the civilian society sector, NGOs and we mostly can contribute through education and awareness raising. 
I believe we are in the very, very interesting point in history now. I want to share with you the experience of the person from the eastern European country, from Poland. But I guess many of you, wherever you are from, maybe you can relate to this experience one way or the other. Many countries in their history went through some system change or revolutions. 
So at the end of the communist times in Poland, the last decade of the communist times, most of the people already knew that system, communist system was just ridiculous. It had so many absurds. They would still go to all the compulsory demonstrations and scream long live the communist party and Lenin and Stalin, but in their hearts they knew and were sure how absurd it was. 
Talking about the culture shift, I believe we are in the same moment where we see we cannot go on like this. This is madness what we are doing to the environment and our consumption patterns and the solutions. As a representative of the NGO, I cannot underestimate the value of education. They need to advocate good holistic education of the deep ecological thinking. I mean education not just about words like climate change, decarbonzation. But the planetary boundaries that include nine Fokkers like chemical pollution, biodiversity laws, nine factors. 
So teaching children and youth that these children will welcome in ten years, IT designer, politicians and consumers. By creating the good educational framework both from the NGO site and the governmental sites and public schools, we are ‑‑ we really can create lasting change. I know that we are a bit impatient. No, no, it takes a long time, education. It's crucial to invest in this general sensitivity for the environment and for the fact that all of us as human beings should be ‑‑ it should be obvious to us that we are part of the interconnected eco‑system and if we cure one part of it we will cure ourselves, too. With that said, I can give the floor to the others because we don't have much time. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you, Weronika. I appreciate that. Alex, can we go ahead and go to you? 
>> ALEXANDRA LUTZ: Yes, absolutely. It was a great example, Weronika, what you mentioned about the communist time and when you see change happening you know it has to happen. That was a great illustration, thank you for sharing that. 
How do we spark change? To change the entire world system, thank you, Michael. It's a question of a governance issue having the right place for this. Most decisions happen in silos. Everywhere we are. Also in terms of state governments to try to work on some specific issues and how do you ensure there is no gap between them. You have to see them and work on it. With digital stability it has been identified as being something we need to work on. How do we get toward working on this? It is interesting what you said, Michael on how you reach out to people who don't know why you are reaching out to them. If you go to people and the environment, well, we are not tech people. The tech people sayer, we are not from the environment sector. Okay, great, who's left? A few people thankfully are and they are on this call. Great to see so many of them. It's why we need to have those conversations. Those moments where we talk to each other and organize this intersection to also propose concrete policy measures we can put in place. It will be great to have more moments where we think, what do we need to place now in terms of policy so we see good examples by businesses, what the NGOs are seeing and the tech is building. How do we share good practices? They exist so making them visible but also some people are comfortable with staying the way they are. It is the problem of the current people in power. We have less than ten years now to make the changes for climate change. Thankfully the generation is doing things we see. That's a good thing. We need to be sure when we are dealing with a subject we put on the different lenses we need. It is the same for gender questions. When you do a policy you have to think what is the consequence in terms of gender and now the question also is in terms of sustainability for tech and the other way around. I'm confident that's already happening so the question is bring it up and continue our work. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you, Alex. Pia, over to you. 
>> Thanks. How do we connect such a vast network of professionals that also have silos. We talk about silos as institutions but we are all in a silo of our own mind. We all have biases and we all have a limited amount of knowledge and wisdom and experience in our brains. This is something I have come to appreciate in the last two years. We had to learn until we knew it on. We could make the decisions, but in fact this is quite beautiful to have this distributed knowledge because it forces us to work in teams. I think the first step is to acknowledge we are in a silo. Whatever we do we are going to be in a silo. So that already opens the door to go out and, as Alexandra said, put on different lenses and call different actors when we are making a decision. That's good when we are working in committees. It usually happens in the private sector, public sector as well. On the day to day struggle of designing the next process of looking at what screen we are going to use or what marketing materials we are designing then it comes down to having the right people in your close proximity and knowing just a little bit but just enough so it will direct you in the right direction. 
Weronika spoke about education. One thing that's critical is to have a lifecycle perspective. Our entire education system is built on a linear perspective where A causes B causes C but we have to learn how to think in networks. I think that the people in this community are very well suited to that because you guys work with networks all the time. 
But we need to transfer that knowledge and the way that we do things into our everyday modus operandi where we build a network that's vast enough to provide the information we need. We don't need to know it all. We don't all need to be lifecycle experts. But we need to know there is a lifecycle and have it in mind so when we are designing we can imagine at least a piece of that and try to optimize it. 
One thing that I think would be very useful for every community is to have more lifecycle assessment experts in the team. So when designing a new product there should be a guide measuring the environmental impacts of the product itself and end of life like waste, but also of the ‑‑ all of the environmental impacts that come from producing the minerals, producing the cardboard for the box, from everything that has to happen so that product comes to life and then dies. So having more lifecycle assessment experts would be a great way to tackle those issues with data. 
And the other thing is to talk more, not just within ourselves in this community but also to the users. We talked a lot in preparing this about human rights. There is something we haven't touched very much upon yet which is the economy. Many of us in our generation cannot afford a house. We cannot afford a car because everything is super expensive. We are spending whatever we make. So we are literally spending minutes of our lives and hours and days of our lives to buying things. 
How are we as a generation serving our peers with the design of the things we sell them? How much of their lives are we taking with the design of the product we make? If we can make a product that lasts for longer that's more sustainable, we are actually giving back life, minutes of life to people who are spending their life to work to pay for the stuff we produce. 
So that's a huge mind changer. I invite everyone to reflect upon because it opens another door and that's the door to changing the way that we do things, changing our business model, changing our designs, et cetera. It puts our hearts into our work and really makes us believe that and see how important our work is for the life of others, for the quality of life of other people. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: That was beautiful, Pia, thank you so much for that very provocative thought. 
YZ, do you have comments about how we can be reaching out to others and especially in your sense how we can be reaching out to more people within communities on the ground, especially people that aren't necessarily involved in this but are very much affected by the end result of the lack of design and sustainability in design. 
>> Thank you very much. I think ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: I'm sorry. You cut out for a second. Could I ask you, it might be easier if you turn off the video. 
>> Yeah. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Can you start again? I'm sorry. 
>> Okay. So I'm saying we need to have a conversation that brings users, communities, government, designers together to reflect on, first of all, the design principles. What is it that we want from the product that we designed. Is it that we want to design for longevity or the question of doing it for shorter obsolescence which is what characterizes now. 
We need also to drive the open architecture in the design of products so that people could take better care just like we talked about. Designing with repairability in mind. 
We must also organize the conversation. It's a question of power. What power do communities have in order to ensure that the perspective. So I think what is most critical is what work we do at the community level and grassroots to ensure that the communities are able to maximize the power of organizing capacity, this agency so when they speak, they speak with an effective presence of the community they are about to mobilize in the eco‑system. Whatever the discussion you do, the people who ultimately have the power will carry the day. 
For me, we need to think about how do communities acquire and use power to ensure that their perspectives reflected on the design of these things, thank you. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you. I'm glad we were able to hear you. Thank you, all of you for these wonderful interventions. I want to open it back up to the floor now. Panos, would you like to go first? 
>> Do you hear me? 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Yes. 
>> I wanted to react to the comment by Pia who was confident that we need technology, she stated strongly we need technology for this and that. I think we should be critical questioning how much technology we need because technology has brought a lot of the problems we have today. 
I understand in many communities there is technology as we experienced before. But also we should collaborate on how to focus other communities. We should put into the picture also the growth community in the domain of sustainability and discuss with other groups proposing solutions in agriculture in the cities, in housing, in monetary systems and try to see together how we can create more local lifestyle. We can redefine the neighborhood and locality. The most important part of communication is the face to face. 
Instead of making the internet greener, we can find ways to use less with less data, less platforms. But still not exactly, of course. So, again, this is a point I want to make. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you. Very quickly, YZ, do you mind muting yourself? There is background noise that's being picked up. Or, Claudia, could you ‑‑ thank you, everyone. 
Pia, would you like to take this comment? 
>> Absolutely. Thank you, panel, so much. I believe in terms of technology we have the same issue we have with money and water. That's distribution. So we have a lot of technology in places which are totally nonsensical ‑‑ 
[ Phone ringing ]
‑‑ I'm sorry about this. Talking about technology. 
Like I don't need my coffee maker to be smart and sense when I'm 15 minutes from home to make my coffee. I can live with brewing my own coffee when I get home. But we need more technology down in the fields to control the way that we are watering plants, how much fertilizer we are putting there and when we should be harvesting the crops. 
Totally agree with you that we should reduce in some areas, but I understand that we need to add a lot in others. Ultimately what we need is to make countries especially in the global south to leapfrog. We really can't ‑‑ we physically can't. The planet will not stand that they take the same curve that the more developed countries have taken. We need them to step to here to here in one big leap and for that we need technology especially in the productive sector. Thanks a lot for the question. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Just goes to show, too, that smart solutions are not all created equal. And the application are obviously not equal as well. Speaking of equality, who can access ‑‑ the person who can access the smart coffee maker is definitely not the same person who needs to access smart solutions for agriculture, let's say necessarily. So we have to recognize the inherent inequality as well that exist within that paradigm. 
Does anyone else have a question or would any of our panelists like to respond to panelists as well? If there are not any questions, I have a few of my own. There are a few in the Q&A as well. 
I think I'm just going to go ahead then. I want to touch on this a bit more. Two things really. One and this is for everybody, including the people listening or that are attending. Are there any specific partnerships or collaborations that you could identify that are missing from your respective work? For instance, a good example of this, for instance, Pia is a lot of people don't know about FLPCI and you can talk more about this. 
What are some collaborations that could exist that are not currently in existence? Also, because so many of you discussed business models and whatnot, I feel like as much as I agree with this personally, I feel like the moment we start talking about business models, a lot ‑‑ it automatically turns off almost anybody in the private sector not focused on this already.
 
It maybe comes off as maybe it's not the right thing to say. I disagree. It's important to have obviously people that are part of the private sector as part of the conversation. That's another big question is how do we get more people from the private sector. Bear in mind that the private sector isn't one whole thing. Fair Phone is participate of the private sector as much as Apple and Facebook are or Samsung. It's a good point of clarification. 
But how do we get companies to change their business model or update their business model or take a more sustainable approach within their business model? It's not just about limiting the packaging in a phone which is fantastic. It's also about other things like trying to stop telling people they need a phone if they don't need one, for instance. How do we change this? 
I would love to hear anybody's comments on this. I know. It's a big question. I don't expect us to come up with all the answers now. 
>> ALEXANDRA LUTZ: I'll give it a shot. You can see there is not just one solution to them all. I think what is important in terms of business sector is to be able to help out to do the right thing easily. 
Right now I think we have this knowledge missing, et cetera. So when someone comes in and they want to be more sustainable they have to juggle sustainable practicesen and ICTs, et cetera. 
So it's not easy to find yet, I guess. The question is how do you make sure people who want to find information can easily find it so it's not something completely new that they have to do to turn to specific people who have specific knowledge and maybe want a lot of money for it. Some have it, some don't. So I think we need as much information and data as we can publicly available so people can make those decisions easily. 
One solution we are working on now in the particle lent is to advocate for digital sustainability index where the idea would be, okay, it kind of flags what is the environmental impact of digital technologies. Well, through a lifecycle assessment we said, okay, if I use this kind of ‑‑ all my words again. Computer phrasing before my employees because it is also that, not just tech companies. All companies have technological practices and so they need to be assembled, too. Once you have all the computers, how do I make sure they are sustainable and, two, that they will maybe stay long. Maybe digital solutions. I know my equipment has to be long and durable to be reparable. Should I take those and buy them, lease them? Also do a website. I guess other people can talk better than me on those websites. But all those things are in existence but not really put forward. Usually we try to establish criteria that would be good for everyone. Our plan is to make it first for public procurement. That's the way we can also start things. In Europe alone it's 15% of GDP which is the word I was looking for earlier. 
So we can make those things happen. Okay, this is how you do sustainable tech. This is an index that shows you what impacts it has when you do this and that choice. I guess it gives a good direction. 
Then I also think it should be the other side. Those practices, we should prohibit them. One of them saying that when you have a practice that consists in reducing the life span of an object just to see the object being ‑‑ before you had washing machines for years. Now it's five. Technology should be more about having a new thing every year. Also those kinds of practices. It's better if you have a new phone every year. It would be just for five or seven years I'm going to give you new things differently. Those things need to be redirected in terms of incentives. It should be in a good way of saying, okay, we give you a card for this and also those who do practices for those trying hard. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you, Alex. I'm conscious of time. But if you could do maybe just what is the role of regulation in all of this as well? You mentioned market regulation, too. I feel like it would be remiss to end this conversation without addressing that within the context of this conversation. 
>> ALEXANDRA LUTZ: Sure. I thought I did in some ways, but basically what you can do is as a regulator there is something called the eco‑design directive. It sets out standards that they have to respect when coming up with new products. It is mostly about electronics but can be others. 
That's one way of saying, okay, if your product doesn't respect those requirements it cannot enter the EU market. That would be one. 
Also with old unfair practices, it is not a directive and the one we want to add as well would be the one on premature obsolescence. It's really known that you don't make the best effort to make your product be less long. Not for every product but when it is clear you could do it better, but you are gluing the battery to your phone just to prevent it being repaired, it would be flagged as a premature obsolescence abusive practice and you can't do that anymore. 
Then the standard digital ‑‑ oh, the ‑‑ nope. Can't do it. Digital sustainability index, damn it, too many words, too long. We should have a better word for this. Something easier to say. 
Anyway, that could be a way of saying, all the data would be publicly held. It means whether you are a big firm or a small firm and you want to innovate, do stuff, you could have access to this easily and know what direction you go. So it is also giving access to data and there is a huge battle saying, okay, who has access to it? There are monopolies getting all the data. It also impacts AI, but that's not a conversation. 
Those are small ways in which you can regulate things out there going in the right direction. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you, Alex. We have about five minutes left. We can extend if we need to and we did start late. So bear in mind, everyone. 
So I would like to give everybody at least a very final thought before we conclude the session. There are good question and answers that we didn't get to. I'm sure there are some in chat as well. But as for a closing thought to all of you I want if you could to kind of answer this question: Are there specific partnerships or collaborations you can identify that are missing in your work, especially one that the internet governance community could potentially help facilitate. Along with this, potentially just one key kind of takeaway that you would like for people to walk away from whether it be a policy recommendation or what is it that we can work on going forward, especially over the next year, at least what's a priority to you? 
If you could just answer that, let's say, within one or two minutes, that would be wonderful. Weronika, would you like to go first? Or Pia? Who would like to go first? 
>> WERONIKA KORALEWSKA: I can. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Perfect. 
>> WERONIKA KORALEWSKA: Thanks. As for the question about collaborations and partnerships, I know that many times when government representatives and government officials from IT departments are visiting the IGF and other fora like this, but I think besides the ministries of development, I think we should have collaborations with ministries of education. Because implementing just really three pages in the student book about the relationship of ICT and environment would be such a success. Children spend eight hours a day at schools, you know, 10 or 15 years of their life and there is not even one sentence in their student books about it. That could be a good partnership. 
One takeaway ‑‑ final takeaway I would like to emphasize is that we might try not to stop being just human beings and not to ‑‑ because we have a tendency to obstruct. Like now I'm a politician and I take a position. Now I'm the marketing designerment now I am the IT person. Come on. We are also just human beings. Don't forget about this while making decisions and inventing marketing slogans that don't make sense, while implementing the illegal practices of premature stuff like just don't stop being human ‑‑ a decent human being with integrity and honesty. Thank you. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you so much, Weronika. Alex, are you free to go now? Or Pia? Go ahead, Alex. 
>> ALEXANDRA LUTZ: Okay. I'll be really short. Well, in terms of collaboration, I think also working more close together between the sustainability actors and the tech actors, that's stating the obvious, but it's still progress. Things are being done which is great. I would encourage more about that specific issue as well. It would help spark the concrete solutions and make everybody feel legitimate in participating with this progress. 
The last thought I would like to share is while tech is not an inevitable force happening to us, tech decisions are political choices that are being made and they are often not debated in our societies as we ‑‑ it's mostly behind closed doors. Things happen. It is not going everywhere. I would call for having democratic debates and populations being way more into this, but also the sustainability would come up way more when people are asked about them because it's something people care about. So, yeah, I would encourage also having democracy basically being put back in those kinds of political decisions and decision processes. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Well said, Alex. One thing I forgot to mention earlier is I have spoken English as a primarily language for more than 30 years and I forget words all the time. Please never apologize while I am ever moderating something for not remembering a word. Happens to me all the time. Thank you so much for this wonderful, insightful, deep intervention. 
Pia, speaking of wonderful, insightful and deep, please. 
>> Thank you, Michael. I felt so flattered throughout the session. Thanks. Great way to start the week. 
I want to tell you a story on my final remarks about good intentions and the demon. Once upon a time there was a really sustainable company who sold remanufactured cell phones. And they are really concerned with sustainability and that's why they are selling used cell phones and not new cell phones. They thought, we are going to make a next step in sustainability and we are going to change our packaging from our very heavy cardboard box with plastic inside and we are going to get rid of all the plastics and use a beautifully branded cotton bag. 
And that company found the demon. Actually it was Maxwell's demon which stemmed the entire theory of information, in fact. They didn't have the information so the demon came over and said, oh, my God, you're doing this change. Did you know your beautifully branded cotton bag to surround your remanufactured cell phone has ten times more impact than the cardboard box you were using before? They totally went into shock. This is based on a very true story. That conclusion was arrived to thanks to lifecycle assessment. If anything, sustainability is not obvious. Most of the things we think are more sustainable are less sustainable when you look at them from a lifecycle perspective. 
When making design decisions I advise everyone to get a lifecycle practitioner on board. If it is too expensive to hire one in Europe, hire one in a developing country. Prices are cheaper there. Externalize. But get the information running to design because that's when you have the opportunity to reduce 80, 90% of the impacts your product will have throughout its life. Once it is designed and built there is little we can do. So work on design with designers, with lifecycle experts and let's change the structure of the industry. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you, Pia. Last but certainly not least, YZ, do you have final thoughts, places where partnerships or collaborations that you can identify are missing from this work? Feel free to comment. 
>> Well, I see two directions. One is that much of the job we do, government is absent at the table. So we need to do more collaboration with the governments in that sense. But second is that I think the two movements, the digital rights movement and the environment movement are applied separately. There is a lot that the digital rights movement would learn from the environmental justice movements, especially about whereas they did environmental movement is deeply routed within grassroots, the digital rights movement is more elitist and not rooted in grassroots. 
So we need to learn more about that. My last point is that ITU has been talking about promoting the satellite economy. At least it's representative governments where governments aren't doing anything about promoting the circular economy. We need the a way to get into that terrain, push so that the government becomes much more serious about it. 
In particular, I think that there is a limit to recycling. The life span gets shorter and shorter. Also in terms of increasing and products so that should be a strength of it. Thank you. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you. As much as we want to create new ‑‑ not necessarily create new, but as much as we want to push the envelope on especially issues that don't get enough oxygen, there is a lot of existing initiatives that do require more concerted effort as well as they relate to circular economy, to integrating lifecycle perspective into design, et cetera. 
So I really want to leave you all with this before we go. Don't despair. There are many things we can do. The reason why I present this in a way that's like, who do we need to connect with? Who is out there? The fact is there are so many people out there. I know because I'm in the message saying, hi, I do this and you have no idea who I am. I want you to know me. I want you involved in these conversations even if it is beyond the initial impetus behind internet governance which was the ones and zeroes, domain names and whatnot. This is all relevant. As we continue to build the internet, we need to make sure we are integrating these design principles into it in such a way that even if we want to connect the next billion we need to make sure we can do it full stop as well as make sure we do it sustainably assuming that's what the individuals who are not connected want to begin with. 
There are so many things to take into account here. I have so many other questions. We could probably continue this for two or three hours if not more. I know we are way over our time. So with that I would like to conclude with the following. I just want to say this session was organized with the support of my colleagues, Minda, Marian and June. Would not have been possible with them. Special thanks to Shawna Finnigan for her work. I especially want to thank Yz, Weronika, Alexandra and Pia for agreeing to be part of this and also for kind of humoring me a little bit with what I'm teasing myself about. Like, hey, Pia, you do LCA. I want to invite you to something that's completely kind of off the path you would be on. Practicing what we preach. Trying to bring these voices together to have these kinds of discussions. We need to have more. 
Thank you so much for this incredible insight. I want to thank Claudia who has been our host of this session, all of our colleagues at the IGF secretariat who made this possible including Anja, Luis, and Samantha and I like to thank our captioner. I don't know if he or she can hear this now. I'm going to open the subtitle.
 
[ Kelli ]
I don't know your name, so if you could write it so I could tell you thank you. And the tech team. Oh, Kelli, thank you very much and thank you very much to our tech team behind the scenes. Lastly, to everyone who joined as well. We appreciate your participation, enthusiasm for the topic and most importantly, I want to thank all members of the IGF community who have been so enthusiastically supporting this idea including Anriette in the MAG. We have been trying so hard for so long to put this on the agenda and see that hard work validated with the success of the thematic track means the world to me. It's really so encouraging as well. 
This conversation is only the start of something so much bigger. We look forward to working with more of you going forward and invite you to engage with us further after the IGF as we take stock of the discussion throughout these past two weeks and plan the next step ahead for 2021. 
In case you would like more information, you can reach out to me or us directly. With that said, once again, thank you so much. Have a wonderful day. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-11-%E2%80%93-ws267-universal-acceptance-of-domain-names-and-email-addresses-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> Hello, everyone.  This is Shadrach.  Before the session starts, I would like to remind the panelists and the attendees that the session is being recorded and hosted under the IGF code of conduct and the unit rules and regulations.  So I wish everyone to adhere to these rules and regulations and also enjoy your session.  Thank you.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: To we are in a minute to start.  I think we will start at 11:30 sharply.
Just wait for all the participants to join. 
Okay so I suppose we can start now.  So hello to everyone, to our panelists and our participants and our rapporteurs.  I welcome you to the IGF session "Universallennance of Domain Names and Email Addresses" and my name is Maria Kolsnikova, I will be your moderator today.  I will introduce myself and our session scope.
I'm with the coordination center and these are two top domains of the Russian Federation.  And this was one of the first ever delegated by ICANN international top level domains and has worked since 2010.  So now it has about 720,000 registered domain names and about 70% of them are in real use.  So for unique websites or landings or email addresses.  And I must say that we are celebrating tenth anniversary this year, and that's why I'm quite interested in our session.  And because universal acceptance was one of the key topics of this year in Russia, included in the scope of multilingualism, inclusion to Internet and provided the online identity to end users.
So I hope that this session will be very fruitful and we will manage to consider the UA organizations and the focus on different stakeholder groups and try to form what next possible steps are needed to be taken to make universal acceptance a reality.
So I wish to all of our participants and our speakers very fruitful discussion.  And I want to make some short housekeeping remarks.  Our workshop will be divided in two parts.  First part, we will talk about challenges facing achieving UA readiness by different stakeholders and the second part, we will try to find possible solutions how to address them better.
And our remote participants are very welcomed to provide their inputs and thoughts or clarification questions in Q&A sessions which will be available after each of these parts.
You can use the chat for this and microphone in Q&A sessions.
Let me also introduce our online moderator, who will be available through this session, Dennis Tan, through Verisign.  He will take care of our remote participants and help them provide their inputs to be included in our discussions.
And also as a warming up, I suppose you to write in the chat.  Plus, if you are absolutely aware of what universal acceptance is and write your stakeholder group, please, or if not, just put minus.
So we should feel the temperature of our audience.
And to start with our discussion, I want to mention that universal acceptance is one of the aspects that are involved in the inclusion thematic and connected with the future development of multilingualism, cultural diversity and online identity on the Internet.
I must admit that inclusion as well as multilingualism on the Internet thematics are very wide and include many different aspects, but universal acceptance is often considered as maybe more technical problem as it concerns the mailing names and address for support.  It can be social economic benefits.  So said, we will be focused exactly on universal acceptance issues.
I would like to remind you that ten years have passed since the country codes were delegated and already eight years seeing the new gTLD program has been launched.  So the respective policies and the technical standards like RFCs are mostly in place as well, but why do we still talk about their implementation and practice?  And why these in the technology solutions deployed online is still limited?
So I'm sure that many of you have already heard about chicken and egg problem that is topical for UA‑related discussions.  So those who want to use their preferred language or script for online identity, for example, domain names and email addresses, the domain side cannot find sufficient technical support.  On the other hand, those who develop the tools and the technology support, who support UA, the other side do not see a sufficient demand to prioritizing the online services.  And so today now, the panel, we have plays have both, the domain and ‑‑ the demand and the supply side.  So we will explore this change.  The supply side will be presented by Dr. Ajay Data and Mr. Akinori Maemura.  And the demand side will be presented by Joanna Kulesza and by Walter Wu.
So I will provide shortly introduction to our speakers.  Ajay Data is a chair of universal acceptance steering group.  And he represents USG and Internet service providers in connectivity providers stakeholder groups.
Akinori Maemura is an ICANN board member and he was strongly involved in some technical discussion and policy development inside ICANN, especially in IDN program, as I understand.  And he represents the technical community.
Joanna Kulesza is the vice chair of capacity building at ICANN and she will represent the academia and large stakeholder group.  We have one speaker, Walter Wu, he has replaced the Mr. payway and Walter Wu is a universal acceptance ambassador in China and also a vice chair of UA local initiative there.
And he also takes the position at Chinese dot mark registry.  He will provide his position on this ‑‑ in this field.
So, we are starting our first part of the discussion of the workshop and I ask Dennis to provide special questions for our audience in the chat.  So you can make your inputs during our discussion as well and Dennis will sum up there in Q&A session.
And I will ask our panelists the following questions.  So why is your stakeholder group involved in universal acceptance issues?  Please explain?  And what particular challenges do you face in UA readiness and how do you solve them currently?  The first speaker is Dr. Ajay Data and as the chair of USG, I ask him to provide some short, very short description of what universal acceptance is because maybe some of our audience, our remote participants don't know about it still.
And after ‑‑ and also, I ask you Ajay to provide what are the main and the common UA challenges that we face today.
So the floor is yours, Ajay.  Please share your slides.  I know you have them.
And besides I want to remind you that USG is ‑‑ was organized by the initiative of the community in 2015. yes, and now works with the organizational and the financial support from ICANN and is a global center, let's say, of not only the promotion of universal acceptance but also the measurement of UA readiness.  So, please, Ajay.
>> AJAY DATA: Thank you, Maria.  I'm from India.  For all of you, good evening, good morning, good afternoon, wherever you are.  Namaste, from India.  And we are into the biggest festival season, it is called Duvalle.  This is known for winning over the evil by goodness.  So wishing you all a happy duvalle and a wishing you all a festive season to all of you.
I was thinking Maria, it would be good to thank that we are also trying to bring everybody on Internet.  And that's what we celebrate here, that everybody in the country, 1.3 billion people celebrate one festival.  How about that all people would have access to the Internet.
That could be the biggest festival in the world.  That's what UA is about.  If we all think of it that way, this is the biggest festival we all could celebrate in some amount of time.  But these parts, thank you very much for inviting me.  I will share my screen for all of you who are the first time here.  And thank you and understand what UA is all about.
Can you see my screen?
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Yes, I can see it.
>> AJAY DATA: It is changing the DNS, and the domain names, and email addresses.  1200 plus domain names, generic top‑level domain names are live.  And these are having non‑Latin script in those top level domain names.
This is for digitally inclusive Internet, which means ensuring all domain names which are valid, and it could be in any language, it could be in the script and any length, they are accepted equally by all Internet applications, devices, and systems.  And so we have a responsibility to do all of that.  And ensuring that every person has the ability to navigate and unit on the Internet using their homeland language.  Any culture, any business, any interest, we would expect and that's what UA is all about.
What UA means for you.  You could be a system administrator, government, business, or civil society member, a strong understanding of UA brings a new new frontier.  That's a huge thing.  In the time of pandemic, when the accommodations are moving very fast, this is a differentiator and this could mean a lot to you.
System administrators, if you are a system administrator, you are bringing in ‑‑ getting ready for next billion people online.  So all people who do not speak English, but want to communicate on the Internet, they are the people to be on your system.
Email administrators, they need to look at their systems and all the tools and ensure that all email address internationalizations which means an email address with non‑Latin characters are supported in your system.
Governments.  Governments are breaking the barriers, providing the tools and we have cases and we will talk about it during the course of the discussion.  These are the people who are enablers, and who break the barriers by policies.
Businesses are obviously directly commercially drive and they need to bring the UA‑readiness in their system so that the next billion people online who are going to come online are going to be served by your businesses, by your software tools only when you support the UA standards and practices.
And we have a study as a UA group which says that there is a $9.8 billion opportunity, and it's a conservative figure, let me say that.  This is going to be a very big opportunity if dollars excite you.
What is UA?  As Maria said, I will explain for those who are understanding it for the first time.  This is the framework.  This slide is a very important slide.  This slide is going to be available through IGF, or send you an email later.  This is the coverage of UA.  Domain names, popular domain names.  You can see.sky, is a new top level domain name, other than the dot com, or it could be.sky.  It's a new popular domain name that says one thing.
Another thing is a long top level domain name, like.engineering.  And the third one is ‑‑ like in India, we have 22ID Ns as a top level.  And it is in script, and we have many top level domain names in almost every country, which is of their own language, and this is new work.  We are just creating detail.
Email addresses.  Email addresses, you can see ASCII and ASCII and if your email is coming from something like this our email systems are already supporting it.
Second, @IDN and you can see mailbox name is in ASCII, and then the domain name is not a non‑ASCII domain name.  You can see it's an IDN name.  And I will repeat this, everything, but you can understand with an example that these are the right examples.
And I'm just going to take one ‑‑ the second last example, this is real email address, by the way.  This is my own email address in Hindi.  It's a working email address.  I don't know in you can copy and paste from the slide, but if you can, you can type this out and tend me an email.  This is a valid email address.
So you can see the five boxes on the bottom, accept, validate, process, store and display.  What is accept?  Accept is if you are an application which can allow me to enter this domain name or this email ID and I can type in.  Then it can validate it well.  And it can store in the databases and when it's acquired, it can display it back.  And if your application can do all of these, you are ready.  It's time to celebrate and you are breaking the barriers for people.
We did a study and there is a significance for all of us to work more harder and more longer.  This is very, very important.  So this is our study.  We have this report, UA readiness in 2020 on our website right now.  UA on the front page itself, you will find the support.  Understanding this one level of number which I will share so that you know we have trouble.  We have a bug in the world, and almost every website.  Only 9.7% email servers.  Only less than 10% of email servers support email addresses in local languages and consist.
It's crazy.  It's a problem.  It's a known problem and we need to advocate everybody to solve it.
To let you know, Google, Microsoft companies and Apple have moved ahead and modified their software to support UA initiatives to support local languages in their system.  So you can imagine these large companies are moving in.  We all need to use these tools, use software so that our systems are UA ready and we support this new entity.
We also did a study on 1,000 websites, top websites worldwide.  And you can see only 11% of websites are ready.  So we have a long way to go.  We all have to work together to ensure that UA readiness is there.
UA around the world.  Just to give you an idea we have measures ‑‑ so in these countries, we have measures.  We have local initiatives.  We have either shares Microsoft, they are supporting UA.  And EI means these companies can host domain names on IDNing in their native script.  This is extremely important to host domain names so that the UA can be created.
So this is extremely critical component which we started in USG leadership as a group last year, so that we can have the local, regional groups drive the agenda, what is best for them, what is the top priority for them, and move in that direction to create an awareness.  We are able to do, in these countries you can see and we are able to move into China and Thailand very recently.  We are live in India.  We are live in China.  We are moving in that direction so that local initiatives are very actively moving in that direction.
Obviously, CIS and EE is live.  There's good supports to make an impact.  And we are already seeing some movement there.
And I'm ending the first part of me talk is to join the local UA initiatives.  Become part of this major event taking place in this world to break the barrier and bring national people online.
Thank you very much.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: I have two short questions to you.  You are presenting the USG community now and why is it from this supply side and you mentioned the company that already provided the ex I.  And so the full support for email addresses in local script.  What do you think?  Are there any UA challenges that are faced by such email service providers or they just got some benefits and competitive advantages because they are a pioneer in this field?
>> AJAY DATA: So, Maria, thank you for asking me this question.  Two things.  I put myself on supply side because India is taking a huge leadership in the supply side.
And my government in the state I'm in right now, there are 7 million live Hindi email addresses.  That's an example.  That's a case study on UAG.tech.  So there's a large number happening here and ‑‑ I wanted to put this as an example, why I am supply side.  There is a possibility to replicate this in every government and every state and every region.
There's a challenge everywhere.  I'm sure that once the government has passed away and shown as an example with 7 billion people, I can safely presume that lots of challenges have overcome and it's very simple for now end user to adopt the EI in that region.
I hope that answers, Maria.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Okay, thank you.  Thank you, Ajay.  I have already mentioned that ICANN has been deeply involved in UA and gTLD initiatives for many years.  And the second speaker is Mr. Akinori Maemura and he will explain the ICANN challenges on what they face currently and what ways have been chosen to address them by ICANN so far.
And as a person with the recent or the current technical background, I know that Akinori has been a network engineer sometime and really has really good understanding of IP addresses.
>> AKINORI MAEMURA: Yes.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: So, please, I want you to make some focus on what are obstacles amid the technical community, while your implementation and practice.  Please, the floor is yours.
>> AKINORI MAEMURA: Thank you, everyone.  Good evening from Tokyo.  It's almost 6 p.m. here in Japan.  Thank you, my name is Akinori Maemura.  I'm an ICANN board member.  I'm doing the chair of the Working Group of IDN UA.  And so I'm the board member to deal with.  This.
First, I would like to directly introduce you the IDN side, before we discuss the universal acceptance.  IDN is the identifier and then with the regional registries and the engineering task force, they are do the numbers side and the protocol side, and ICANN itself is doing the domain name things to establish the rule of how ‑‑ how to ‑‑ you know, how to put the rule for the ‑‑ you know, what kind of ‑‑ what kind of does ‑‑ can be put in the top level name domain field.
So as Maria explained in the beginning of session, the IDN, the country code TLD started in 2009.  So it is more than ‑‑ we have the history of more than one DCAD, and then in 2012, we started from the new gTLD program to expand the name space for the TLD.  So these are for expanding the name space for creating the customer choice and the competition, based on the very, you know, incumbent ‑‑ the original TLDs like a dot com, dot net and dot org.  It's high to expand the TLD, the space and then the IDN is the one part of that, that expansion of the TLDs.
So we had more than 100 ‑‑ sorry, 1200 TLDs after the expansion to create new name space.  So with this the I DN TLD has enabled those who speak languages other than English to deal with their own languages in the TLD field.
So ‑‑ but the difficult point of this is, you know, is introducing the new type of characters may introduce the instability, as well.  For example, we need to ‑‑ we need to ‑‑ we needed to tackle on the ‑‑ how to ‑‑ the problem, how to deal with the variant, which is the ‑‑ for example, two different shape of the characters are in actually, semantically the same meaning or two different characters are actually ‑‑ it's a different character, but the ‑‑ they are confusingly similar.  This kind of confusability may introduce some instability to the TLD name space.
So we spend more than a decade to set up the international rule for the top level domain name, which is not only done by the ICANN organization and the ICANN board members, but we have been involved in a lot of ‑‑ various amount of community members to ‑‑ to ‑‑ to setting the rule like this.  So this is ‑‑ you know, this is the one with ICANN, it's the biggest endeavor for setting ‑‑ creating, you know, the variety of the name space for the I DN deployment.
This is one thing.  The IDN deployment at ICANN, it's twofold, one is setting the rule for the IDN.  And then the second part is as Ajay already beautifully introduced, how to deploy.  How to have this variety of domain name accepted by the ‑‑ everyone who is using the Internet.
So this is ‑‑ this is the main topic for this session, universal acceptance.
So, you know, universal acceptance, first of all, is now advancing within ICANN community while the quite mighty community team which is being led by Dr. Ajay Data and his own really powerful, mighty leadership, to involving a lot of community member through capable and knowledgeable for spreading out to 89 entire community and the industry to have universal acceptance and concept known to all.  And then this is ‑‑ we are so grateful for the UA endeavors for this ‑‑ in the five years or maybe longer.
Then not only the USG effort.  We have already established the ICANN organization's internal steering committee to assist the UA endeavor and then have the streamlining their own efforts to make achievement.
Within the ICANN organization, I'm happy to share with you that now we have the universal acceptance program manager who is Mohamed Del Bashir who has been well rised throughout the community to further advance the UA efforts the community.
So, you know, we set ‑‑ we at ICANN set up the IDN rule, but that's not enough.  And now we are taking a huge effort, you know, by the committee members to have it, you know, the spread as a norm all over the globe.  So this twofold is at ICANN for the universal acceptance.
Thank you very much.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Thank you, Akinori.  Thank you very much.  It was very interesting to see what is going on inside of ICANN, and, of course, that all the members of its community are connected and involved in all of these issues first.
So now, I want to go to our demand side.  And I'm inviting Joanna Kulesza.  She will present the demand side and we will try with Joanna what is happening on there and what aspects of universal acceptance barrier are end users struggling with and how the civil society approach to support to universal acceptance.  So please, Joanna.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Thank you.  I'm glad to speak.  My video has been disabled, which is fine, but just to give you that piece of information.
Thank you very much, I am indeed involved with the ALAC which is the At‑Large Advisory Committee.  We have many questions, how do you do that?  How do you get 1 billion people that are online?  And we would in no way aspire to represent individually that is using any kind of Internet service, but what we try to do is we try to understand what an average end user is expecting from an online service.
And we try to represent those expectations the best that we can.  In that sense, we understand that there is a commodity of expectations that need to be ‑‑ that need to be expected, and in that sense, we try to advocate for accessibility of all services is, and this is where universal acceptance comes in.
We would look at universal acceptance as an average end user to be better able to use the services that are available online.
In that sense, universal acceptance to us is a compilation of elements as Ajay wonderfully explained and I do encourage you to use his email address and that's a universal acceptance example.
So we would look at universal acceptance as a compilation of issues that come to the foreground would be on one hand non‑Latin scripts, and it's something that we have covered in much detail.
On the other hand, it would be new gTLDs.  Now, those two leading topics need and necessity individual approaches.  So as much as non‑Latin scripts would be a very direct instigation of the expectations of end user, we would expect every end user to be able to use their script to be able to interact online and that is of predominant value.  With new gTLDs, there's a compilation of elements to look into.
On one hand, it does enrich as rightfully noted by Ajay, it does enrich consumer use.  Here in Europe, we would be focused on consumer protection and we would be focused on making sure that that competition is fair, whatever that might mean.  Effectively, that comes to the foreground with India at large.  We try to make sure that all the groups of end users, especially those ones who are underrepresented in the community have a chance to be able to heard and to have their interests looked into.
This is why the at‑large stands strongly for public interest commitment.  So this would be an important element of the discussion of new gTLDs, something that comes to the foreground when we look at the demand side.  It's also this current challenge that we are facing globally that would be the pandemic.  On the one hand, it has increased our reliance on the network.  We want to make sure that all the services are available to everyone who is using the net.
On the other hand, it seems as this might also impact the demand for new gTLDs.  So looking at the variety of issues that come under the universal acceptance umbrella, the perception would be ‑‑ it might make sense to offer targeted approached and this is something I see in the chat as well.  So we would have participants of this specific workshop that already uses the term "universal acceptance" that might be ambiguous to some.  And they clearly note, well, I am aware of local scripts or local dia critical marks.  I wouldn't think of using them online.  Think it's very relevant, also for this region that I have the opportunity to represent here, that's Central and Eastern Europe.  The they welcome the opportunity to use the alphabet online.
In central Europe, where we are accustomed to using Latin scripts, at wearness of universal acceptance is ‑‑ the awareness of universal acceptance is relatively low.  We would encourage increasing the awareness and outreach to stakeholder groups, particularly when it comes to governments and local initiatives to raise awareness of universal acceptance, particularly the script, the elements of non‑Latin scripts that appear in local languages that would probably be useful.
It is also an element with capacity building.  So incorporating segments on universal acceptance in academic forces, various forces, both that deal with social sciences on Internet Governance and international relations and particularly when it comes to computer science students, raising awareness about how the DNS is built, and why universal acceptance is relevant.  So demand side would expect in that sense, and I take ‑‑ to try to make that a focused statement.  So I would assume that the expectation would be to offer fair competition across the board but at the same time to offer capacity building and raise awareness in specific targeted stakeholder groups on why the issues we are discussing here are relevant.
Will stop here and I'm looking forward to other intervention.  Thank you very much.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Thank you, Joanna.
So very, very detailed position.  And very many examples you have provided.
So I have one question for you.  So I think that you have already mentioned it, but maybe you can add something in this field.  From the end user perspective, how do you think.  Is universal acceptance a main barrier and exactly this prevents achieving a truly multilingual Internet?
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Universal acceptance is of high importance to the end user.
There's no doubt that universal acceptance is of predominant significance.  The awareness of that challenge differentiates among regions.  We have regions where it is targeted the outreach would probably be useful.  That would be one of the obstacles that we would need to overcome to make the Internet more approachable, more usable to the end user.
But in certain regions more outreach would be appreciated.  That would be my response to your question.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Thank you, Joanne.  We will continue to look at the demand side and as it was mentioned by Ajay Data and achieving this, we will have a ‑‑ for example, the registration of the domain names and local languages can grow if end users find the email addresses, based that the domain names are directly accept.  So to consider the UA challenges existing for the business community, particularly the domain name business, I invite Walter Wu, to ‑‑ and ask him to share his opinion from the domain name industry.  So okay ‑‑ but um ‑‑
>> WALTER WU: Thank you mark Rhea.  It's my great honor to have this opportunity to present and communicate with the industry experts.  I just make a simple introduction.  I'm from China.  Chinese IDN registry.trademark.  I also serve as the UA ambassador and also the ‑‑ I serve as the deputy director of a Chinese domain name initiative in society of China.  We also have the local initiative of the USG.
I will share my point of view about understanding about UA challenges in China.  As you may know, Chinese's official in China and simplified Chinese is officially used in writing script in mainland China.  By June of 2020, China as more than 40 million users and about 30 million mobile users.  Among those Internet users, very few of them speak English fluently.  So for most of the China Internet users traditional domain system, it's difficult to using natural language online.
So gTLD and ICANN provides the hope for Chinese Internet users.  Registrants show their great passion for the IDN.  There are over 2 million IDN owe main names registered in China and the Chinese registrants are 85% of the global gTLD IDN market.  However, the UA issue is a big obstacled for IDN and the new gTLD.  So Internet browsers don't support IDN.  While Internet users typing IDN in the address bar of browsers, sometimes it was directed to a search patch.  The website using the IDN domain names are included by search engines or sometimes this was ‑‑ it is include, but not displayed correctly.
For example, they display the website name as punitive.  It can not be received and sent correctly.  The web viewing platforms does not support the IDN fact.  The messenger software doesn't display IDN as a hyperlink.  It's very popular in the industry.  There's big issues about the practicability of IDN.  They can't lose the potential traffic or the potential customers and that's why although there are nearly 2 million registrations in China, you can ‑‑ you just see very few enterprise organizations displaying their ID and their their brochure and advertisement package.  And users are familiar with IDN and don't get used to IDN for Internet navigation.
To summarize, it's been a fatal effect for IDN.  So it's time to fix it.  Thank you.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Okay.  Thank you, Walter.  And I have one clarification question for you.  So you have provided an example that even where the demand, if it exists the demand on UA ready solutions, the technology is not available or only partially ‑‑ partly support universal acceptance.
So ‑‑ and the key technology players do not want to prior itize universal acceptance support even if they see any social economic benefit.  So why do you think this is happening?  So why they don't want to prioritize it?  Maybe because you ‑‑ you have many dialogues with them.  So what have you heard from their side?
>> WALTER WU: Yes, I think that's actually a key question.  A very good question.
I think the problems of the UA issue is not ‑‑ it's not from the technical standards site or it's not solution site.  I think for the ‑‑ for example, for the IDN, every browser, they help the Internet user navigate online.  That's their obligation to provide the standard DNS.  That's no problem for the ASCII domain names.  Because some Internet browsers in China was developed by a search member.  So the Internet traffic is pretty important.  They will redirect a search or type in IDN of a domain name as a search stream and go to a search page.  I don't think that's a pretty technical solution problem.  That's kind of ‑‑ I think that's kind of, you know, the ‑‑ what their aim for the ‑‑ for the commercial value, for the maximum of the commercial value.
And also, I think that there is a gap between the domain name industry and the technical side, or the ‑‑ we say the Internet provider.  So ‑‑ and also for the email solution.  I think the email solution is pretty mature and IGF standard or whatever, but no email vendor wants to jump out support to be the first to support the UA, because if they did that, maybe they will get the pressure from the customers for some emails cannot be correctly sent or received.  I think every vendor is feared of that.  So that needs the communication and the need of collaboration, I mean, to let the email vendors to, you know, implement the UA at the same time.
So to summarize your question, I think the whole UA issue is not pure technical problems.  It is kind of ‑‑ you know, in a different market, for a different reason, you know, why they did not support the UA.  I will explain what happens in China.  Sometimes because of a commercial value, sometimes because of, you know ‑‑ normally they want to go out.  The demand, it's like chicken and egg issues.  There are 2 million domain name registration, but very few enterprise or organizations really use the IDN.  The I DN domain name in China will be registered as a pure protection.
People just want to protect their own domain names but they know there's a big challenge to use that.  So nobody really use the IDN.  If nobody really use the IDN, Internet user never have a chance to use the IDN and Internet user do not use the IDN, but Internet service provider and the big Internet companies will not really think the IDN is a big demand.  So that's why we need to use old kind of workshop, education, communication, to have the community realize the issue and that everyone works together to push forward.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Okay.  Thank you.  Thank you, Walter, very much for your input.
So now I want to make some short sum up from our first part of the discussion and to go to our Q&A session.
So as I understand and have gathered from our panelists, that they highlighted the following UA challenges.  So first of all, lack of knowledge on your components, as well as the technical community ‑‑ among the technical community as well as the end users.  And particularly, in the field of language ‑‑ different language and scripts and the specifics ‑‑ the specifics of their usage.
So one more challenge is that we need not only ‑‑ there is into Ed for not only technology standards in place, but to change the attitude of UA implementation and realization of truly multilingual Internet by different stakeholders.  And also we need the diversity of approach in promoting different components of universal acceptance, especially in different regions.  Because the level of understanding is quite diverse.
And I can say that necessity to keep the system secure and stable and following the principles ever interoperability are important as well.
So ‑‑ and Akinori has mentioned about these points.
Also, as Walter has mentioned, we see the gap in communication between the domain name market and popular Internet application.  And Internet application developers, they don't want to support the universal acceptance support.  Because I understand, because they don't see that they can make a profit in the very short term.
So ‑‑ because they don't see the commercial benefits.  So I hope that I managed to gather all the inputs.
Now we will go to the Q&A session and I'm asking Dennis if there were some inputs from our remote harpants and if anyone wants to ask questions.  So please raise your hands.  I think we have time for two or three questions from the audience.  So Dennis, we begin with you.
>> DENNIS TAN: Sure, Maria.  I hope you can hear me okay.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Yes.
>> DENNIS TAN: So there were a few comments on the chat box, that I have summarized.  So I think there are three main ideas here as far as challenges to adopt or promote universal acceptance.  The first one is the lack of web content in local languages and I think the comment goes into right ‑‑ if there is no local content using the local native languages, I mean, the domain name is an extension of that.  So not having local content does not promote using local languages.
The second item is users have become accustoms to them not supporting local characters.  When the Internet was introduces many, many years ago and only ASCII was the norm, so users have to work around that, and now when you introduce IDNs and such, that is something that is not familiar, I guess.  And the third challenge for universal acceptance, nowadays, the search engines are a powerful tool also help users go around not having it memorize domain names.  They can search in English or their own languages and that's kind of the way for them to find find the website that they are looking for.  So if the use of search engines replace the need to memorize domain names, how can they support UA.
So those are the three challenges, the lack of web content in local languages.  The second one users accustomed domain ‑‑ an the third one is the use of search engine so people don't have to memorize the domain names.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Okay.  Thank you very much.  Now we have questions and I wanted to give the microphone to Maarten Botterman.
>> PARTICIPANT: Thank you for the update on universal acceptance and the specific input of IDNs.  I appreciate the technical and the market and also the user's perspective.
And I think the key point that Dennis made is the biggest driver to get this going is to make it interesting for people to come online.  And most applications may be region or in a province locally to support people who don't use the Internet across the world, but are interested in using the benefits for their local regions, then maybe governments can step up and take a role there, content provision.  So for sure a continued call to governance to have their people use this well and offer more and more content in the local languages.
A question to, I think, specifically Ajay and maybe to others, what is the business case for businesses to really go and offer all of this content if there's only 10% that results?  How do we get that?  The chicken and the egg.
>> AJAY DATA: Yes, thank you, maarten.  I know you know the answer but let's try to bring it to the people.  Another remote question, those countries or the regions where the language is not really an issue, why they should adopt the UA acceptance.
And then all the friends here can add to my views.  Let's assume that you are in awe country where no IDN is required and you are completely English specific country but do not forget that you do not work in isolation.  You work with the world and world will have email addresses in their languages and you would like to community on them.  They would like to end you an email.  They would like to send you payment and if you do not accept, you will not ab toil to work with them.  It's a small case and then when you deal with the whole world, you can't just be in isolation of your whole standard and we have to follow the part of the standardization.  That's the power of the Internet.
When we are on the same page, then we harness the power.  That's a simple business case and I can go on for an hour to explain and advocate about this, but this is a simple case and it's not really a good argument.  Secondly the benefit.  Let me tell you the benefit.
In my state, they wanted to argue the same question that people can have g mail ID and they get up, what is the point of providing them a Hindi email address and then we did a survey and we did a study and out of 100 people, 37 people do not know the email address with the phone they are using.
It was configured by the phone supplier.  They don't know, because they don't know English.  It is simple.  They have the email ID configured on their phone because the phone does not work without the email ID.  Technically for the sake of number, they have an email, but they don't know it.  Someone else configured for them.  So how do they communicate?  That email ID is not available to the government.  So now with the power of email address, government is now able to each to the person whom they would have never reached before.  Now they are able to communicate.  And you have 7 million people who are deprived to get a communication from the government for their benefits.  That's a huge case.  The moment we make the barrier ‑‑ Maarten when the dot com started, no one believed that there would be these websites.
We are at the same junction that we have to fight for and some part of time that will be become part of you are history and people will sound fool who are not liking this idea.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: I see some questions in the chat.  Dennis I want to know if you will provide them or this is and invitation to Ajay to put his answers in chat.
Okay.  I think they are quite similar.  I can pronounce them to Ajay.
So the question was if someone will get their email in Hindi.  How do they know this is not a bad email address.  You pointed that some email services does not provide information about tactually the email address, only the name of the sender, but ‑‑ so what would you recommend in this point.  This is not a UA problem.  We can certainly have a session for sure about the trustability and everything for sure.
And the ID ‑‑ it's not a problem in ASCII domain, what I receive a email from [email protected].  How do I know it's from Maarte, really?  It's a long discussion that we always have.  The popular domain names and the domain names and service provider, you have trustability.
The domain name is passing the SPF, and the ICANN.  Is it valid?  Is it having a PLS configured and is it coming secure or not.  There are many pools already on wait when the mail services get configured for a good service.  And the clients nowadays if you the Android and the Microsoft, all three and a basic hygiene check is always performed whether the domain is coming and main sourced is coming or bad source from the IP.  This is basic hygiene that happens.
But the similarity from the security point of view is I guess ‑‑ and this is my view that IDN is more trustability and more strength than an ASCII domain as of now, because they don't understand them.  They can't attack you.  The spammers do not create the maims out of these I Ds and domain name.  There may be a small percentage that come in.  There are ‑‑ (No audio).
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Oh.  I think ‑‑ I think ‑‑ Ajay? 
>> AJAY DATA: I got lost.  My Zoom shut off and restarted.  So maybe someone in Zoom doesn't like what I was speaking.  So the question is ‑‑ the question is that this is about a non‑ ‑‑
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Okay.
>> AJAY DATA: This is a several proved that this is a very strong IDN case here.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Okay.  So as I can conclude from the first part of our session that first of all, that I. DN exists and email addresses in local scripts exist so don't forget about this, first part and the second part.  So if you want to work on your local script, think of who will understand you in this script and who you want to communicate with it.
Because actually, I would put the.
They will that in you use just our ordinary paper post you always put the address of the language that can be read in those countries that will receive this letter.  So I think this is parallels here and Internet just provides some tools that are similar that are similar to offline life.  Don't forget about this.
Okay, Joanna, you want to input?
>> JOANNA KULESZA: I think there is a vital interest in us understanding what is expected.  I think the discussion we are having here in the chat is an argument for more awareness raising, and for more capacity building.  As Ajay was explaining, it's about the trust.  It's about raising awareness of what it is, and building trust.  I'm speaking on behalf of the demand side.  And there is' try business advantage if you can use UA popular.  Now the name of my city is Noods.
If we used Polish script, it would be Woodge.  I think it would be a tremendous benefit to use this very Polish name.  I think there's a certain advantage to encourage people to join the universal acceptance movement we are trying to rep here during the IGF but it comes at the rice of making them aware of what it is and building the trust.  AI appreciate the discussion.  Thank you very much.  Sol I don't see questions.  Dennis?
>> DENNIS TAN: No questions, but it follows open the theme about the UA, two sides of the same coin.  The acceptance issue and it talks about raising awareness on both ends.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Okay.  So then I suggest all of us to come towards the second part of our workshop.  And so the first part, we have analyzed what makes universal acceptance like barrier and what challenges all of us faced in this field.  And now our aim is to address how stakeholders on the demand and the supply side can be motivated.  And they can come together and find solutions to address these universal acceptance challenges and have a multi lingual.  So as was mentioned during the Q&A session, so public sector could play a key role here, and because he can drive the necessary demand, and to better serve their citizens, the governments could lead by example in the email statements.  Especially if we talk about local languages and scripts.
They can require the support of these issues through the procurement policies and in much way, they can push forward the technology developers and the whole ‑‑ this digital transformation which we are watching now.  Connected with new domain names and email addresses and, of course, provide in this way better connectivity for all the citizens including minorities.  So from that perspective, I'm asking our panelists so ask the following questions, what next steps can be taken and how to address the formed gaps of universal acceptance.
So what stakeholders, as you see it can be invited also in these dialogue and how they can be moderated to adopt and promote universal acceptance solutions.  And so please make special focus on the public sector and its roll in these processes so each panelist will have five minutes.  I invite Dr. Data to the microphone.
>> AJAY DATA: Thank you, Maria.  It's a wonderful learning session.  So my view is very simple.  This is not just the readership and my friends Mark and Dennis, we can do that.
This is about the whole world community joining us together to solve this problem.  I would insurge everyone to look at the UA initiative.  There are two direct interventions that you can do in your region.  One, you can look at becoming an ambassador in your region for UA and you can start a local initiative and both are fully supported by way of guidance and mentoring and run local expenses.  This is a framework support, with a whole supportive community.  Maria, you know that we are 500 plus members.
But 500 plus members from the whole world is a small number.  It's a big number from the UA, from ICANN or UA perspective, but from worldside service, we need a lot more people to take this up in a much more stronger available and there's so we must leave this work of as far asking what is really required locally, and we will support them for whatever is required that is the initiative that invite everyone to look at for two things from USG.  One is to apply for join for start the local initiative.  That is the second.  Thank you.
We see your suggestions and what else can you recommend especially for the end user community.  USG is more focused on the technical community and the questions of public sector engagement now.  So do you have any suggestions to the special enter user community?  Ajay?
>> AJAY DATA: So you want me to speak? 
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Yes.  Please so end user, I think the demand side, right?
>> AJAY DATA: And if you are a non‑English speaker, knock the door off of your Internet provider.  I'm aslur you, the end users you are the one who will get benefited faster.  We must start asking of the domain register, whatever software we are dealing in, if the end user is going to start asking, hey this email is not working.  Hey, look this domain is not working.  Solve this bug.  This is what I expect from the end users right now.
The moment we start, every application will be UA ready.  Just start asking.  Just raise at wearness that we have a bug and with ‑‑ the awareness that we have a bug and we need to solve it.
The website also has a section where ‑‑ where the end user can go and raise a complaint or a ticket if the software is not accepting.  For example, airline website or any foreign website.  So it can raise an ICANN ‑‑ and ICANN supports us in UA to go back to the website and ensure to put the plan with UA in their portal.  We go to them and let them know that we are missing the customers.  So UA end user can just adopt ‑‑ start adopting the email addresses IDNs and go to their software whatever they are using to push them to make you ready.  Thank you.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: And I'm inviting Akinori to provide his suggestions on how we can go forward with your challenges, please.
>> AKINORI MAEMURA: Thank you very much.  It is a very hard question, and, you know, we have a lot of technology for which we are definitely need for the future.  For example, the IPv6, the DNSSEC, and we need that for accommodating much more user of the Internet or to reinforce the content and then UA is another version of such a new technology.  It's really hard to get everyone of that and then implement it to the end system.  So the most ‑‑ the most parent part is to collaborate with a lot of stakeholders and figuring out that ICANN is doing through the USG and USG and ambassadors, as Ajay said is wide spread to the globe.  And then they can they can make action in their local field to, you know, spread the words of the important of the universal acceptance and then that's one part.  Another part is maybe ‑‑ you know, USG's endeavor would be quite quite bottom up feature and maybe ICANN itself needs to have more the efforts to have, you know, the bigger player to have much more advance to the universal acceptance.  So that's another point.  And then as already told, the governments is really important to advance.  This is a multilingual issue and it's a quite cultural issue.  And if the government may be quite, you know, interested and obliged to move it forward.
Not only government but all stakeholders should be involved, and the USG and ICANN should reach out to the various stakeholders.
So sorry with the lack of concreteness and then very short we should try very hard for to follow.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Thank you very much.  I hope ICANN has already made good steps in helping to achieve and is cleave universal acceptance andingizing with concrete stakeholders and ICANN has such plans to community with the key players on technology markets like technology developer companies that are very important for the whole market of Internet oriented applications and I hope you will continue this work in this field because you have all the competitive competence and your position allows you.
And now I want to have ‑‑ I want to invite Joanna Kulesza to provide her point from the end user perspective and please share your upon on public sector engagement.  Joanna.
Johana, are you with us?
Okay.  We'll connect Johana.  I invite Walter Wu to provide his inputs on this field.  Walter, please.
>> WALTER WU: Actually, Maria, I will share some of the things that the Chinese community has made.  And hopefully this can be useful to solve UA issues globally.
The communities in China have a consensus that it's important to have a more IDN user friendly environment.  Then come from the industry association, and Internet companies and domain initiative was set up in January of this year.
CDN has a law of USAG, just like a bridge between the local community and the global community.  To promote the understanding of a UA, the leadership member of the CDNI, offers to the major Internet companies whose application to the majority of the market share and covered the wide range of internet users.
For example, there's major Chinese search engine provider, and so goes the leading Chinese input method and the browser service provider.  360 also is a big service provider of Chinese search engine and browsers, as well as the leading person email vendors so we invite all of those big Internet companies to be the coleader of CDNI and then we could have the opportunity to have a face‑to‑face communication and what is a UA issue and then, you know, make the consensus that we need to move forward together.  During the outreach meeting, CNDI also introduced, for example, what is ICANN and USG, and what is the new gTLD program.  And also we also, you know, provide a better perspective of end user.
The Internet companies, actually, we have a pretty positive answer from the Internet companies.  For example now by doing 360, they have agrees to enlarge the support of the Chinese IDN side, and so goes the mobile provider and 360 provider pass, and they are conducting their IDN work including support for EI for their personal email applications.  Actually, you know, that's a major communication work that we are doing with major Internet players in China.  Besides, I think we also have the following cushion about pushing the UA issue.
First of all, we should address the significance of UA realization or what does it mean to the country and the community.  The CND will promote the awareness of a UA.  We also want to Creade more opportunity to meet and have face‑to‑face meeting for both major Internet service providers.  From the perspective of the user on the one hand, the realization for UA will benefit from setting up a friendly environment that the potential value could be boosted.  On the other hand, more education shall be organized for the end user as many of them do not know, you know, they could use another language for Internet serving.  So it's strongly believes that both efforts will set good examples for other players applications, and will achieve more progress in the future and that's a major part, you know, for inodorousing the ‑‑ the UA progress in China.
And, you know, at the end, I want to summarize a little bit what my personal understanding about how to promote the UA.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Just one minute, please.
>> WALTER WU: To improve the UA, we have to increase the awareness of IDN.  Just now the audience asks why do we not use the search engine.  Because the search engine never provide a direct connection between the enterprise and the customer.  That's the key value of IDN and all the gTLD domain name.  So that's all.  Thank you.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Thank you, Walter for your opinion.  And now we have Johana.  She's with you.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Thank you very much.  I will be with very brief.  Thank you for dropping off.  I think I covered most of the issues that I believe are relevant.  I do agree with Akinori.  It's about reaching not governments and working together.  The overall narrative is for us is to advance the multi‑stakeholder.  There's no other way we can accomplish any of the themes that fall within Internet governance, especially UA.  There is a weight that is on thes to better represent regional values or cultures, but it is a multi‑stakeholder effort.  So I welcome all the accommodations that have been done and I'm very much looking forward to the at large following these.  Thank you very much.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Thank you, Johana.  Thank you very much.
And so I think I may be do provide some sum up of the session.  But now we have very little time.  Dennis, can you summarize our inputs from the chat and I'm not sure we have time for the questions but maybe one would be appreciated.
Dennis?
>> DENNIS TAN: Thank you, Maria.  Yes, as far as solutions or ways to move forward.  Some comments on the chat box, one is to build awareness of UA and how that will advance local communities, also government can play a big role in promoting usage of local languages and therefore the domain names in local languages and content as well.  Capacity building is mentioned to provide community training and how they can promote UA and I think lugging to the local UA initiative and work in that direction.  There is also mentioned about how the national Internet registries can promote the usage of domain names in their local languages and also a solution is to help or either through funding or training or resources to the private sector those that are involved in hardware and software developers for them to know about the issues and how they can, you know, create the products and services including universal acceptance.  So that's largely the comments on the chat.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Okay.  So I don't see any hands raised.  So I will summarize shortly what we have achieved in our second part.  So if you have some additions, as I our panelists, they provided the following suggestions.  So we ‑‑ first of all we need to continue to raise awareness of the UA challenges and the neediness of UA ready necessary and multivote all stakeholders as globally as on the regional levels.  On the regional levels, sometimes there's different understanding of the whole problems.
And stake hoders should review their attitude and look at the larger social benefit and the long‑term business benefit of supporting UA readiness and especially the public sector can lead by the example, and drive the whole ‑‑ hold these universal acceptance implementation process through the instruments and tools that they have and they use and provide for their citizens.
So we also need to provide more education for end users on their possibilities of using local languages and scripts on the net.  Explain the different categories mentioned by Ajay Data, which are involves universal acceptance scope.
And we also need to reach the global technology leaders to support universal technology solutions for broader adoption by customers.  There is the need to develop and provide trainings so the global technical audience on how to enable UA readiness in their systems that Walter has mentioned.
We can incorporate in the universal readiness, a thematic in special technical degrees in educational programs for computer science students.  So they can be involved in all of these issues ‑‑ to start to work on our market.
And of course it should be made in collaboration with academia and university communities.  And end users can be a part of this UA implementation process if they should ‑‑ if they actively will participate and communicate with those organizations they are conduct with.  So they can ask for these support and in such a way to demonstrate the high demand on these services.
And, of course, we need to keep an eye on security issues and stability issues and as I already mentioned look on how to follow the interoperability principles of the Internet.
So this is my conclusion that I have put from this session.  If you want to put some notes, just ‑‑ we are actually out of time.  But if you want to put some closing remarks, just for a minute, I can provide you the microphone.  So I suggestion it for our panelists.
Do you agree with these conclusions or want to ‑‑ want to add something.
>> AJAY DATA: I want to end ‑‑ I want to take two seconds before you end, just for the benefit of our audience that UA is working very actively to find the technology gaps, find and work on them, very actively to find the solutions, make them more straightforward, and make them more ready and that's the very active work which we do as a community and there's a specific Working Group which tries to do that.  There's a technology Working Group that works on the technology side and so there's a good structure.  So I would request everyone who is not aware about UA, please visit USG website.  So you can join Working Groups.  You are welcome and you are straightforward.  There's no objections.  So if you are interested to contribute, you would be welcomed and would being able to contribute.  I want to thank you for the opportunity to talk about it.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Thank you, Ajay.
So Akinori.
>> AKINORI MAEMURA: Thank you for your excellent moderation.  Thank you to all panelists and participants nor the good suggestion and input and ideas, which helps us a lot.  Thank you very much.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Thank you, Joanna.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Thank you, everyone.  It was a pleasure to be here and I'm happy to be at large to support the items we have so precisely identified.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: And Walter? 
>> WALTER WU: Thank you.  Thank you, everyone, for a productive meeting and I look forward to the communication about the UA, about the implementation in China.
>> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA: Thank you for our panelists for the organization ‑‑ the organizers of this session, and for all of our participants, I hope that this session helps you to understand universal acceptance issues better and now you know how to join these processes and what we need to do further.  I want to mention that I'm really glad that this topic is raised on IGF field and now it's one of the priorities in ICANN community and on ICANN fields.  So I think we need to move further and invite more stakeholders to be involved in all of these processes and these need to be kept further and it's also widely discussed on the future.  On regional and national IGFs because this is very connected with the local agenda of different countries. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-11-%E2%80%93-ws290-unlocking-the-internet-stakeholder-perspectives-of-interope-%E2%80%93-raw^^

>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: Hi everybody, and it's 20 past 6.  So let's get going, straightaway.  Hello and welcome everyone.  I'd like to thank the people at the UN for helping us with the organization.  Thank you, it has been very smooth.  My name is Astor Nummelin Carlberg, and I'm policy director at Open Forum Europe, Brussels based Think Tank, and we work with explaining the merits of openness and technologies to policymakers and bringing experts together in settings like this, for example.
This IGF workshop is on how increasing interoperability could be a way to solve some of the most intractable issues of the Internet platform market.  This is actually the second IGF session that we are hosting on interoperability.  The first one two weeks ago was a pre‑event, where we invited speakers from different geographies to discuss the developments in this area from across the world.  We had Brazil, India, Australia, China and EU represented.  But today we are doing things differently.  We are taking a stakeholder perspective.  We brought together representatives from Civil Society, SME, consumer organizations, to get a broad picture of how increased interoperability in the platform economy could affect the stakeholders represented today.
Let me introduce our panelists.  First off we have Dr. Ian Brown, visiting CyberBRICS Professor and distinguished scientist.  In this context he is independent researcher studying interoperability and competition intensely for the last 7, 8 months.  Michal Wozniak is a independent expert specializing in information security privacy in the digital age Internet Governance and federated services.  We have Maryant Fernandez Perez, lawyer and senior at digital policy officer at European consumer organization, she represents in that role 44 consumer associations from 32 countries.  Annika Linck manager at European digital SME alliance, leading the organization's policy positions and advocacy towards the EU institutions.  And with us today we have my co‑moderator and co‑organizer, Vittorio Bertola, head of policy and innovation at Open‑Xchange, a global leader in free software application supporting the Internet's infrastructure.  Also I want to welcome Paula Grzegorzewska, who will take care of any questions or ideas that you wish to share in the chat or Q&A function, which you should be able to find at the bottom bar of the Zoom application.  Vittorio, would you like to quickly introduce the topic of today's discussion, and then hand over to Ian to set the scene and introduce his research.
>> VITTORIO BERTOLA: Sure.  Thank you.
  (cavernous audio).
Today's meeting is about giving you multiple stakeholder view of interoperability.  Interoperability is the ability of different but similar applications and services, typically by different makers to function together and to replace each other, be exchanged one from the other.  This easiest example is the Internet messaging world.  We are familiar with instant messaging like in WhatsApp, Skype and telegram and these applications, you have many different apps, they have similar functionalities, but you still need to install them all to be able to communicate with everyone.  If you have people on WhatsApp, you need WhatsApp, if you have people on telegram you need telegram, you need one account and one installation of every app.  This is a waste of effort, waste of time and resources for the user.  But this prevents innovation and competition, because due to network effects, the fact that some of the apps are already dominant and most users are already there it becomes hard to create new applications and compete with the established ones.  If we interoperate for a set of common features, a user could use one and pick the best one and use it for everyone if you want, like E‑mail.  E‑mail is the opposite example.  This is to give you a basic idea of what we are talking about.  Now I will give the floor to Ian Brown for the introduction of the topic.
>> IAN BROWN: Thanks, Vittorio.  I will be very brief because I think with 60 minutes we should listen to our panelists and bring in our audience as quickly as possible.  As astor said I've just completed quite a detailed research project on the interoperability as a tool for competition regulation and what that might mean in practice for many of the common applications and services that we use on the Internet.  It's been a interesting project, both from the competition policy side, this is something that the European Commission, various members of congress and other policy focused lawyers, economist, Civil Society groups have been looking at as a way to improve competition in big services, I'm sure you are all very aware of how dominant a number of small, big, what the European Commission calls gatekeeper platforms are in a number of online services, whether that is social media, whether it's instant messaging, whether it's search, whether it's, so those you see a single provider holding in many countries a very high share of the market.  You see in many European member states 90 percent plus market shares of single providers.  You even see, I've got the best figures for the EU member states, in a number of EU member states, Facebook alone has 80 percent plus of the population using Facebook itself, and/or Instagram and WhatsApp which of course Facebook also have acquired over the last few years.
From a competition perspective, interoperability is seen as one way of addressing the fact that several of these big Internet markets have what seems to be decisively tipped in the direction of one provider, very hard as Vittorio was saying for SMEs or even other large competitors to come in and break into a market to offer users new options.  We saw that even with Google trying to break in several times into the social media space found great difficulty even with its enormous resources, huge numbers of programmers, designers, very large user base, still had a very difficult time breaking into social media markets, so intra operability would be one way of giving a chance to new competitors to break into these markets and give users more choice.
But alongside that competition policy angle I think a number of Civil Society groups have rightly emphasized the potential social impact of interoperability as well.  For example, I've talked quite a lot to colleagues from Article 19 freedom of expression campaign group.  They think opening up recommendation algorithms, letting people choose different providers to curate their own social media time line could be a very positive thing for freedom of expression.  I think we will hear more from some of our colleagues on this panel about the impact potentially on privacy and data protection, letting people who would prefer to make use of services that paid more attention to user privacy, that gave users more options about how their data was used and so on, could be something that could be very positive overall for the level of privacy that is available online.
There are wider questions about media pluralism and diversity in the democracies and perhaps a more controversial topic but relevant here in the EU, a number of European Commissioners have talked about increasing what they call digital sovereignty of European and other nations giving European companies in Europe the chance to compete with the giant largely U.S. and Chinese providers today, whose services are so dominant in certain areas, and that would hold for every other country in the world as well.
I'll pause there, and we can come back to some specifics throughout this conversation.  Thanks.
>> VITTORIO BERTOLA: Thank you.  Now let's come to Michal.  You could provide us with a perspective on social media.  For example, if Facebook or Twitter were to open their protocols, how would it work, what should their focus be on?
>> MICHAL WOZNIAK: Let me start with why I think opening of those protocols is important, and to start, to see why one needs to go as far as looking at how moderation works on Facebook and Twitter, which is it doesn't really work very well, and we know this pretty well from our own experiences, most probably, right?  The reason why moderation on Facebook and Twitter doesn't work well is because simply put, they are trying to create a single set of rules for the whole world to follow, and that is just untenable.  That is not going to work.  If you need proof of that, search for what a thumbs up means in Tuscany or Afghanistan, communication is contextual.  Different groups, different cultures have different, understand things in different ways and communicate in different ways.
It gets worse because even if they start moderating more seriously they need be facing backlash for censorship which is somewhat fair, they are the monopolists, they are the biggest networks.  If they ban someone, they make someone disappear from the social media landscape.  Of course, those large companies that Facebook or Twitter are complaining about this, but the problems that they put themselves in this position themselves with their centralized business decisions.  Simply put good moderation goes against the centralized business model they chose.  Interestingly, they start to recognize this themselves, there was a tweet from Jack dedivorcey on Twitter saying centralized enforcement of global policy to address abuse and misleading information is unlikely to scale over long term, this is a direct quote.
There is on the other hand a fantastic talk by Kalin about how the centralized social networks dealt with the outright trolls when the outright trolls tried to join in and overrun the fedyverse and the short version is because there were many instances, many codes of conduct, many different communities with their own little groups of people and their own groups of moderators and their own rules, they had more fine grained control of the communication.  They had moderators that were embedded in and caring for the communities.  Those moderators understood the context of the communication that could easily spot a troll.
The fedverse also gives a better moderation tools because you can silence a threat, silence or block a user or completely defederate from a different instance and server, saying we don't want any communication with that particular server or that particular instance.  This also avoids the problem of quote‑unquote censorship because if it's a decision of thousands of users and hundreds of instances, it's hardly coordinated censorship.  It is basically a lot of people don't want to talk to you.  This is the why.  Didek's talk outlines nicely, I'll link it in the chat, how and why moderation works better in a decentralized system and how to open, I would say, obviously we need to focus on open standards, and these have to be enforced.  What I mean by this is we have to agree on open standards and we have to make the big platforms implement them properly and fully, because they will try to subvert the process.  They will try to change those standards a little bit or add some things and they will say that this stifles their innovation and all of that.
But the only way to make interoperability work is if it's fully implemented open standard.  We should take it step by step.  Start with relatively low‑hanging fruit like public time lines and gradually add more problematic things like private messages or groups or any additional kinds of communication that happens on those platforms.
One last point that I want to make here is that we have to be aware that initially, hypothetically, let's say that Facebook and Twitter open their protocols, initially other fedverse instances all the other small servers, many of them will refuse to federate with them and that is okay.  As long as the first step of opening up this protocol is made, then it's on other instances to decide to join in, to federate with Facebook or federate with Twitter and gradually open up the second system.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: Thank you very much.  I'm going to move to Maryant but put a pin in the open standards question.  We have reason to come back to that later, and in discussions with attendees on the call.  Maryant, perhaps the floor is yours to give the point of view from consumer protection.
>> MARYANT FERNANDEZ PEREZ: Thank you very much.  My name is Maryant Fernandez Perez and I work at the European consumer organization, group of 44 organizations from 32 countries.  We deal with interoperability with this matter from the perspective of competition and perspective of bringing consumer welfare and choice and therefore protection.  The first point for us is that support a symmetrical regulation on platforms as gatekeepers.  What we mean by that, platforms that have substantial network effects, those that work in economies of scale and scope, platforms that lock in effects, users and consumers and therefore they prevent consumers from, high switching cost for consumers and data dependency.  We want to have stricter rules on these platforms that are gatekeepers, and we think that regulation is the first step for that because we think that these problems are unlikely to solve correct, otherwise we wouldn't be talking about this in the first place.  One of the solutions to tackle this gatekeeper function is through interoperability.  As we have heard from the speakers, indeed can bring benefits, so we think one possibility to bring benefits to consumers and to the economy as a whole to make it more open and competitive is access to APIs to tackle structural, wherein ter operability is needed for other examples, additional rules could be foreseen.  We can discuss to have regulatory mechanism or legal obligation for interoperability that we need to be careful not to think about it in isolation, so we do not only need interoperability to have more competitive markets or to address the gate keeping functions of these platforms.  This is just one element that we need to consider, and there the key question is, as speakers have said, how you implement it and be aware of risks that it can entail.  We have lessons learned from previous attempts, at least in Europe, for example, in the payment services era where access to data by nonbanks was facilitated but in practice it is creating issues, particularly for privacy and personal data protection.  For example, in this context it is important to bear in mind that existing rules to protect people's privacy and personal data is respected.  If a company is collecting data illegally, we don't want that with interoperability for example in that data that is legally collected that it's moved somewhere else and the problem becomes bigger and who is the accountable entity for that.  We see interoperability as possibility to bring more competition and consumer welfare and choice, definitely, so when there is a market failure, but we cannot see it as in isolation and that is what I wanted to say.  I'm looking forward to the discussion.  Thank you.
>> Let's move to Annika, would you give us perspective by SMEs, is interoperability useful to thrive on the market.
>> ANNIKA LINCK: Thanks for this question, Vittorio and hello from digital SME, we are a alliance of small and medium size businesses in the ICT sector, European digital SME alliance represents 20,000 SMEs from across Europe.  Thank you for this question about interoperability being useful for SMEs, because yes, we do think it can be useful.  However, in the process, we have been repeatedly, we have advocated for a level playing field for SMEs in digital markets.  We believe as a organization that you need to have open, fair and competitive markets, because otherwise SMEs would have a hard time competing especially if there is already such a high concentration, there are these dominant players in certain markets, from which as has been discussed, as most participants here know also you benefit from feedback loops, from network effects, etcetera.  So if you want to create a fair economy where SMEs and innovators can actually compete, you need to provide some answers, and, yeah, advocating for interoperability requirements can be one of the answers, in the past we focused more on the competition angle.  Back in 2009 we backed the European Commission on its antitrust investigation against Microsoft for tying the Internet Explorer with Windows and then in 2016 we were also a independent intervenor in the European Commission's antitrust case against Google and Android.  Because we are representing SMEs, and including app developers and we wanted to make sure that there is an open and competitive ecosystem for SMEs, including SME app developers, but we are not only focusing, we don't really focus on one specific company.  We want to ensure this, that the markets are competitive, because this is actually the way to ensure that SMEs can compete and that the economy overall can bring about innovation which is not only beneficial to the SMEs but to society overall, and also not to forget the European economy especially is reliant on SMEs, 99 percent of companies in Europe are SMEs.  They bring about a lot of employment, two‑thirds of employment in the EU, so they are really important.  They are also really important in digital markets.  Now what we have seen with the competition angle or with the cases that the European Commission has brought against the large dominant players so far, those have been really important and they have been considerable fines that have been imposed, but for now this hasn't really changed much in terms of slowing down or limiting their dominance.  So the issue seems to be more structural which is why we also believe that interoperability can be an answer, but here of course, it comes, it's like the details, the nitty‑gritty details of how this can be done and how this can be operationalized are still to be discussed.  I'm very happy to also be in this panel to learn and discuss with experts what could be the way forward.  I'm going to stop here and happy to discuss further.
>> VITTORIO BERTOLA: Thank you, I think I have a follow‑up question for you.  But first I want to add, coming from an SME which has been involved for so long, SMEs are the viewer of this extraordinary growth of the Internet in its early phase, initially the Internet was growing through this interoperability which was how things were meant to be in the beginning, which was what powered the external growth and creation of common knowledge and welfare that the Internet has brought about.  Even the dominant platforms of today, were originally start‑ups and SMEs competing against bigger giants in the field of ICTs and telecos and so on.  It is about restoring the potential for growth and innovation that was done in the beginning in my opinion.  It is not about become something very new.  It is like protecting the region in principle.  Something I'm wondering if you haven't thought about the standardization process, because the development of technical standards originally, this was a bottom up process made by individuals, even in companies.  Now it seems to tip in favor of big platforms running most of the show in many of the standardization organizations.  I don't know if you have also some comment on this.
>> ANNIKA LINCK: In principle, we are, yeah, we see that there is an issue here because as you are saying, a lot of times, it has to do with resources, SMEs usually have less resources to get engaged in complex and long term engagement commitments, like when you want to work on standardization, expert committees, etcetera, you need to have the time and the resources to send someone there who can actually do that work.  For SMEs, that is often more challenging.  This has been recognized by the policymakers, so there are some support programs here that provide funding and support to SME experts to be present in standardization organizations.
However, the percentage is still not real, it is not representative of the importance of SMEs in the economy, so indeed this is an issue, and I'm not fully sure what the answer is here, how to address that, because it's quite complex as well.  But indeed, it would be very important to involve us in standardization process, and also to create that link between, just making sure that these ideas can be operationalized and enforced.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: That sounds very good.  We are going to move in a little bit towards, I've put a pin in a bunch of things here, that we should include in a more of a open discussion, like privacy, the question around standardization, both how it can be used specifically to get those open protocols, those open APIs but structurally speaking making sure it's a inclusive process.  But let me ask a devil's advocate question.  Say me a average user, I feel like I'm not at all interested in linking my Facebook messenger with Twitter and Slack and discord or whatever.  I want to use them in different ways, separately, for different people, for different reasons.
What answer would you give to somebody who poses this kind of question or this kind of concern?  Ian, any thought?  Michal?
>> IAN BROWN: Why don't you go first, Michal.
>> MICHAL WOZNIAK: Fine.  These are different tools, so nobody is saying that for example E‑mail needs to be interoperable with social media, or that I Ms or Internet chat needs to be interoperable with E‑mail, although there are projects that actually do this.  There are forums like discourse which offer a online Forum that is also accessible or usable as a mailing list.
But obviously, tools like Slack and tools like Twitter are different kinds of tools and are used for different kinds of things.  They don't have to necessarily talk to each other.  But it would benefit the users to be able to choose different Slack‑like providers or Twitter‑like providers, and still be able to talk to users on Twitter or on Slack.  We are talking about interoperability within a similar tool that achieves a similar goal, not necessarily about every single tool talking to each other, because of course that doesn't necessarily make sense.
>> IAN BROWN: To add to that, I agree with all of that.  Nobody is saying we should force users into interoperability, so someone in a situation, Astor, you described, would remain, it would be entirely possible for them to continue working like that, no one will be forced to connect their profiles on different services.  We have seen some, one or two academic papers saying exactly what you just said, Astor, that today some people do use those different services like that, actually even quite similar services, people might use one instant messaging app with their family and their boyfriend or girlfriend, very close friends.  They might use a separate app for group discussions with school friends, their university friends, their colleagues.  They might use perhaps LinkedIn would be a obvious example for much more professional networking focused activities.  People will be entirely free to do that.  Regulation would require, any potential interoperability regulation might require the largest platforms to allow interoperability when people wish, when users choose to connect their profiles.  But it won't force them.  Actually, if we had more interoperability from the largest platforms, we might see all sorts of new products and service innovation come out of that, of bringing together people's profiles and communities in other ways which by definition as a counter factual we can't see today until that interoperability is there.
>> MICHAL WOZNIAK: Can I add, we see this innovation already happening in the fedyverse we have instances like mass tad Don which are Twitter like, we are instances using pixel fed which are let's say Instagram like and we have instances that are using peer tube which are kind of YouTube like.  These are three different kinds of interfaces that are used for different kinds of social sharing.  Yet underneath they are using the same protocol, they are using activity pub so I can follow a user using my mass ta Don account I can follow a user that is using peer tube and is publishing videos on peer tube that I'm interested in.  I don't have to do this, and additionally I can have different accounts on those different interfaces or they are used for different things.  In fact I do have different accounts that I use for different things.  But the power for this, the power to do this is with me.  I have the power, as a user, to say I'm using this account for Instagram‑like things, and I'm using this account for Twitter‑like things and I'm using this account for whatever my video, social video requirements.
>> Vittoriothank you, we can move to Q&A and questions from the audience.  I'm going to start with one that came in the chat and also there is Q&A posts already there.  A interesting point is raised, in other conference, the point was raised that companies are edging away, they lack (indecipherable) the point I'd like to make before turning the question to anyone in the panel that wants to answer, is that interoperability is really at the base of the Internet together with open standards and open source software, which can be tied to it.  It is a way to, the whole system, especially in Europe when we have 27 different economies and languages and societies and markets, notwithstanding the efforts to unify them, it is easier to think that we can have constellations and alliances, one very big company like Google or Microsoft or Amazon or whatever, and interoperability and open standards are DNA for this, this cannot happen unless you have common languages and common standards that allow you to create synergies among the services by all the different companies in the various countries.  I don't know if other people have the same thought but I think the answer is resounding yes.  Anyone on the panel wants to comment?  Otherwise I'll give the floor to Astor.
>> IAN BROWN: The reason that these big ecosystems, and actually the economists use the word in a different way to the technologists, technologists take it for grant that  ecosystems include multiple companies, they are more like the European idea that Vittorio was talking about, whereas the competition economists think of the mega firms that have their own internal ecosystem, they have privileged access to data about their customer, they give privilege services to each other that they don't give to competitors, that is what has to a significant degree propelled their incredibly rapid growth.  You can argue there are some benefits to society from that perhaps.  It encourages those companies to grow incredibly quickly.  They get a lot of scale efficiencies.  They will bet large amounts of money on new products and services, they may invest signature amounts in R&D, but over time, I think it's certainly equally if not more arguable and this is what competition regulators themselves say as well, so for example, the UK's competition and markets authority said this in a major report earlier this year.  It is better for consumers to have lots of companies competing because that will stimulate more innovation and new products and services over time, that will better suit the needs of consumers, rather than having these small number of enormously profitable and historically large companies sitting right in the center sucking up all of the products and services around them.  There have been various statistics this year saying that the five, the Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft I think, the original five are worth something like at some points this year 25 percent of the U.S. stock market, S&P 500.  They have grown so enormous.  These multi trillion dollar companies, those do have some benefits.  I use Mac products myself.  I enjoy using them.  They are slickly designed but other people have different preferences.  They don't want to have to use Apple everything or Google Android everything.  They would like options from perhaps European companies that do things differently.  They would like more choice to use open source software that could give them all sorts of different ways of achieving their goals.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: Very good point.  I think we will probably come back to this discussion.  There will be some questions posed around this as well.  There is one point that I want to make sure that we don't leave hanging, because it came up, in some ways from chats but also something that Michal mentioned and it's the question of privacy, Maryant as well, something we need to address in this panel as well.  I don't know who wants to pick it up, but talk a little to the relationship between increase interoperability and privacy.  Do you want to take this one, Michal?
>> MICHAL WOZNIAK: Sure, I can take a stab at this.  One way to look at this is that currently, Facebook controls the communication of roughly more than a billion users, right, more than a billion people currently communicate mainly through a service run by a single company.  The alternative is that when you are communicating through an interoperable service, you are most probably talking to a user on a different instance controlled by someone else.  Some people see this as a threat.  They see this as a potential problem because now you have not only you and the other user you are communicating with and not only the admin. of the service, which in case of Facebook is Facebook, but in case of a interoperable service where you are talking to a user in a different instance you have two different sets of admin., two different sets of people or entities that control or are involved in this communication act.
But this also means that no single entity in a decentralized network, no single entity has full view of the social graph, no single entity has a full view of all the communication that is happening as opposed to Facebook which has a full view of every single communication that is happening on Facebook.
Even though now you have, if we go, if we interpret the goal the interoperability route, even though we have two different sets of admins that you have to trust, this is already a success because now not a single entity has the full view.  Plus you can have, again, the decision is yours.  It's not like right now where you either have to agree to Facebook's terms and conditions or not be able to communicate at all.  If you have a interoperable communication service, you can tell the other user, you know what, I would prefer, could you set up an account on this other server?  I trust them more.  Now you can have this conversation.  You can say these guys are better with privacy.  I trust them more.  Let's have a conversation once you set up an account there.  This is not something you can have with Facebook right now.
Another point I want to make is that if you dive, if you spend time on the fedverse, if you start using masttadon or any other socialized network, you notice small things related to privacy, for example, if I create an entry, let's say mastta Don version of a tweet which is called a toot and I decides its follower only I will get a message saying you might want to lock down your account, because your account is not locked down, anyone can follow you.  This thing that you are doing with followers only is not necessarily effective.  There are plenty of those small messages all around the place, because mast ta Don doesn't really care about scaring the users.  It cares more about being honest with users.  This is their quote‑unquote business model, let's call it.  They can be more honest about potential privacy issues and they are.  I would say that I don't really see huge privacy issues.  You get the additional set of admins that looks at, that can see some of the communication acts but you win so much in return, that I think this is going to be worth it.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: Yeah, okay.  It made me think of Maryant's comment earlier, because sometimes when we talk about interoperability in the platform market, in the fede verse there are examples of how dynamics play out.  Maryant lift add point in the area of open banking, you mentioned about privacy concerns.  Here we have this LinkedIn privacy, perhaps you could develop this a little bit.
>> MARYANT FERNANDEZ PEREZ: Sure.  The point is that when you would design interoperability as a remedy or as a legal obligation or some open standards, of course there is a different, we see interoperability as a layer step approach where it is not going to, you are not going to have the ideal scenario by we now have interoperability and that has to be done by 2021.  In open banking, the idea was to open more competition in the sector, by allowing other service providers to offer services that consumers requested themselves.  But sometimes to offer their services, these actors would need access to certain data, but the point would be that you as a consumer with decide when and how this data would be sent to another provider.  But in practice we have seen tensions between banks, we have seen that the European banking authority that is in charge of implementing it was not looking much at the GDPR.  We see there have been contradictions but luckily the European data protection board has come up with guidelines that were subject to private consultation to how to put the consumer in charge and how to ensure that existing laws would still be applied.  That is what I meant by not dealing with interoperability in isolation, by having interoperability you cannot forget for example in Europe the GDPR.  Yes, we see multiple privacy violations but not because we don't have the law.  It is because it is not being enforced.  There are various things that even if you have a legal basis being consent, that consent often, we see that it's not always meaningful.  It is not really respecting the principles that are embedded in the GDPR because of what we call the dark patterns because how the choice is presented to the consumers so the same issues could be seen by mandating interoperability.  The key is how you implement it in practice to give the choice to the consumer, to allow more competition.  If a platform were to offer interoperability as well, it would be ideal that the law would prohibit discrimination or terminating interoperability.  We see some platforms indeed offer other services and they make them interoperable.  One clear one is Facebook and Instagram, there are issues where you can see they are interoperating but why not open to others.  That is the key, why in their ecosystem but not elsewhere.  The key question for policymakers that is a complex one, and for us and all stakeholders involved is how to make sure that the end result will benefit consumers.  That is the key, you are talking about privacy, but also competition, and we think that there are other measures on top of interoperability that are needed to achieve the end result, on privacy, enforce the law, also there are extra rules that we need to get in place, for example, the privacy regulation that would be particularly important for avoiding tracking by default, if we manage to get there.  But also other tools, like prohibition of self referencing in certain scenarios, restrictions on when you install a browser that has a impact on consumer behavior, to say that interoperability can be a powerful tool to bring more competition but it is not the only one.  We need to make sure that it will work for consumers, and also other smaller businesses as well and not for the usual suspects.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: Sure.  The point you made, to hammer home, it's interesting to see companies such as Facebook essentially going for more interoperability between its services, showing that, because in different conversations we have heard concerns being raised saying that, if there is no demand from users or consumers to have this, then why would you mandate it?  But it kind of shows if one of the biggest companies actually increase at least within their own ecosystem more interoperability, that they have identified this kind of market demand.
Any other comments from the panelists on the question of privacy?  It is a very important one.
>> MICHAL WOZNIAK: I will add.  Ian, please go ahead.
>> IAN BROWN: Just to emphasize what Maryant was saying, that in Europe and many other countries, although not yet maybe given the new administration in the U.S., we have this comprehensive data protection regime.  It needs to be enforced, as Maryant said, but actually the European data protection authorities have already produced specific guidance to deal with the interoperability of national COVID contact tracing apps, and the privacy implications of that.  EU member states are enabling the national apps that they are giving to their citizens to run on their smart phones, to look out for signals from other people's smart phones running the app who later notify everyone that they have come into contact with if they have been diagnosed as positive with COVID, that will work crossborder.
I'm currently in Spain, I could go, well, not France actually but one of the other European member states participating in this, Italy is participating I think, Vittorio, and I could come back to Spain and if I then started showing symptoms of COVID, I had a test, I was positive, I notified my app, then the warnings would flow not just to other people in Spain that my phone had been near, but also to Italy.  The EU data protection authorities have published guidance on the privacy implications of this.  Although it's a specific scenario, I think those guidelines actually are useful to build on, and on top of the broad GDPR rules that are there.
I would emphasize, and this is something Vittorio and I have both had conversations with other people about, E‑mail is interoperable, and somehow we manage with E‑mail, E‑mail has not caused gigantic data protection breaches, it is not perfect when it comes to data protection but it is a comprehensive horizontal as policymakers call it set of data protection rules, it covers all situations, there is also in Europe a specific instrument, the E privacy directive that is being updated at the moment.  That updated E privacy regulation as it is planned to be might actually, if there are really specific issues that come up from required interoperability in a digital markets act, that could be somewhere that they could be addressed and similarly in other jurisdictions that are looking at reforming competition law, they also need to think about their data protection law at the same time.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: That is great.  Of course, you pointed to practical points here, but we will have reason to come back to the conversation around privacy and interoperability, because as you said, really important to keep that in mind and not treat any of these steps in isolation.
There was one question that has been discussed earlier and I would like to give it more attention, it's this link between let's say a potential law, potential digital markets act and provisions in there, to the world of standardization, and in fact, the production of the actual open standard through which things cannot interoperate.  I'm looking at, Annika and Vittorio to get back to you.  Vittorio, if you start, to explain the link a little between the law and how this could engage standards organizations, because I'm not sure if this is clear to everyone in attendance, and talk a little about the standardization system and how we can encourage to make sure that what we get at the end of the process is something that works.
>> VITTORIO BERTOLA: Sure.  You need technical standards to make interoperability happen.  These technical standards should be open and fully open and implementable without having to pay royalties or other conditions, otherwise this becomes a way to limit competition and possibility to reach the end of the market.  The discussion is you cannot force technical standards now because technology evolves at a quicker pace than the laws.  We will need to have some way of, having giving high level principles, validate objectives of the technical standards, at the same time keeping the standardization process of the Internet which are open and functioning, except that increasingly in recent years we are having problems with standards organizations that are so open that one of these big companies can send lots of people and dominate the conversation.  On the other hand, also there is the problem smaller companies do not have the money and resources to attend these processes.  In the end it's easier for bigger companies to take the lead.  There is a need to rethink partly this process, not completely because they are the base of the Internet but to bring global representation, companies that are not just from the U.S. and Silicon Valley, from all over the world, including developing countries, so increase the diversity in the standardization process, especially the global ones.  You have to find compromises between innovation and compatibility.  Of course you want to have a full set of compatible features that everyone supports.  At the same time, you want to leave the opportunity for each player to innovate and put new things on top of the common features and compete on that and bring innovation.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: Out of curiosity, Michal, you mentioned activity pub earlier, this is a standard, now I hope I have my facts right but I think it was developed in W3C, and here it was a process, maybe talk a little of what it is and how it was developed, and maybe what the potential future is of this standard, and what can we learn from activity pub when looking at interoperability in a broader sense.
>> MICHAL WOZNIAK: I wasn't deeply involved in the standardization of activity pub, but I was observing this process somewhat from the side.  It started off as just, I believe it was more than 50 different open source social networks, each of them had their own little precious protocol, and none of these protocols were compatible with each other.  You would have those tiny little islands of a few hundred, few thousand users, speaking one protocol, and then speaking another protocol, then speaking yet another protocol somewhere else, and eventually after years and years of talking between the developers, the developers finally got the idea that maybe it would make sense to have a single protocol, like all of this is open source, all of this is like open protocols, but these protocols differ.  They sat down and ironed out this protocol called activity pub.
I don't think we should dive too deep into the technical specifications, but the basic idea is that you have a in‑box and outbox, that is what it is.  Messages come to your in‑box, you read them, then you have a outbox where the messages are sent.  It's a simple mental model that lends itself very well to a lot of different kinds of use cases, like social networks but also IM or chat or E‑mail like services or anything that passes messages between users across different servers.
But I think the biggest take away is that this is a very difficult and arduous process, there will be a lot of people that have have strong opinions about this, and there will be several people involved that are not entirely honest about their real goals, especially if we are talking about creating a standard for the mainstream social networks like Facebook and Twitter.  They will immediately send their people, their technical people to join and try to subvert this process and try to change the protocol and try to pull their own way as much as possible.  But what I would say is, activity pub exists.  It is being used out in the field.  It has the functionality that users clearly want.
I would say just start there, instead of reinventing the wheel Twitter will try to reinvent the wheel, create a new open protocol.  This is definitely not the way to go.  I would say let's start with something that exists, that works, that has been implemented already in dozens of different software projects across thousands of instances with about 4 million users and those different instances, if need be, we can try to extend it and make it better and implement in features.  This is also somewhat related to the question of privacy, because I think as I said what makes sense is to take this step by step.  If we are talking about opening up and decentralizing social networks, we have to do it step by step.  We cannot do it wholesale.  This is too big of a problem and too big of a project.  I would say use activity pub for public time lines and then let's talk about private messages and talk about groups and talk about the more difficult complicated ‑‑
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: That sounds good.  We only have a few minutes left.  I wanted to get a quick round with the panelists, to the attendees who we are grateful are staying at least in Europe it's quite late, so the ones who are here, glad you joined.  But to go around to the panelists, if there is something you want to leave the attendees with in the context of the interoperability and platform, something to think about, something to keep their eyes open for, could really be anything.  Maybe, Maryant, do you want to start?
>> MARYANT FERNANDEZ PEREZ: Sure.  We have discussed my aspects.  I would emphasize the need to avoid a race to the bottom in terms of privacy protections, we talked about E‑mail and of course we can communicate by E‑mail easily and smoothly, if you use encryption, you cannot really talk to everyone, unless they have a key, and it's not that simple.  But not being simple doesn't mean it's not possible.  Just bear that in mind.  We need to bear in mind the difficulties and challenges in trying to make it right.  I look forward to the next steps.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: Great.  Vittorio, now you are a moderator but I throw you in as well because you know a bunch about this.
>> VITTORIO BERTOLA: I don't have much to say.  I think this is the way to go, let's try this.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: Okay.  We hear now that they allow for a extra five minutes.  You can extend it a little bit.  Annika, from your point of view, final points and we will see if there are unanswered questions, we can give them as well.
>> ANNIKA LINCK: Yes.  I want to say, what I already said before, that actually we want to have an open competitive digital environment, and here I found it very interesting to hear that Maryant for instance was saying similar things, interoperability can be one building block of this, but we also need other obligations and we need proper enforcement of potential rules that will be put in place by the digital markets act, so yeah.  I think there is not really a contradiction here so much between the vision we have as an association of small and medium sized enterprises, and what is good for consumers.  I'm happy also that this came out of this discussion, at least from my side.  Thank you.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: That is great.  Michal, have to pick one of the names, but Michal.
>> MICHAL WOZNIAK: Whatever works.  Somebody mentioned at the beginning of the panel, somebody mentioned the openness of algorithms, that we have not talked about this a lot, and I think this is a immensely important topic that we also have to keep in mind, the openness of recommendation algorithms and openness of time line creation algorithms and all of that.  Amazingly, the interesting thing, one of the many interesting things that I notice time and again on the fedverse is that for some reason there is a rush of users quitting Twitter and going to mast ta Don, joining the fedverse and a lot of those users are fascinated, they are relieved to see that the time line is chronological, like the simplest algorithm, this is a algorithm, right, take the tweet and put it there in the order that they come in.  It's the simplest one and after years of Twitter trying to improve the experience with their fancy AI driven time lines, turns out that the chronological time line is what users want.  Now here they have this kind of a choice, right?  So let's be mindful and remember about recommendation time line and other kind of algorithms at play that these should be also open and interoperable.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: Great.  Ian?
>> IAN BROWN: Two brief things, partly responding to the chat as well, Colin and others in the chat rightly said and, Annika said earlier as well actually, we need to think not just about what laws and regulations say, but also about practical support for SMEs and for Civil Society to get involved in standardization processes, because it's really important that we have a diversity of voices in those processes, because the standards that come out of them will reflect very strongly who had the biggest say in defining the standards, so that's my first point.
My second point is, I think actually this is something, this is a topic that really would be good for the IGF to take up and do more of, because it's something that many different jurisdiction are thinking about, it is not only, by a long way, the EU that is thinking about this, and it would be great for everyone if jurisdictions were thinking about this in similar ways.  They don't have to do everything identically and of course they won't.  But it would be helpful to the SMEs that would like to be able to export all around the world, to Civil Society, that are very focused on global human rights issues, and to users everywhere, if as far as possible, what we don't want is a European fedverse, an American fedverse, Australian fedverse and Indian fed verse that didn't interact with each other.  We want this like the Internet to be a global system ideally.
>> ASTOR NUMMELIN CARLBERG: On that point, and I think for the ones who are interested, here we have a quite EU focused discussion, but we have and you can find it on the IGF YouTube channel our discussion on these topics from more geographies than the EU, so we had that covered as well.  I think from our side, at Open Forum Europe, this is really the beginning of the conversation, early December we are expecting the digital markets act to be presented by the European Commission.  Then it's going to be important also in the process of the developing that legislation to have as many voices involved discussing all the issues and not keeping them in isolation.
I hope or I'm sure that this is not the last Forum like this that we are going to host.  And in the beginning of next year we are going to have at least a European law that we can discuss the nitty‑gritty of.  Then hopefully we can build on the kind of attendance that we had here today from all across the world, because there are a lot of lessons out there that are going to be important for the EU to learn when they develop this legislation as well.
So before I end here, I want to make sure that I do ask Vincent from the UN who helped us with this told me to do and that is to encourage you all to leave feedback in the built in system.  I hope that is all I had to say.  I haven't seen this feedback version but when you find it, use it.
With that I would like to thank all the panelists very much from Open Forum Europe, this was a very nice and interesting discussion, and I think a start of many more discussions to come.  Thank you all of you, and have a nice evening or day or morning or whatever time it is in the world where you are at.  Bye, everyone.
>> Thank you, bye‑bye.
>> Thank you.
>> Bye.
>> Thanks so much, bye‑bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-11-%E2%80%93-ws326-the-promises-and-perils-of-satellite-internet^^

 
  >> PETER MICEK: Let's get this on the road. 
    Eleanor, are we live? 
   >> Eleanor: Yes. Livestreaming has already started. 
   >> PETER MICEK: Okay. Thanks. 
   >> Eleanor: You're welcome. 
   >> PETER MICEK: Okay. Welcome, everyone, to the Internet Governance Forum 2020. I want to thank you for joining us here in this forum, just before the end of the big party. I want to thank the organizers of this ambitious virtual convening. I think this year we're really showing the power of the Internet and our dependence on it. 
    We're happy to convene this panel on The Promises and Perils of Satellite Internet. 
    We all use satellite services. They are essential to delivering location data, mapping your daily run and bike ride and predicting whether it will rain this weekend may depend on satellites already as well as the delivery of television and global news channels that we all depend on. 
    Satellite imaging also tracks everything from deforestation migration to military invasion and seeing sites of atrocities. We saw Amnesty International did so last week in Ethiopia with their report based on satellite‑Internet pictures. 
    Satellite‑based Internet services have been a dream since, at least, the 1990s. It's been too slow for mass uptake. 
    So it has not helped bridge digital divides or expand connectivity to what is offline. 
    The world will not reach the sustainable developmental goals subtarget 9C and connect all those in least‑developed countries to the Internet by 2020. We have about six weeks. 
    However, we're now seeing the launch of thousands of small low‑Earth satellites with the intent of bringing faster Internet service to new places. The trend will continue as billionaires race to launch 50,000 new satellites this decade. It's time to take satellite‑Internet services more seriously and understand how they may impact human rights, peace and conflict, the environment and development. 
    To do so, we have a diverse panel today with a wide range of experience. 
    I think that satellite‑Internet providers and regulators alike should consider the counsel of this panel of diverse experts as you develop business and regulatory models. 
    I will turn to Felicia Anthonio who is going to set the stage. She's going to tell us about the obstacles of connectivity from her perspective. Then we'll go to a presentation by Larry Press so we have a base of knowledge regarding what these services are. 
    Felicia, what is keeping people offline and what is disrupting access in 2020? 
   >> Felicia Anthonio: Thank you so much, Peter, for organizing this session. It's very timely and important given the situations in which we find ourselves today. 2020 has thrust this upon us, and one key thing you mentioned in your opening remarks is the fact that the importance of the Internet (?) And at the height, governments implemented lockdown measures to control the virus and to ensure people had access to life‑saving information as well as education and businesses all moved online. 
    This wouldn't have been possible if we didn't have this important tool called the Internet and digital communication platforms. 
    So, as the effects of COVID‑19 on our daily lives lengthens, governments' regional and international access continue to stress the importance of the Internet and there's a need to transfer safeguards to make sure more and more people are connected globally. 
    Despite these efforts, we've seen that over 3.8 billion of the world's population are yet to get online. While many of those who are managing to get online struggle to stay connected due to expensive data plans, poor and slow service, and government‑funded Internet shutdowns. 
    As you mentioned, we are far from reaching the goal ‑‑ the SDG subgoal nine that seeks to ensure that everyone is connected everywhere by 2020, since we have just six weeks to end the year. 
    Then there's some more hope. As an enabler of other rights, including the rights of freedom of expression to access information, freedom of opinion and expression, the Internet must continue to be at the center stage of combatting this pandemic. 
    And then, also, the importance of the Internet is further highlighted in SD17, which acknowledges that innovative technology development and reliable data (?) To reach the goals and (?) Will best serve people in developing countries who need it most. 
    However, as I've indicated, as we all struggle to get everyone connected, some governments are actively hindering these efforts bier implementing repressive measures such as hacking surveillance and digital identity programs to draw back these efforts and further develop the divide across the globe. 
    For instance, despite the impacts of ‑‑ devastating impacts on shutdowns on human rights, businesses, economies, the coalition ‑‑ 
      (Audio is distorted) 
   >> Felicia Anthonio: ‑‑ Internet shutdowns are increasing across the globe. They're the lasting longer, and more and more people are being affected. They're used to target minority groups. 213 incidents were recorded in different countries. 
    Recently, we've seen in this year that shutdowns that began in 2019 are still ongoing while governments in countries like Ethiopia, (?), and Belarus have shut down the Internet this year during elections or during protests. 
    And so most of the justifications of the governments that have disrupted the communication devices are normally given as the need to ensure national security, but, in actual sense, shutdowns have implications on human rights and the other aspects of people's lives. 
    Also, with the outbreak of the COVID‑19 pandemic, there's also been the introduction of contact tracing applications and data‑driven interventions to contain the spread of the virus. Unfortunately, some of these measures have increased surveillance on human rights and (?) Of people's personal data. 
    Also, the lack of access disproportionately affects at‑risk and underserved communities such as women and people in racial and ethnic minority groups, rural and Indigenous populations, and people with disabilities. 
    Although the global connectivity by the end of 2020 is very unlikely to be achieved, we can strive to get the world connected by 2030. To do so, we must amplify our efforts with innovation in order to achieve that. 
    Governments must provide relevant infrastructure to ensure secure high‑quality and high‑speed connectivity, prioritize digital literary and improve structure in order to boost access. 
    A human rights (?) Satellite Internet may be the missing piece. Internet service providers may play a key role in this plan and have their responsibility to support more people to get online by providing quality and uninterrupted services. And, most importantly, implementing human‑centric business models across the globe. 
    Increasingly, we've seen that ISPs are becoming (?) Violating human rights of users as they continue to give into government demands to restrict these rights in countries where they operate. 
    As we explore how satellite Internet service providers can contribute to get more people online, it is also essential for us to do so while ensuring that people have access to open, security, and quality Internet without further endangering their rights that we are fighting for. 
    Let's make sure we do not recycle the very challenges we are currently having the ISPs, providing Internet connections to fiber optic and cable services, and it is crucial to advance are this while upholding and expanding human rights in the digital age. 
    It is my hope that the co‑panelists and experts in this sector will be able to throw more light on this subject and convince civil society that satellite services could contribute significantly to bring more people online in safe and effective manner because one thing is certain. What we do today to ensure an open and accessible Internet, including the proliferation of satellite services, will contribute to a digital tomorrow where connectivity won't be a discussion topic. It will be a guarantee. 
    So I'm hoping to see how we delve into this conversation in how satellites can connect more and more people and even possibly helping people that find themselves in countries where the Internet is being disrupted, how it's enabled them during the disruptions. 
    Thank you. 
   >> PETER MICEK: Thank you so much, Felicia. I think you really laid out the gauntlet there for what we expect. 
    We have questions coming up in the chat. I think it's time to throw the presentation to Larry Press regarding where things are going. 
    Please share. 
   >> LARRY PRESS: Okeydokey. 
   >> PETER MICEK: Larry is professor emeritus at California State University, Dominguez Hills. 
   >> LARRY PRESS: Can you guys see the slides? 
   >> PETER MICEK: Yes. 
   >> LARRY PRESS: Okay. Yeah. I'm just going to give a really quick overview of the whole field, what's going on with these low‑Earth orbit satellites, LEO, as far as the Internet goes. I will run really fast through this. We can come back to it in the discussion. If anybody wants, I have an annotated version of this presentation which I can just send you. You can send my email there. Just request it. 
    Okeydokey. These are the five topics. I'm doing five slides, five topics. 
    Orbit characteristics is the first one. We'll end up talking about the role of the U.N. at the end. 
    Okay. So what are these low‑Earth orbiting satellites? What you're used to today, if you have Internet connectivity with a satellite is what is shown down here, geostationary satellite. Geostationary satellite has some problems, and it has some advantages. 
    As you can see, the altitude of a geostationary is 22,000 miles whereas these lower satellites are often well under 1,200 miles. There's some good news and bad news with that. The big advantages is that the orbit time, the time it takes to go around the Earth is 24 hours. What that means is the satellite appears to be fixed in the sky from any point on Earth. That's got two really nice advantages. It means that there's a large footprint for the satellite. It can see a big portion of the Earth at any one time. Another one is that the terminal is simple. $50 terminal can be bolted to your roof or pole once, and it never has to move. That's the good news. 
    The bad news is this column here, latency. It's slow. To get a packet of data from Earth up to the satellite or from the satellite back down to Earth takes about a quarter of a second. That's difficult for some applications. 
    Low‑Earth orbit satellites, that's what we're talking about today, their latency is only maybe 20, 25 milliseconds. The orbital time is two hours, and so forth. 
    The key thing about this latency is that that makes it possible to do interactive applications, the kind of thing we're doing now. If we were trying to do a Zoom conference and I was on a geostationary satellite, the performance would be patchy. It wouldn't be smooth and fluid, the way this is. Even things like web surfing are interactive. It turns out when you get a web page, it's not just one transition but many, many transactions back and forth between the client and the server to get the data and video and whatnot. That's nice. 
    The bad news is the footprint is small. The big one is the orbit time is two hours, depending on exactly how high it is. That means the satellite, from a given point on Earth, will be visible and then move over the horizon and disappear. 
    It has to be visible and in a fraction, switch from one satellite to another when it disappears. 
    So here is kind of what's happening today in LEO satellites, with a little bit of historical context. Just to throw this in, the whole idea of using satellites for communication was invented in 1945 by a science fiction writer, Arthur C. Clarke. Maybe you've seen some of his movies like 2001: A Space Odyssey. He came up with the idea that a geostationary satellite could be used for communication just after the war. 
    In the early 1990s, early 2000s, Teledesic tried to do a low‑Earth orbit satellite constellation. You can kind of see this animation here. It didn't work. They only planned to do 840 satellites, but by 2002, they were broke. They had big money behind them: Bill Gates, a Saudi prince, and a mobile phone entrepreneur. 
    A lot of times, people say, Oh, this didn't work for Teledesic. Maybe it won't work today. 
    You can guess the rocket technology, the electronics technology, and, more importantly, the market is very different today than it was in the 1990s. 
    So today, the industry, they're kind of half a dozen or so players that are actively trying to do LEO satellite constellations. Let me say a quick word about each one. SpaceX is probably the best known. Elon Musk is a well‑known guy, the head of SpaceX. They have a big lead right now this technology. They're the only company that can reuse the rockets that they use to launch satellites. They have big rockets. They can launch a lot of satellites. They're really effective at the manufacturer satellites. And they are the only one of these companies that's serving anybody now. They call it a beta test, but they are offering service in the northern United States and have plans to expand soon to the southern Canada and, following that, will be Germany and the rest of the world. 
    So they have a big lead, but it's not all over. OneWeb is a company that, like SpaceX, wants to go after the end user as well as other markets. They went bankrupt about a year ago. They reorganized and have come out of bankruptcy. They're now owned primarily by the UK government and by a large Indian Internet service provider that has clients in parts of Asia and Africa as well. They're well‑positioned in that sense in that they have good in‑roads into the market. 
    They are also the only other one that has launched what will be production satellites. 
    Telesat is a Canadian company. They're not going to focus it first on the home user. They're going to focus on things like mobile back call and enterprise and larger customers, Wi‑Fi hotspots in communities. 
    They have a nice advantage in that they are a project of a company that has a very large geostationary satellite business right now. They've recently got funding from the Canadian government to help them provide rural connectivity in Canada. 
    The next, Hongyun and (?) ‑‑ I'm not sure if I'm pronouncing it right. They're Chinese. They're late to the party, but they have all the resources and technical resources of the Chinese government behind them. The real political advantage is that the world is kind of bifurcating a little bit. The splinternet. They're trying to expand rapidly around the world. 
    Last but not least, Kuiper. It's funded by Jeff Bezos. He's committed to put up 10 billion there are to make it work. He, again, not only do they have money, but they have the advantage of being able to have access to Amazon's ground infrastructure and all their data centers and data services. So even though SpaceX is way ahead today, I think it's safe to say that if this works out, these are the very early days, and there will be room for all of these. 
    Moving on, just say real quickly something about the potential markets. The one that I think we're focusing on maybe today, which gets the most kind of press is homes, individual users, maybe a small business, people that just have an end‑user terminal. 
    There are other markets that are less price sensitive and that all these companies are very much thinking of connecting ships at sea, putting down Wi‑Fi hotspots in rural areas, connecting to airplanes as they're flying, connecting mobile phone stations out in rural areas, connecting enterprises. You know, sometimes really fast connectivity, community centers, government, and so on. It goes on and on. 
    The picture here is a Microsoft mobile data center. What that is something that can be put on the back of a truck and just plunked down anywhere, and as long as they can get power to it, the reason that it kind of fits into this satellite picture is that SpaceX just did a deal with Microsoft where they are going to be providing Internet connectivity to Microsoft's Azure network into portable ground stations like this. So they will be able to set up a data center anywhere in very short order. 
    Challenges, okay. This thing is not a slam dunk. Elon Musk even says his goal is to not go bankrupt. 
    The first one I put there is the most interesting, maybe. Finding the most viable business model. Because the fixed costs are so high for an Internet constellation and the cost of signing up and serving a customer is very low, I think it's going to turn out that there are a lot of unknowns, but I think almost for sure there will be variable prices in different regions. That is good news. That says, in essence, the more affluent countries are going to pay more. This is going to be good for ‑‑ or there's attempt to heal the digital divide. 
    Going down the list of technical factors ‑‑ excuse me. I have a frog in my throat. One factor ‑‑ one technical thing that has to be overcome is the cost of the user terminals. Remember, I said they're really complex. They have to be in constant motion and constantly switch. SpaceX, in their initial beta tests, are charging 500 bucks for the terminal, but they're losing money doing that. The cost of bringing ‑‑ the low‑cost terminals are a technical barrier that has to be overcome. 
    I think it will be with mass production and improved technology. Right now, the second one, satellite, communication links, right now, the satellites cannot communicate amongst themselves. SpaceX is definitely committed to developing ‑‑ to adding that feature to their future satellites. That will have a really nice effect. It will both lower latency. It will lower the need for ground station for terrestrial infrastructure. 
    So I think that's technical. I think it will be overcome. The reflected light mitigation has to do with astronomers complaining about the light getting in the way. That is being dealt with the astronomy community. 
    How do you keep it from interfering with satellites above and below it? Again, there's a political aspect of it. The IGU is very much, you know, in the center of that, but it's a technical problem. 
    Avoiding collisions is a technical problem and a little bit political. That's why I put it at the end. People have to track these satellites and predict where their orbits are going to go. If it looks like there's a confluence, a collision, possibly coming up, you have to have communications between the operators. You don't want one to do a maneuver that raises their satellite and another one that's in danger also raising their satellite at the same time. So that requires data sharing, and it requires collaboration in the mitigation and planning maneuvers to avoid collisions. That gets exacerbated by the fact that not only are we talking about these commercial applications, but governments are doing military applications, and they don't like to talk about the status, the orbits of their satellites. 
    All of that leads to the political things. I just quickly listed three. I think we heard a bunch in the previous talk, worrying about security and autocratic uses such as surveillance of people and censorship and whatnot. 
    The Chinese and American ‑‑ or western‑global influence battle that's going on right now is definitely a political problem. I think maybe, who knows with the Biden Administration, it will ease up a will believe. And then there may also be resistance of competition. 
    Okey doke. 
    The final slide I have is kind of self‑evident from the other. There has to be a role by the U.N. These satellites, these constellations are global infrastructure. They're not belonging to any nation and certainly not to any private company like Amazon or SpaceX. 
    You just saw there are half a dozen efforts to do LEO satellites. If you go a bit further and look at space in general, there are 68 nations that launch or own or operate satellites. These LEO broadband satellites are from the U.S., Canada. OneWeb is UK and India. Then a couple from China. Though, I think China, those two may be merged into one, but right now they are two. 
    So we need global collaboration. We need laws, standards, regulation. I don't know. We've managed to pull it off on the high seas. Hopefully, we'll pull it off in space as well. 
    And that's what I have. 
   >> PETER MICEK: Thank you so much, Larry. Yeah, as you said, you will make that presentation, those slides available, which is great. That's your email address. 
   >> LARRY PRESS: The slides are annotated. They have a lot of notes underneath. It's not just the pictures. 
   >> PETER MICEK: Slides and more. That's fantastic. I think we all learned a lot more. There's of which, if governments have a fairly limited role right now, they certainly have a number in of vested interests across the security, political, and commercial realms. 
    For that reason, I think it's appropriate that we go next to Jennifer Stein from the U.S. State Department. She's Special Advisor for Internet Freedom and Business and Human Rights in the Bureau of Democracy of Human Rights at the Department of Labor. 
    Can you tell us about the work you're doing around the security and privacy aspects of the Internet service and how it relates to this sector. 
   >> JENNIFER STEIN: Thank you so much. Thanks for the invitation to speak. While I don't pretend to be an expert, I recognize that there are possible links to surveillance capabilities associated with the technology. So here I'm going to talk a little bit about that. 
    I want to highlight the possibilities and invite you to think about human rights due diligence opportunities and challenges regarding government use and safeguards. 
    As we might be aware, the State Department released guide to ensure companies that their technology and services with surveillance capabilities are not used to violate or abuse human rights by government actors. 
    The guidance document has been a culmination of a two‑year project that has both involved civil society and industry colleagues. Too often we find that technologies with surveillance capabilities are misused by foreign governments to (?); harass human rights defenders; intimidate minority communities; discourage whistleblowers; kill free speech; target political, opponents, journalists, and lawyers; or, also, to interfere arbitrarily or unlawfully with privacy. 
      (Audio is distorted) 
   >> JENNIFER STEIN: We released the guidance document in an effort to help businesses concerned about their products or services being used. The guidance itself outlines a series of due diligence measures in line with the principles of guarding human rights and the OCED guidelines that products (?) Misused by governments to violate human rights. The guidance familiarizes business with human rights terminology, and then it offers them a greater understanding of the human rights concerns the U.S. Government may have with certain transactions. 
    The guidance also helps businesses conduct a human rights impact assessment on relevant products or services and then provides businesses with a series of considerations they should weigh prior to engaging in transactions with foreign governments. 
    In terms of applications of this guidance to satellite‑delivered Internet, the definition section of the guidance document makes clear that this technology fits within the purview of the document. I might add that this document is publicly available. I'm happy to share the link to the document in the chat function at the end of my presentation. 
    The document defines products or services with surveillance capabilities as those that can be marketed for or used with or without the authorization of the business to detect, monitor, intercept, collect, exploit, preserve, and/or to retain sensitive data regarding information or communication concerning individuals or groups. The definition also includes examples of products covered by the guidance. 
    So one such category of product is non‑cooperative location tracking. So that is clearly a primary capability of satellite‑delivered Internet. 
      (Audio is distorted) 
   >> JENNIFER STEIN: So, as satellite‑delivered Internet falls within the scope of the guidance, providers should heed its due diligence recommendations. I've outlined a couple of them. This would include undertaking a human rights impact assessment of satellite Internet as a technology. As noted, end user is inherently locatable in satellite's communication. 
    This is an important risk in oppressive countries that have the political will and ability to search out users for violating censorship laws, for example. 
      (Audio interference) 
   >> JENNIFER STEIN: Satellite‑delivered Internet companies will also need to do in‑depth due diligence on local laws, regulations, and implicate surveillance, including those involving data requests, of course. This will be particularly relevant important as the world transitions from expensive and rare satellite Internet to rare and ubiquitous Internet. Providers will need to put in place appropriate human rights safeguards to protect. 
    There are a few safeguards that stand out as especially relevant. This includes building human rights considerations into any contractual agreements with governments and put in place a sound grievance mechanism and develop robust reporting, including transparency under a data requests. 
    Assuming we have good time at tend, I'm also curious hear from participants in today's session what might be implemented (?) Could these companies come up with design features to (?) In location tracking or could they provide for data minimizations, protect against data requests? Just a few ideas. I will leave my comments here, but I'm more than happy to put these out for guidance and open for discussion. 
   >> PETER MICEK: Continue using the chat. There's great questions about encryption and how traffic might work over connections where bandwidth may be limited and many other great questions there. 
    Let's get to some of our last folks who will give remarks. I want to throw to Félix Blanc from Internet Sans Frontieres quickly to bring his perspective and some of the work he's done around submarine cable deployments and ways to protect human rights and safeguard the public interest that might be applicable, as Jenny said, to this sector. 
   >> FÉLIX BLANC: Thank you, Peter. Thank you for this invitation. 
    I'm working on cables for years now. Of course, the question is always will the satellites at some point overcome in some ways ‑‑ or come back ‑‑ and it's especially interesting because I work on a cable link between Europe and Latin America, and this cable was designed for (?) Observations and to enable the (?) In Europe to connect with the astronomic observatory in Chile. 
    Part of the capacity, which is 72 terabits will be (?) To academic research next year. It's a very important milestone in the history of submarine cable. 
    Ironically, when I look at all of these new adventures in space, I'm looking back to the submarine cables, they're important to astronomers and project a rise, a big, big, big ‑‑ like a prize result for astronomers. For an observatory, it's problematic. You will find a statement by International Astronomy Union about that. 
    I will give (?) To compare cables and satellite. In terms of regulation, it's similar. You have the U.N. ‑‑ International Convention on the Law of the Seas. For the marine cable, it's the basis on which (?) Is possible. It's the same with satellites, and the problem is that the U.S., for instance, we say that we cannot consider space as a (?) Because it's open for profit. If one (?) Is out, will your future government cooperate for new treaties from these low‑Earth orbit constellations. 
    The submarine cables are okay. If it's limited in terms of environment impact, but you have the possible debris in space. It's one of the major issues in case of accident, we cannot access the (?) To put new objects. Potentially, it's highly problematic. 
    In terms of costs, I find the figures that it's 48 billion since 1990, for the submarine cables, all cables, and now invested for only this year and next year is 7 billion and you have 10 billion for the standing projects only, not the others. 
    The question is what will be the total amounts of investments? So it's more of a question for the next few years. In terms of latency, there's a lot of investment because in the same ways as in the 19th century between London and Paris, you have (?) With the first telegraph. (?) It's supposed to be layered with laser beam and all the devices working from one point, for instance, let's say joining London, it's quicker with satellite than with submarine cables. 
    There's a lot of if. If all works correctly, technically, it will be quicker than (?) But in terms of capacity for the digital divide, will it be enough to cover all of the needs in terms of connectivity on data? Submarine cable in terabits, like (?) Facebook the question is would it be the same with the satellites? I have no ‑‑ in terms of said control, of course, as you know, Snowden revelation and other things, the submarine cables were used for surveillance in the past and still are. 
    We can have hope to have direct connectivity to (?) States in some case, but the problem is with mass projects. There's a lot of community networks or other projects that could use the space for their own project, for instance, and the question is: Will it be open for those kind of projects, given only five or six states can launch? 
    So that was my concluding remark. Of course, we have a lot of hope in that there are already projects with satellites (?) Censorship, but the question is given that would the concentrated (?) Submarine cables, is it possible to use space as a freedom launcher? 
   >> PETER MICEK: Thank you, Félix. I love space as a freedom launcher. 
    There are tough questions there that are in the chat. 
    You raised circumvention. Getting back to Felicia's introduction about these intentional disruptions of connectivity and whether satellite might provide a way around that sort of blocking. 
    So we do have a practitioner. Last but not least, Ahmad Ahmadian runs the service that effectively delivers access to information via satellite. 
    Ahmad, can you tell us about your service and what you're hearing? 
   >> AHMAD AHMADIAN: Definitely. Thank you for organizing this webinar. 
    As mentioned, the topic is satellite. One of the main issues is access to information, right, around the globe. There are places that they do not have access to Internet due to the government control or lack of connectivity or broadband infrastructure. So NetFreedom Pioneers, I try to keep it short so we have time for Q&A. I see a lot of great questions to be answered. 
    At NetFreedom Pioneers, we realize after the government took more control of the Internet inside Iran by establishing, you know, national infrastructure, to have more control over Internet, and, in some instances, blocking access or websites or, you know, last year, right now, it's the anniversary of one of the longest Internet shutdowns, 10‑day shutdown, inside of Iran. 
    This is based on satellite, which has great advantages. One is the geostationary satellites, they can broadcast to anyone in the world without asking for permission from the governments. Of course, there are some complexities to that, but if I could get to the core technology we developed, I do have this presentation, if everyone can see it. 
    So, as you can see in this technology, we basically utilize the satellites, the TV signals, that could be broadcasted or any digital transfer. We bundle with activists and publishers who is content is blocked in countries, this amounts to four to six gigabytes of content. We convert it to video stream. Once the content is embedded, that enables us to tap into infrastructures like (?) And in case of Iran satellite, we can broadcast it into TV screens at home. 
    People on their end can record the channel as if they are recording their favorite show to watch it later. Then they use their software, a very small software on Android devices or laptops. Anything you can store on your computer, you can embed it in your video screen, and people can record it. 
    The benefit of the satellite is it's accessible by everyone. Conclude not be censored. Of course, the governments are utilizing some jamming techniques to jam the signal and interfere with the broadcasting, but, still, we've been able to have this built‑in data and recovery mechanism that recovers lost files. 
    Our coverage is over Iran. The main audience in Iran. The coverage extends to east Asia. Many people, especially in developing countries, they use satellite to watch TV. They are able to tune into this channel and get files without having access to Internet structure. In remote areas, they can get the files. 
    In case of refugee conferences, emergency responses, and bypassing censorship in remote areas. Data casting is becoming one solution to bridge the digital divide during the pandemic. They're utilizing the casting over DTT or satellite broadcasting, but, yeah, we are looking forward to seeing the expansion of LEOs, satellite Internet, all around the world. 
    Hopefully, you know, that's going to be a freedom launch for us for the global connectivity, and no one can interfere, but it poses a lot of risks having the sudden accessibility to the content and fast expansion. One is misinformation. Groups like Access Now, ourselves, we're working to bring literature literacies and Internet space, but this poses a lot of risk, like the social expansions that pose risk, and the international governance didn't exist to have some compliances in place and mitigate this risk. 
    Civil society has a role to gear up for the fast expansion of the Internet in those areas and pushing the private companies, actually, to follow some human rights compliances and not regulate based on the developed countries like Iran or China and provide Internet access to those people. 
   >> PETER MICEK: Thank you so much. 
    It's interesting to have this while we acknowledge that a lot of lessons have been learned from the rollout of new platforms and services bringing a lot more people online. 
    I do, again, want to underscore Jenny's request of everyone to really think about how due diligence, human rights due diligence, environmental studies can impact all of these adverse effects. 
    Great. 
    Do any of the panelists have questions for each other? I would like to leave that open as we kind of reflect on what's being raised by the attendees. 
   >> AHMAD AHMADIAN: I would like to pose a question to Larry. 
    One of the channels we had in our video broadcasting was jamming, right, satellite jamming. Although, it's a violation of international laws, especially the ones of Cubans. They target the satellite in space. I wonder if it also applies to LEOs, and can the governments interfere with those Internet service operations by some similar techniques? Is it a violation of international laws or they can justify it by their sovereignty laws? 
   >> LARRY PRESS: Okay. Excuse me. I think the answer to that is that I don't know but I doubt whether SpaceX, for example, is going to get permission to broadcast ‑‑ not broadcast but to neuro cast to antennas and users in, let's say, Cuba. So what's going to happen there is, if Cuba is willing to accept them as a service provider, or Iran, is they will say, Okay. Anything that you have ‑‑ any traffic you have talking to people in our country, it has to go through a national gateway and be distributed terrestrially through our control. 
    I think the only thing that may be close to that is if you could sneak an end‑user terminal to a place near the border. Maybe you could have somebody on the other side of the border in a free nation, so to speak, maybe do a point‑to‑point to that one person. 
    I can't imagine any of those countries are going to serve a country that won't let them serve ‑‑ that wants them to go through a gateway. 
    That very much happened. OneWeb had a deal for distribution. They were pretty tight, before they went bankrupt in Russia. Then Russia changed their mind. They really wanted everything to go through a gateway. They say it's for national security purposes, but maybe not. 
   >> PETER MICEK: Thanks. I think you referred to the commercial interest of the existing telecom Companies. 
   >> LARRY PRESS: That happened. I think it was probably part of the OneWeb kerfuffle. 
   >> PETER MICEK: Any questions between panelists? 
   >> JENNIFER STEIN: Can I ask a question. I think I had posed this question, and I would just be interested in anyone ‑‑ maybe Larry or any others ‑‑ just thinking about the technology, are there human rights states that we can think of now in terms of encouraging satellite‑Internet companies to start to think about? I know I mentioned contractual safeguards, but are there other features we could think about encouraging? 
   >> LARRY PRESS: Email encryption, that's something that works. 
    You know, I was listening to your thing and trying to think if there are any essential differences in the context you're raising between cable or satellite, and I kind of ‑‑ my first thought is maybe not. 
    I think you said that the satellite operator knows the physical location of the antenna it's talking to. But, in order for the government to find out that physical location, the satellite operator has to cooperate with them. That's the same thing, you know, if somebody wants to know, you know, where a certain IP address was. The service provider has to cooperate. Maybe I'm wrong, but at first brush, it seems like getting SpaceX to reveal information is the same as getting AT&T to reveal information or are available company. 
    In the United States, it takes a court order. I'm not sure. Can anybody else think of ‑‑ why am I being shortsighted? 
   >> PETER MICEK: That's a great general question. I don't think we can answer that. Yeah, so that's a good point. We still may recreate a situation where a rather limited number of companies operating with a limited number of countries are in control of a lot of data around the world. 
   >> LARRY PRESS: Yeah. 
   >> PETER MICEK: So we have questions in the chat around Outer Space Treaty, around who is responsible for all this junk that's being put up. Is it the ITU or does the ITU just cooperate and put the responsibility on the launchers? 
   >> LARRY PRESS: Okay. I will say something about that. That is a big problem. When I went through my little issues or something, that was kind of the biggest one, I think. It's both technical and political. 
    For example, who is tracking these things and trying to avoid collisions? Yes, the United States government does that. They pretty much open in cooperating with others, though I am not at all clear that they are willing to include in the data sharing and whatnot that goes on, military satellites and that kind of thing. I don't know. 
    But, yeah, the U.S. Government, for example, tracks right now ‑‑ it just got improved, but objects that are in orbit down to 10 centimeters for a long time and just recently went on to smaller things. 
    That being said, I know of there's two companies ‑‑ two commercial companies, one that is already operations and one that is start‑up mode which will be providing similar services as the United States, private companies. 
    The one that's already operating is the ‑‑ I don't know, template. 
   >> PETER MICEK: I think we have to wrap here, unfortunately. 
   >> LARRY PRESS: Okay. The bottom line is a couple of private companies are coming online. The U.S. Government is doing something about it, but it doesn't work if everybody doesn't cooperate. The Chinese have to cooperate with the Americans, for example. 
   >> PETER MICEK: That's a great note. 
    I want to leave one last minute if any of the panelists wanted to offer voluntary commitments to further the goals of the IGF and specific to this session. Does anyone have any commitments that I wanted to make to put on the record or put charges to others. 
   >> LARRY PRESS: I'm willing to help. What do you need? 
   >> PETER MICEK: Great. That's an offer of cooperation. 
    For Access Now, Felicia probably plans to continue watching the sector and how it may impact humanitarian rights. 
    Anyone else? Can we get a head nod from the panelists? 
    Things, everyone, for joining. I learned a ton. There's a lot of questions in the chat about the political and the policy. That's what we see coming into the sector, and that's why we need the cooperation, I think, that Larry charged us with. 
    So I want to thank all the attendees for coming and thank Ahmad, Felicia, Larry, Félix, and Eleanor at the IGF staff for putting this on. 
   >> LARRY PRESS: Thank you for organizing it.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-12-%E2%80%93-bpf-cybersecurity^^

  
>> You can take a snapshot, a print screen of the session and use it later on while preparing the final report.  I have just started the streaming.  And just quickly looking at our list if for any ‑‑ for any other panelists who we are expecting.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: I think Apratim just joined and needs to be promoted.
>> Nope, I don't see this person yet.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: He just sent us a message.  A‑P‑R‑A‑T‑I‑M is the first name.
>> Yes, he has just joined.  I am promoting.  So we are still missing three people at least for what I see on my list.  Stephane and Isaac Morales.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Isaac Morales is in the attendees list.  As for Stephane and the others they will come in later in the discussion so I think we can actually get started without them and they can join when they're available.
>> About Isaac Morales, could you please repeat.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: He's actually Gerardo Isaac Morales and he needs upgrading. 
>> I see, okay.  I have promoted also this person.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Thank you.
>> You're welcome.  Enjoy your session.  Thank you.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Thank you very much.  Excellent. And I think we have everyone and everything ready to get started.  Thank you very much for joining this meeting of the Best Practices Forum on cybersecurity here on the last day of the Internet Governance Forum.  I was a lead expert for the group here.  And moving on to the next slide I wanted to share with you briefly the agenda for what we'll be discussing today.
The first ten minutes I'll give a brief introduction.  We'll then have some time for a presentation by one of our working groups within the Best Practices Forum around norms developing in cyber versus norms development in the real world.  20 minutes later, John Hering will present an analysis of new cybersecurity agreements that was performed as part of the work of the Best Practices Forum this year.  We'll have time for discussion and general Q&A and finally Markus Kummer will send us on our way and after that we'll take notes from the session, work on the final publication of the Best Practices Forum in the next few weeks on the IGF website for the BPF.
Moving on to the next slide, I'd like to frame a little bit what we did this year and actually the last years of the Best Practices Forum.  As a group we've been meeting regularly actually for quite a few years more.  But in the last three years specifically we started investigating the idea of culture norms and values in cybersecurity and started taking a close look at norms development mechanisms.
That initiative started in 2018.  Last year ‑‑ because the BPF ran in conjunction of the initiation of the new U.N. GTE and OEWG working groups, we had a much closer look at best practices related to operationalization of cyber norms and started analyzing stakeholder agreements for commonalities.  I think what was unique about the BPF was we didn't just look at norms that were being developed at an interstate level, but we actually also took a look at norms being developed in the private sector, within civil society, but spanned across more than one stakeholder group which is typically what makes them interesting for us to review and consider in the Internet Governance Forum.
This year we took a little bit of a wider approach and we started thinking about what we can learn from norms in global governance in completely different mechanisms than cybersecurity.  In many ways that idea actually came from input that was given at the OEWG meeting that included civil society, because it was clear that the understanding of what is a norm and how do norms work is not universal across the entire spectrum of all norms and actors. A working group within the BPF spent some time investigating a variety of different initiatives around cyber norms and looked for strengths and weaknesses and also specifically what made them succeed and what made them fail.  We hope we can take some of that knowledge and study it in the context of cyber norms.
Second, we initiated a work stream that particularly looked at new agreements in relation to international cybersecurity.  So the work that we did last year, they essentially took those same agreements, identified new ones that were released in the last year and deepened the investigation into those agreements.  They looked at things like what UNGE 2015 consensus norms were actually reflected in them or what new norms were introduced which were completely outside of that space.
Moving on to the next slide, you can see an overview of the different workstreams we have this year.  There was one that was really focused on ideas to put it simply, looking for inspiration from other mechanisms and applying that to cyber.  The lead for that work was Mallory Knodel who is also in the meeting today. There was a work stream that focused on more desk research related to existing agreements.  We also published a call for contributions to the entire Best Practices Forum mailing list as well as many different organizations that are involved in this space or have participated in the past and used all of that input to further that research.
Finally, we have one work stream that was focused on outreach.  That was led by Sheetal Kumar which engaged new stakeholders we could involve in the Best Practices Forum and could bring into the community to help us learn more about cyber norms and share those learnings with the wider community. The research team was led by John Hering, who will also be presenting in this meeting shortly.
Moving into the next slide, just really briefly again the agenda, we'll take a look at the output of the ideas work stream first.  Then we'll look at the research that was done this year and finally we'll wrap it up with discussion, hopefully analysis of new agreements and the discussion, we have a set of esteemed panelists on the panel whom John will introduce to all of you later that will be brought forward to feature some of their very unique perspectives and opinions of all the different areas.
Before we get started, I want to say a quick thanks to everyone who joined our meetings throughout the year who joined with ideas, who joined one of the work streams, who contributed to the two research papers that were published earlier this year and who are on this call at a very different hour to contribute and chair their ideas.  Thank you very much for joining.
With that I'll hand it off to Apratim and Anastasiya who are going to present us the outcome of the research they did on norms development in the real work.  Apratim and Anastasiya, over to you. 
>> APRATIM VIDYARTHI: I'm going to try and share my screen to make this easier on everything.  All right.  Can you guys see my screen?
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Yes, we can, thank you.
>> APRATIM VIDYARTHI: I'm coming to you from very cold Philadelphia today.  What I'm going to be talking about with Anastasiya are what cybersecurity policy making can learn from norms that have been formed outside of the cybersecurity sphere, specifically in global governance.
Before we get started what we need to talk about is the definition of norms and why they matter.  And I'll answer the second question first which is that given the nature of the internet as a decentralized entity that spans across geographic borders that has multistakeholders that aren't just nation states or civil society, it's really hard to govern.
So the multistakeholder model really forms the basis for norms.  What are norms?  There's an entire spectrum of things that we would consider norms.  Implicit norms are what Justice Potter Stewart would have said as I know it when I see it when he was describing explicit material in a case.  Explicit norms can be anything you can't really define but you can sort of understand.  Social contracts, guidelines for conduct. Then on the other hand, you have explicit norms.  These are really treaties, agreements, things that are codified into law and at the very extreme spectrum you have accepted international law that's really the bedrock of international conduct.
So what we found in our research is that norms that are successful have four really defining principles.  So they are concrete and specific, which means that they really set out some sort of behavior that followers understand.  They're framed in a context, so they don't just come out of nowhere. They come out in a specific problem and they're applied to that problem. They're propagated by leaders and norm entrepreneurs, so you really need either a strong state, a strong non‑state actor or some individual who is pushing those norms. Finally, they're promoted using incentives and socialization and persuasion.  IE the right kinds of tools.
So the framework for norm development is actually one of the norm forming process.  So what we saw in our research that's accepted in social science is that there's a four‑step process to the development of norms.  So norms often arise with an initial social process that comes from a politically engaged entity, for example.  That's where the idea of the norm comes about, so this forum is a really good example of that.
The adoption of the norm happens through a political actor or a transnational organization.  This is where the norm goes from the grassroots to the international sphere.  It's either spread by nongovernmental organizations or a state and then the norm is accepted by more states than one and by non‑state actors.  And this is really key, especially in Internet Governance because we need both states and non‑state actors to accept those norms in order for it to really impact how the internet functions.
And then, finally, the last step is the hardest, which is really the codification of the broad norm into a conventional and customary norm.  The reason that's the hardest is it requires agreement on what the norm is and oftentimes when the norm starts at the grassroot and is spread by different states and different actors it's really hard to agree on what that is.  Anastasiya?
>> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: Yes, we also tried to look a little bit deeper into sources for norm setting and trying to develop a list of what the sources might be.
The first one as identified are multilateral norm diplomacy and state driven efforts.  It would imply joint statements of states, proposals by states as well, exchange of use between states, publications, and understanding the best practices.  State led and state-initiated processes for example. It could be particular examples as public consultations organized by states for non‑state actors to share the understanding of norms and how to operationalize nonvoluntary norms.  As an example, the public consultation to solicit the use from the civil society.
The next category is subject matter, and particularly we analyze norm ‑‑ governments to agree on certain norms of behavior.  Or the Red Cross’ call to stop cyber attacks in the healthcare sector.  Both happened earlier this year.
The third and final group is industry‑led process.  Those efforts that aim to establish calls to governments to agree on certain norms of behavior.  For example, digital Geneva Convention, as well as establishing industry organizations based on participants' consensus around particular behavior.  Examples are a tech accord.
>> APRATIM VIDYARTHI: What I want to do next, I want to discuss some of the critical factors for success.  We sort of already covered these, but I wanted to go into a little bit more detail.
As I said, there are four critical factors for success.  The first one is context.  And what we're talking about is framing the problem the norm is aiming to solve.  This includes all the details, the platform, the organization, and the larger issue that the norm is aiming to provide a solution to.
The second critical factor is employing strong leaders and resources for norm development.  So leaders can be individuals, they can be states or nonprofits, nongovernment organizations, but really they're the ones who are going to be carrying that norm forward and they're going to be the ones who are pushing it.  The right leader will be able to network and provide connections and provide the right leverage and pressure for these norms to actually be practiced in real life.
The third element is ensuring the right elements of the norm.  So identity is targeting a group or a group of actors, and so identifying the group of actors to target is really important.  Because norms don't apply to everyone, they apply to specific subset of actors and that specificity and concreteness is really important.
The second element is behavior.  This is talking about the specific actions that the norm wants to change.  And then the third is propriety.  This is really what the norm is based off of.  Whether it's laws or treaties or social conventions, the norm has to be based off of some underlying conduct for it to really be effective. Finally, there is expectations, so setting the expectation for behavior through concreteness and specificity.  Norm that is broad is probably not going to be successful and so having the right boundaries of success is incredibly important.
Then the final factor for success is choosing the right tools of influence.  So the menu of tools that we have here are incentives, persuasion, and socialization.  Incentives are effective if they're consistently used in the long‑term.  It's basically the carrot approach.  The persuasion tool is the stick approach.  It's messaging and targeting and having the leader push those who are the subject of the norms to actually apply those norms and adhere to those norms. Finally there's socialization which is about creating a common language and building capacity and for the leader to lead by example in making the norm acceptable to those who are the target of the norm.
So we can take an example here.  Today we're seeing as we're in the middle of a global pandemic and sitting on Zoom that digital healthcare and medical infrastructure are a really important part of this pandemic and helping us really succeed and survive.  So the correct context in this example would be to promote a voluntary norm to protect this digital healthcare and medical infrastructure and perhaps create a standard of ensuring the security of that healthcare infrastructure.
So a strong leader in this case would probably be a group of U.N. member states within an OEWG as Maarten mentioned earlier.  Or it might be a state actor which has the requisite resources and expertise to promote that voluntary norm.
In terms of the details of concreteness and specificity, who does the norm govern?  This is really a question of what specifically we're talking about within digital healthcare.  Are we talking about the cybersecurity of healthcare records?  Are we talking about the protection of hospitals and other medical infrastructure?  So in the former case, the norm might govern companies like Apple and Google who have, for example, a contact tracing application process and interface.  If it's the latter, if it's protecting hospitals, we might need to target state actors to ensure that cyber attacks aren't affecting hospitals.
The second part of concreteness and specificity is what does the norm say some what is the behavior it's governing?  And the first example, if it's about protecting medical records, then the norm is trying to govern behavior of how those records are stored and kept, where they're kept.  If the norm is guarding cybersecurity for hospitals, it's governing offensive cybersecurity and ensuring that hospitals are safe.
And then what is the basis for norm promotion?  So is this grounded in some sort of international law about how cyber attacks are handled?  Is it some industry standard?  And then choosing the right tools of influence.  So the OEWG might call for national legislation and a private actor, such as Apple or Google, if they were propagating that then they might lead by example and lead that persuasion. We move on to the risk factors inducing failure and I'll pass it on to Anastasiya.
>> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: Thanks.  We're looking at what makes norms promotion successful.  We tried to identify what are the norm settings, as a result, the particular factors that impact the process.  First of all, the lack of clear outcomes that actually could be one of the traps that could lead to failure in norm promotion.
Lack of enforcement mechanisms.  Actually, mechanisms conformity or adherence to the norms.  This applies to usually international borders that often press norms without leverage other than modeling and persuasion.  The next items are too weak or too powerful leadership.  We try to also highlight a normative which is successful for norm development and leadership can be a crucial factor.  It may also break norms if it's in the interest of powerful leaders and benefits outweigh the costs of not adhering to norms.
And it's particularly common in cases where there's a lack of enforcement.  The next factor is lack of incentives for internalizing norms.  This might be another trap leading to failure in norms setting.  This happens when the prospective benefits of norm compliance do not outweigh the benefits of staying away from norm adherence.
Speaking about the particular examples or incentives, those incentives might be domestic demand or international legitimization and acceptance.  Actors follow norms because they want others think well of them and they want to think well of themselves.  Those could be critical.
Another factor is domestic balance of power or domestic legal institutions and domestic powers.  They play critical roles in a state's noncompliance with the norm or compliance with the norm, and for norm interpreters can be helpful to consider the balance of power within a particular state to frame the norm so that a particular state would follow the norm.
Finally, norms that are too specific or strict in wording might contain ‑‑ another common mistake that could lead to failure.  We mentioned earlier that the lack of some elements in the norms, particularly the entity, behavior, propriety makes it harder for entrepreneurs to garner attention.  However, sometimes imprecise norms ‑‑ particularly actors with different backgrounds and best to support the norm development process.
>> APRATIM VIDYARTHI: Next we'll talk about enforcing norms, Anastasiya, I'm going to hand this over to you as well.
>> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: Thanks.  We also looked at what mechanisms enforce norms.  We identified different scenarios that could be applied, first of all, supporting norm legislation and codification.  Some norms might appear first as a best practice but over time they can be legalized and become a part of the law.  And, therefore, cost for noncompliance with norms become risks of noncompliance with measures.
The voluntary norm in 2015 IG report which was implemented already in best practices such as first code of ethics and implementing industry best practices and this has appeared for the first time in the public consultation.  The disclosure hasn't been part of the directive framework before.
The next scenario could be crafting new norms onto existing institutions.  This in particular allows to create legitimacy for norm entrepreneurs and thus make the norms more attractive for them.  Favoring fragmentation and cross pollination of cyber norms efforts is another scenario, especially if it is coupled with multistakeholder engagement.  Fragmentation and different initiatives can help address different actors and focused on a relatively small group of stakeholders.  Norms can be even more efficient in changing behavior and creating new collective expectations. So the norm initiatives addressing needs and interest appear, the more incentive and motivations are created for active participation of different stakeholders and norm development.
Creating network sanctions can be another scenario.  It could be effective in not only making particular actors follow norms, but also exerting pressure on actors to facilitate domestic reforms.  That could be propriety for the actor to follow a norm.
Applying diplomatic sanctions.  They become more and more ‑‑ one of the I would say popular ways of diplomatic pressure to other states to actually follow the norms and they use cyber diplomacy as a key example of this enforcement mechanisms. However, we identified in a paper it's yet to be seen if these mechanisms are, indeed, effective in practice because that option of sanctions usually causes costs on both sides.  The sanction and sanctioning states.  Therefore, to make the punishment work, incentives should be provided to sanctioning states as well.
Finally, targeting the reputation and self‑esteem of norm breakers is one of the scenarios to enforce norms.  Reputational benefits is one of the incentives for norm compliance can be targeted and this may include public criticism, refusal of other states to enter into future agreements with the norm breakers or keeping current agreements or withdrawal of a member from international organizations and closed groups.
>> APRATIM VIDYARTHI: Thanks.  The last thing we'll discuss is case studies.  Really how these frameworks and factors for success work in some other fields that we've seen.
The first case study we looked at are global and nuclear norms, which are particularly close to my heart because I studied nuclear engineering for a really long time.  What we're talking about here is the entire norm of non‑proliferation, of ensuring that uranium is not enriched too highly.  The strengths are that they follow the standard norm process.  There were social processes that initiated these norms.  They were propagated by civil society and governments and are now effectively international law that's widely accepted.
One of the strengths is that they're concrete norms.  There are specific rules that govern how much uranium a country is allowed to have.  For example, the kind of reporting that they need to do to the IAEA, et cetera.  And the international acceptance happened through persuasion and enforcement.  There was a lot of international pressure by countries like the United States and then there are a lot of incentive as well such as access to new technology.
However, what we do see is that there are some weaknesses, right.  There are cumbersome regulations that stifle innovation in a sense.  There's a lot of reporting that's required.  There's a lot of risk adverse behavior that prevents countries from developing new nuclear technologies that might be much better in terms of energy efficiency, for example, and in terms of environmental friendliness but countries are not willing to go through the entire process and be ‑‑ risk the look of looking like a proliferator. Political disputes become tied to these norms because they're so tied to a valuable source of energy.  So the context framing in today's world wasn't necessarily correct but at the same time we do see that countries that don't follow these norms are punished by the global community.
The norm of diplomatic privilege is also one that has followed the standard process of norm development.  So there were original social customs more than 200 years ago of diplomatic privilege and those have been propagated through intergovernmental actors and through states and to effectively becoming the Vienna Convention on diplomatic privilege.  Those social customs have been adopted into codified norms and there is reciprocity inherent in the norm framework.
However, what we do see is that the norms of diplomatic privilege are pretty narrow.  They avoid controversial topics, which is sort of the reason that we have this widely accepted international norm.  They're also ripe for abuse because these standards have been for so long accepted as normal.  There are very few ways of enforcing those standards in novel and creative ways.
In terms of the Sullivan Principles of employment practices, these were practices that were signed by some American countries during apartheid.  They had buy in from corporate actors, but on the other hand they were very broad principles.  And they weren't widely accepted because they were in an opt in format but also there is no real norm leader that propagated these principles on a global level. But the real weakness came from the fact that there were no costs for violating these principles so there was no real enforcement mechanism for getting countries or getting companies to buy into this.  In fact, companies could be certified in the Sullivan Principles and continue to do the things that they promised not to do, and no one would have any ability to sort of punish those companies.
The final case study we see is the World Bank guidelines on the treatment of FDI.  This is really interesting because it's a guideline and it's a model for national laws to treat foreign direct investment.  It's not really a codified international law, but the details of these guidelines are often reflected in the codified law of state actors. Now, obviously the weaknesses as I said, these are nonbinding and there's no enforcement mechanism.  But despite that we see this has been pretty successful in shaping the codified law of states.
Finally, I'm going to pass it on to Anastasiya for our last couple slides on lessons learned.
>> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: The key lessons learned we outlined in the paper.  There are certain things to consider to facilitate norm development.  We talk about the context, we talk about the norm entrepreneurs, so these are important ingredients to keep in mind.
Failures are inevitable and they can become the basis for success as well.  It's necessarily to keep in mind and get prepared.  We cannot predict the entire norm development process.  There can be many factors to consider.  But they create opportunities for further successful efforts.
Final lesson learned is norm development even without results creates socialization.  Norm promotion can fail if there is no readiness to process norms.  It's important to consider norm development as a process, which is crucial to preparing the entire environment. Concluding, we received very interesting feedback to the paper and tried to summarize key questions that we learned.  You may see them on the slides.  First of all, one of the questions, what is the difference between norms and international law.  How those two concepts correlate and how they are actually different.
The next very interesting feedback is that perhaps we could be ‑‑ go a little bit deeper to analyze more targeted and substantial recommendations to policy makers, industries, civil society, et cetera.  Finally, confidence building measures in norms development.  How those two concepts could be further incorporated into norms development.  Thank you very much for your attention.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Thank you very much.  Thanks to Anastasiya and Apratim who worked on this research together with our corresponding paper and with Mallory Knodel as well who led the initiative.  I would recommend everyone who enjoyed the presentation to look at the first research paper that the BPF published earlier this year, which is available from our website.  And we have shared the link to that page in the chat as well so you can find it there.
Next up we will go over to John Hering who will share the work that was done on analysis of cybersecurity agreements and will lead a brief discussion on that topic as well.  John, over to you.
>> JOHN HERING: Thank you so much, Maarten.  Thank you to you and Markus and Ben and Wim for your coordination of the work of the best practice forum this year.  As well as to all the other collaborators and all of the working groups in particular on the one that put together this analysis of cybersecurity agreements.
If you wouldn't mind going to the next slide there, Wim.  Thank you.  So to give a bit of framing as was said at the outset, a lot of this work builds on ‑‑ in particular the last two or three years of the work of the best practice forum in discussing how cyber norms are developing and how they're being implemented and taken up across different stakeholder groups.
This portion of our work, this second report, builds very directly on the work of the 2019 best practice forum on cybersecurity, which if you're familiar with went through a list of cybersecurity international agreements and sought to identify areas of overlapping principles to sort of start to see where consensus was being built.
We built on that in two important ways this year.  First, we revisited the list of agreements we had to include developments from the past year that would fit into our scope.  Certainly there's been some very important developments there, including the launch of the global commission for stability of cyberspace six critical norms, the contract for the web which I believe was launched at IGF 2019 last year and a few others that were included that are featured at the bottom.
Similar to last year, all of the agreements that were included in our analysis needed to describe specific commitments or recommendations for their signatories or supporters, as some agreements didn't necessarily have signatories, including different stakeholder groups that supported it at different levels.  They needed to aim to improve the overall state of cybersecurity.  That needed to be their objective and needed to be international and involve either governments or significant operators of different parts of the online infrastructure so that we were including people who had opportunities to be influential and to sort of guide norms development.
But beyond that, they could certainly be within a stakeholder group between different governments, they could be multistakeholder in nature or even agreements within stakeholder groups that are nongovernmental, such as the charter of trust or the cybersecurity tech accord that are just between industry groups.
The big new element this year was we decided to exclusively focus on agreements that included voluntary nonbinding norms for cybersecurity.  And excluding in our analysis anything that was going to be a legally binding commitment in that the implementation of those principles are just very different when there are requirements by law as opposed to actual norms.  Then, Wim, if you would go to the next slide, which is not meant to give anyone a headache but just to show a quick heat map of where things lined up in the analysis that was performed by different BPF experts.
Down the left side of the screen there are the different 22 agreements that are included in the analysis.  And then on the right they're lined up with which norms they reflect based on the 11 norms of the U.N. group of governmental experts based on their 2015 report on expectations for responsible behavior in cyberspace.  We chose to focus on those 11 norms as the U.N. first committee has a unique responsibility to peace and security challenges as being the most global multilateral norm setting body and seeing the degree to which previously or subsequently those norms have continued to be strengthened or reinforced.  You can see some have been more than others.
These norms themselves were simplified a bit so they could be inclusive of other stakeholder groups and not exclusive to state actors but making sure the spirit of the norm itself was captured in the analysis.  What's perhaps a little bit less of a headache to look at is the next slide.  This gives you a breakdown of the frequency by which we were seeing those different 11 norms of the U.N. GGE reflected to various degrees in different agreements that were included in the analysis of those 22. You can see the most frequently included ones was the commitment to cooperate with states for greater stability and some recognition of human rights in the agreements themselves were the most commonly reflected principles in other agreements.  And the least commonly reflected one was a commitment to prevent wrongful use within one's own territory.
That's we are sort of landed in terms of analysis itself.  I would encourage you to read the further report and give us additional feedback.  But if you'd move to the next slide, we can move towards a broader discussion here.  We have issued a call for contributions based on whether or not your organization is a signatory, the projects and programs you have and the other questions that are listed here.  If you would proceed further Wim.
We received responses from ASPI, from East West Institute and from Professor Duncan Hollis.  I believe we'll pivot a bit to opening a discussion with our panel.  I'll start with a few questions here that will build off the work that we've done.  In the interest of time I'll provide a quick introduction for the wonderful, esteemed panel that we have.  Please do correct me if I mispronounce a name or anything else in introducing each of you.
First we have Stephane Duguin.  He's spent the past two decades analyzing our technology that has been weaponized.  He's investigated the use of disruptive technology such as AI in the context of counterterrorism, cybercrime and other cyber operations and cyberthreats.  We have Sherif Hashem, a visiting professor of computer information sciences.  He was an expert member of the GGE that we've been discussing.
We have Pablo Hinojosa, we have Louise Marie Hurel, who is a researcher in cybersecurity.  We have Moliehi Makumane from the government of South Africa where she's been with the South African Foreign Ministry for nine years, currently special advisor to the South Africa U.N. GGE and was previously the head delegation for the U.N. UEWG.  We have Isaac Morales from the government of Mexico, the coordinator of multidimensional security, the Ministry Of Foreign Affairs in Mexico.  And among his duties he's in charge of multilateral negotiations on cybersecurity including as a member of the U.N. group of governmental experts.  Finally, we have Aude Gery.  She has done her Ph.D. thesis on international law and cyber weapons counterproliferation focusing on legal problems. It's an impressive panel. 
Perhaps sticking with Aude, would you mind telling us a bit how the international legal perspective applies to the analysis of cybersecurity agreements and how international law factors into these conversations?
>> AUDE GERY: Thank you, John, and thank you for the invitation to this panel.
First, I want to say that I really found the paper and both papers very, very interesting.  Because although they were not focused on the relationship between norms and international law, they did not omit it.  And it was quite interesting, and I liked it because I think very often we tend to think about norms, and especially in the policy debate, as something that is very and distinct from international law.
I'm going to be quick on that, but if norms are nonbinding I don't think they should be qualified as outside of the boundaries of the law and of international law in comparison to the legal rules that would be the only binding ones.  Because whether binding or nonbinding, both norms are part of the so‑called I would say normative gradation between law and lawlessness.  The nonbinding provisions contribute to the existing interpretations of international law.  For example, if you take the GCS's norm on offensive operations by private actors, that could be one way to implement the obligation, which is a binding obligation in international law.
And nonbinding norms can also become after ‑‑ it was very well explained in Anastasiya's paper, for example.  They can become either codified or customary obligations.  And in that sense, space is a very good example of nonbinding resolutions becoming binding after some time.  So I think there is a very close relationship between the two.
In the GG report, the 2015 GG report, they tend to be separated and very distinct.  And in some ways, it can be dangerous because if you think there is no relationship between the two, you will say, well, their norms are nonbinding.  And if they integrate international law obligations, you may think that you may break the norm, there is no legal consequences to the evaluation of the norm.  But there is ‑‑ since it is one way to implement an international law obligation, it is a violation of international law. So I think we should be very careful that even if they are nonbinding, they have some kind of relationship with international law.
>> JOHN HERING: Had to come off mute.  Thank you so much.  Pivoting to the broader group of panelists we have and the respective organizations they're representing, I wanted to kick off with providing an opportunity for each of you to highlight whether your organization is a signatory to or has contributed to any of the cybersecurity agreements that we've included in this review, whether they're multilateral or multistakeholder in nature or within a particular stakeholder group.  Which of these agreements have you joined onto and what might have been the motivation in doing so?  I'm happy to call on someone or if someone has a strong feeling to jump in.  Stephane, I might go to you, first.
>> STEPHANE DUGUIN: Thanks.  It's a great initiative when it comes to engagement across the quarters and across the issues.  Recently for example we've been joined by an organization that would ‑‑ would not think about joining international groups that we focused on the cyber issues.  So quite interesting for sure, but a potential there.
We also signed a call to governments earlier this year, to nine governments and made a change.  ICRC that we have obligation when it comes to ‑‑ of course not attacking the healthcare, that's quite obvious.  Protecting the healthcare from making sure that resources are there but also not harboring criminal groups knowingly. 
>> LOUISE MARIE HUREL: Yeah.  Hi, everyone, can you hear me okay?  Yeah?  Great.
So yeah, as John has kindly introduced me, I'm a researcher at the cybersecurity and digital liberties area.  For those of you who don't know, I’ll give a background of what Igarape is, we're focused on integrating agendas on security, justice and development.  Cybersecurity is part of that.
I'm saying this because we've been working with cybersecurity governance at the national, regional and international level for some time.  And we were one of the early signatories of the Paris call.  And one of the motivations was really to kind of see a document, international kind of ‑‑ a way of symbolizing multistakeholder and multistakeholder more inclusive approach to cybersecurity.  Kind of pushing the boundaries and it was ‑‑ in 2018 it was a very important moment for, you know, gaining traction of the GGE discussions.
It was also very important timing for different stakeholders to come together and actually kind of agree in certain norms.  I think that was really important, so the Paris call was one of them.  But also, we've been very much engaged in other processes, such as the OEWG, the intercessional meeting and other meetings.  But we're an accredited organization which is a prerequisite.  I think what I'd like to leave aside from talking who we are, what we've been doing and why do we engage in these discussions, not just at the national level but we really see the importance of, you know, different organizations, especially those from the global south to actually be hands on and vocal in international cyber norms discussion is also because it raises a very important question of who can actually participate in these conversations, who can contribute to international cybersecurity and cyber norms discussions.
I think that is something that comes very much together with not just, you know, supporting or endorsing, you know, something like the Paris call or just being in the meetings, but it's really asking the question when we talk about multistakeholder cybersecurity and these international agreements who can actually kind of actively participate and shape these discussions?  I'd like to leave that provocation over there. 
>> JOHN HERING: The floor is open if there are other thoughts about the motivations for joining respective agreements.  I also want to open up the conversation a bit more to pivot to what's happening with them.  I think everyone here is likely party to at least one of these agreements, whether it's a national government or an organization.  If you're an outside party and researcher, what are the project and program implementations you've been successful in supporting cyber norms agreements.  I think this is the big question in the international space at this moment. 
>> AUDE GERY: I'm just going to mention two of them.  The first one is the papers, both papers that were just presented.  When I read them, I was like I would have loved having these kinds of resources when I was studied my thesis and started work on this issue. The reason is it showed some of the norms are widely accepted.  The paper shows that state's practice is bigger and bigger and at least some of them might in some way evaluate the progress of the nature of the norms.  I think it's one very good example of the ‑‑ what we can all bring to the community.
The other one is responsible behavior.  Norms and the resolutions and creation of a global culture of cybersecurity calls for public/private cooperation.  These resolutions are quite detailed.  So this kind of dialogue is I think very important to try to identify how to implement them and consensus of states is very difficult.  The key is really to raise the level of global cybersecurity and this kind of dialogue can definitely help to do that and to achieve these goals. 
>> ISAAC MORALES: If I may?  Thank you.  First of all, just let me recognize the important work you have been doing on norms.  Actually, it's timely and necessary to get this kind of general clarification of what the norms are and what we can expect from the norms.  I just wanted to refer briefly to this idea of expectations because we really need to understand that the norms are not going to solve all our cybersecurity problems or cyberspace governance.  The norms are part of a more general construction of what we need to put in practice.
In this regard, just to share, the government of Mexico was part of the Paris call, and the motivation, it was in our case, implementation to call to implement the norms.  The call to implement the previous agreements.  Actually, I believe that ‑‑ agreeing to norms, by agreeing to norms, you have the how of the homework done.  But the other half of the homework is implement what you actually agreed.
In this regard, I also shared that with Australia and South Africa and many others, we have put it on the table on the opening working group the idea of adopting a follow up mechanism of the previous agreements completely on the norms.  This format is serving, but the idea is actually to call to the implementation and to see not only the good things that we are doing to implement the norms, but actually the obstacles to implement the norms.
A very important issue that I saw in the work that you presented to us, it was this idea of the concrete that the norms need to be in order to be effective.  Yes, the more concrete, the better.  Nevertheless we have to recognize also to take into account that when dealing in multilateral settings, in multilateral platforms and with the goal of consensus, then you need more flexibility or ability to keep some issues not very well defined in order to get that consensus.
That is also important for me to say and put it on the table because actually within the open ended working group, we are discussing ‑‑ now we have the norms, then maybe guidelines to implement the norms.  It's also important to put on the table this idea of implementation of the norms.  And finally, to share with all that recently Mexico put it on the table to the OAS, the regional organization, through the resolution of international law, a call which was adopted by the OAS General Assembly, a call to implement ‑‑ I mean, recognizing the applicability of international law in cyberspace and a call to implement the norms, the agreed norms. So this is also a way to step forward the implementation by socializing, by endorsing, by bringing in organizations and now our homework is to work on that implementation.
>> JOHN HERING: Well said.  The floor is open if others want to take on either of these questions.
>> SHERIF HASHEM: If I may?  Thank you for the invitation to join this panel.  I would like to give a couple of points as a former member of the U.N. GGE, I've seen the process early on, we spent actually a few weeks discussing the applicability of international law, whether it's applicable or not.  Then we moved to the following GGEs about how is it applicable.  You can see the debates.
With this in mind, I personally feel that reaching a global treaty on cybersecurity is not in the near future so norms is what we have to work around.  I'm not a lawyer, I've worked with lawyers quite a bit for the past 20 years or so, so I feel that we need to move forward with implementing norms.
I agree with the comments about really the challenge is to support the initiatives for implementing norms, build capacity, get a clear understanding of the implications at different levels.  Some of the articles that led to these norms which from previous work that was done in non‑proliferation of nuclear and chemical and other weapons, especially since the first committee of the U.N. was part of this effort.
I remember in our discussions in 2012 and 2013 about such articles is dealing with ‑‑ I mean, categorically different.  While they are broadly used, we cannot deal with control the same way when it comes to nuclear weapons.  I used to say if I enter a room with a nuclear weapon people will notice, but if I enter a room with a stick with a virus people would not notice.  You cannot expect the same results.
For instance, developing capacity, then it could hurt nuclear or chemical weapons.  That's one.  The second is really when we talk about capacity building. I've participated in training workshops and awareness seminars across different levels.  I come from Egypt, that's why I use the model of the pyramids.  You need to have a broad base of capacity building across different categories.  We need to reach the top of the pyramid soon.  Decision makers really are important to engage.  Because, I mean, I've seen it in my home country.  You can have so much by engaging the general public and definitely we need to do a lot of that.  But also the understanding of the policy makers, the strategists so that these are reflected at the highest level and they propagate and we need to work on it whether it's a top down, bottom up approach, again, we need to understand this.
This is maybe a critical point, to manage expectation.  What do we expect from the other side is very important.  And to define the roles and responsibilities ahead of time is important.  And to build confidence ahead of having a crisis is also critically important.
To give you an example, if you talk to a CEO of a company about cybersecurity, everyone would be convinced it's important.  If you tell them that we need to avail this budget to hire these people and to do the training and implementation, what implication will it have on the operation, it's a different discussion because it will hit on the budget and bottom line.  So engaging decision makers at all levels, letting them know actually what is required from them for these implementations to be done successfully is important.  Like the IGF engaging key players like for instance when it comes to ‑‑ I mean, the computer security response teams is very important.  I mean, at all levels we need to have this type of mobilization towards a clear understanding of the norm implementation and to have successful implementation rather than expanding by adding new norms.
I'm happy with the list of 11 norms, let us focus on getting them done and getting them implemented across the globe.  I'm a member of the African Expert Group On Cybersecurity in the African Union.  You see over 50 countries in Africa, they are eager to implement the norms.  Decision makers need to be engaged and capacity building needs to happen and hopefully we have the IGF, African IGF in the next week, and hopefully the message will be conveyed there as well.  Thank you.
>> JOHN HERING: Wonderful.  And perfectly on time to end this first section of our panel that reviewed some of those large principles from the research paper we put together.  Thanks again to all of the coauthors on that and to all of our panelists for joining us today.  I'll turn you over to the capable hands of Maarten and Sheetal Kumar.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Thank you very much.  Just as a note for everyone who is attending.  If you have questions you can enter them in the Q&A box in Zoom.  Some of our panelists have already been responding to questions there.  Feel free to share questions there as well.
For the rest of the session we'll dive deeper into a broader perspective of cyber norms and norms in general following on the paper that was presented earlier.  I'd like to kick it off with a quick question that we don't always have the opportunity to ask, but we have a fair amount of government representation in this panel.  I'm a bit curious if some of the government representatives could chime in on the usefulness and implementation of cyber norms in their respective countries and regions.  If you don't mind, Moliehi, I'd love to open it up with you and get your perspective on that.
>> MOLIEHI MAKUMANE: Thank you.  Can you hear me properly?  Yes, okay, thank you so much.  Thank you for the invitation and for being such ‑‑ part of such a terrific panel.
On the implementation of norms, right, I would say for a country like South Africa, which we still categorize ourselves as a bit of newcomers to the broader discussions, the norms discussions in itself have really helped to frame the discussion so that we don't go too far outside the first discussions, but also not to go ‑‑ delve too much into the broader ICT discussions.
So the norms and discussions are around implementation have helped us to frame how we start having the conversations internally.  And for now, it's still broadly in government, just trying to figure out who are the relevant stakeholders, right?  Because there is no template that says because country X has these stakeholders you can immediately transfer it to your own situation.  So it's really helped us in terms of doing that. Implementation, I think what we identified from the beginning was that the norms when you look at them, they seem like very commonsense things.  But when you really ‑‑ (choppy audio)
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: I think we may be losing your connection a little bit.  Perhaps if you could briefly try turning off video it might make it a little bit easier.  If not, then what I would suggest is Mr. Isaac Morales, if we jump over to you for a second and we'll go back to Moliehi when she's able to rejoin.  Could you give us your perspective on just in general norms development and the status that your region is in?  Because you did a really good job earlier speaking about the country specifically.
>> ISAAC MORALES: Yes.  Thank you, Maarten.  And actually building upon what Moliehi was saying, in the case of Mexico, the discussion on the norms, I mean, to recognize the norms it was also an opportunity to deliver a broader discussion within the governmental structures.  Most of the time ‑‑ I mean, recent times we're concentrating this discussion among a more technical people if I may say.  The communications minister was discussing these issues.
Nevertheless, the norms bring us the opportunity how the policy level people need to, not only endorse, but to engage in implementation of those norms.  So it has been really successful for us creating an interagency community.  Not a unique or only one agency, but an interagency community where all ‑‑ I mean, technical people and policy level people have representation and they deal with implementation of the norms.  Not only the norms, also the CBMs.  That's an opportunity for me to say it's important to see and to recognize that most of the time when discussing, for instance, at the OAES new CBMs, the border is very thin between a norm and a CBM.
Actually between CBMs and capacity building efforts, this very thing borderline ‑‑ it's important also to make them visible in order to decide if we want to go through the norms way or the CBMs or the capacity building.  Actually, we made an exercise when discussing our national cyber strategy 12 years ago in order to identify which of the CBMs norms or actually capacity building efforts could accommodate us at the national level, you know?
It was interesting that many norms could see also in order to be implemented can see us as CBMs or actually as very concrete actions in order to develop further on what we are trying to do through the norms.  So it's ‑‑ in a general sense, also, I will say that it's a two‑way road where the international agreements we are trying to accommodate international agreements with our national efforts and our national priorities and needs trying to reflect it or make them visible at the international level when discussing the open ended working group or the platform as the OAS, et cetera.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Thank you very much for that insight.  Pablo, I realize you're not representing a government, but you are over a wider region.  I'm interested in Asia Pacific specifically.
>> PABLO HINOJOSA: Hello, good evening to everybody.  So Pablo from APNIC based in Australia.  We basically speak from the viewpoint of the technical community mainly internet network operators and computer emergency response teams.
We think that international cybersecurity discussions among states at the U.N. have been largely detached from technical considerations.  We think these discussions are far apart from a technical reality.  If we're moving towards sort of from the norm development processing to implementation of these norms, we really think that technical considerations need to be taken into account and we also need to prevent scenarios where eventually implementation of these norms may have unintended consequences affecting the technical operation of the internet.
In this sense, we have worked in parallel to the Best Practices Forum of cybersecurity organizing a series of workshops since the IGF in Mexico basically unpacking different norms from the GGE.  We brought the cyber norms debate in Mexico and then we unpacked the CERT norm in Geneva.  It was an interesting discussion because basically the CERT guys, and you were one of them, Maarten, made it clear that most have not heard about the existence of this norm or any implementation efforts underway around this.
There was this conversation about whether this norm incentivizes or deters SERTS in solving technical problems.  Then later on in the IGF in Berlin, we organized another workshop where we run the norm of request for assistance, another GGE norm.  We ran through it in different cyber attack scenarios.  For example, the cyber attacks in 2007, the Bangladesh bank heist in 2016.  And we looked at these incidents from the perspective of how this norm could have supported response activities to mitigate these incidents.  And the technical community’s assessment was that officializing communication lines can introduce latency, which can undermine incident response and damage well‑established formal networks of trust. These are two recent discussions where the technical community have expressed views about implementation of these norms.  I will leave it there and hope to be able to participate in the next couple of questions. 
>> SHEETAL KUMAR: Thank you so much, Pablo.  And thanks to everyone who has already participated.  It's really interesting to hear all your perspectives.  And I wanted to move now to reflecting on the earlier part of the discussion which was around research in other areas of norm development and implementation and where we could perhaps learn from those areas.  We heard about the need for enforcement mechanisms, incentives for internalizing norms, leveraging context, having leaders, entrepreneurs, take on norms, getting norms into existing institutions, cross pollination across different forums and spaces.
We also heard that cyber is different for a number of different reasons.  We heard about the importance of being concrete but at the same time in multilateral spaces how difficult it is to get consensus when you're very specific.  So we then heard about socializing norms across stakeholder groups, the role of regional organizations in adapting norms and defining roles and responsibilities, building capacity before we get to a crisis and identifying resources. So I wanted to come to you and ask which one lesson from norms development outside the cyber realm do you think we need to take at this point considering all of that to the cyber realm.  Move us forward in the norms implementation process.
>> AUDE GERY: Well, I would say there are four reasons.  The first one ‑‑ I'm not going to detail it because we've already talked about it.  In the world of implementation in the construction of the obligatory nature of norms.  Here it comes from the field of international environmental law.  When you look at environment law what you see is you have a lot of obligations that are binding so you have to implement them to see how to give them some binding ‑‑ some obligatory nature because they were very vague.  Or you have nonbinding norms because they're more precise and other states implement them in the same way so it will make states' implementation more almost uniform and make them almost as binding obligations.
The second reason ‑‑ again, it is in the field of international environmental law is the role of the private sector and civil society.  Because it's a field that requires expertise and we see that there are bodies, expert bodies working on very specific issues and guiding, providing states with very technical expertise.  It has been said by Pablo I think on the role of the technical community.  Here the best example is when we had the first provisions on software, we could see that the technical community had not been consulted and the provisions were and are still very badly drafted.
The third lesson comes from the field of nuclear activities.  It is mentioned I think in what cybersecurity policy making can learn from nomadic principle.  It's the convention of nuclear safety in the convention on the physical protection of nuclear material.  What's interesting there is the wording that is being used in these treaties.  Because the wording recalls the U.N. resolutions on the creation of the global issue of cybersecurity.  It sets obligations in the form of objectives in terms of legislation, in terms of safety and security obligations, in terms of criminal responsibility.  It is precise in terms of objectives, but it offers flexibility in terms of how states can internalize the objectives and fulfill the obligations.
Finally, I would say that the fourth lesson comes from both space and nuclear law as well.  Here it's related to the concept of peaceful use and the implementation for international cooperation in terms of technology transfers and the implementation for the meaning of the concept peaceful use.  I think we could work and try to have a look at how things work with this concept.  How it is being implemented by states to see what we could learn for cybersecurity and to maintain a peaceful and stable cyberspace.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Thank you very much, Aude.  One other topic we want to discuss with this panel is to understand from your perspective what is the main challenge is from cyber norms implementation today.  Are there different areas in which different stakeholders should be pointing their attention.  Moliehi Makumane, since you were rudely interrupted, I would love to have you give us some insight.
>> MOLIEHI MAKUMANE: I'll keep my camera off so I can get through this.  Okay, so I think the main challenge for implementation is the lack of coordination, internationally as well as guidance on how to do coordination domestically.  I can't say that we don't have guidance on how to implement the norms anymore.  I think the open-ended working group was a very useful platform to share an exchange of views on how different countries implement the norms.  Now I think the big challenge is how do we coordinate for those norms that don't just impose obligations on states, how do we coordinate with ‑‑ (choppy audio) ‑‑ with academia or on government coordination.  Are you losing me? 
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Yeah, unfortunately, your connection is a little bit tough.  Maybe if you wouldn't mind sharing your contribution on the chat.  In the meanwhile, I'll hand it over to Stephane who also had something to contribute to the topic.  Sorry for inconvenience.
>> STEPHANE DUGUIN: Very quickly, the report that we look into for the session is a lot of very, very interesting highlights for that specific question.  I would advise everyone to dive into them.  And this being said, two thoughts.  The first one is what prevents the operationalization of norms practically speaking is linked topics and discussed in different forums.  You have silos that are coming from all ‑‑ or the groups of interest.
Today you have the discussion on arms control.  And in between you have the concept, which is automized weapon.  Automized weapon, if it's a piece of code that you put metal around it to make an attack, then it's cyber.  So that doesn't help any actionable implementation done, operationalization done down the road.  That's one example but there's many.
The link in between what we call norms here today, silent norms, when it comes to more protocol.  Real norms and cyberspace, and this was mentioned earlier, is when you address protocols on the internet, we have the global effect way faster than in any working group discussion to date.  So that's something to make sure that the two are discussing each other because they are two sides of the same coin.
The last one, maybe the most important is grounding of operationalization of norms.  They're not in a vacuum.  People are today suffering because of cyber attacks.  Whatever operationalization needs to be grounded into this fact checking, evidence led human centric assessment of the impact on society.  Thank you.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Thank you very much, Stephane.  Pablo?
>> PABLO HINOJOSA: I'll talk a little bit about the gap.  I think it's fair to say that processes are not yet understood the same way around the world.  There's not the same understanding among states.  Not to mention other stakeholders.  We're still not fully involved with this yet, including as I've said before the technical community.  I mean, we can see how the most important normative approaches, for example the GGE process, it's been mostly triggered and developed and motivated by a small group of states.  Most of them have already thought deeply about these issues and have national cyber strategy in place, have evaluated scenarios and understand well what is at stake in a very clear way.  That's not the case of most states, even though they might have agreed in the General Assembly with the GGE recommendations of 2015.
I mean, if I translate this, what Apratim and Anastasiya was talking about, these leaders have not been able to sufficiently propagate these norms around the world.  But the point I want to make, actually, is how important they work, the best practice forum on cybersecurity has been.  Precisely in performing an excellent inclusive approach and to raise awareness about these norm developments and operationalization processes.  It has succeeded in the last three years to bring new stakeholders into the discussion and socializing these important lines of work.
I also want to just conclude by reflecting on how ideally suited the IGF is in terms of promoting this line of work because it's really a space that brings people together to increase understanding.  So if you want to maximize the chances of success of these norms, it would be very important to have the IGF and its evolution in the next years to come in the radar of this important processes that has still been very exclusive with only very few actors.  I'll leave my remarks there.
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Thank you, Pablo.  Louise Marie also wanted to share something?  We just have one minute left.
>> LOUISE MARIE HUREL: I want to follow up on what Pablo said.  He put it nicely in terms of what are the types of expertise we need to operationalize these norms and who needs to be on the table at the different levels, at the international, regional and national level.  I think the GGE and the OEWG have been very interesting and in some ways taking the discussion on building consensus to a new step.  So I think at the international level what we see is like these attempts to build consensus.  But throughout this past year how do we trickle that down.
What we've seen in Brazil is how you understand how these discussions are going at the international level and at the national level you don't have clear roles and responsibilities.  I want to close with that and how do you actually trace those international norms to the national level and vice versa.  I think just to end with, also, a note about the role of the BPF in all of this, I think the BPF has done an incredible job of actually tracing and starting the conversation on tracing these norms and where they're at and which stakeholders echoed similar norms, even if they didn't use the same language, even though they didn't articulate in the same words.
For example, the ethics first framework, norms, they actually talk about vulnerability disclosure, while you see that over in the GGE.  How do you actually tie ‑‑ I'm not trying to draw causality over there ‑‑ but how do we actually kind of connect these siloed conversations?  So I just wanted to end with that.  I think the BPF going forward and many other organizations have a really important opportunity to kind of like continue this process of tracing, which I think will make it clear where do we need to talk about rules and responsibilities.  Whose expertise do we actually need to kind of like bring to the table to make that possible?  I think the CERT example is a notorious one.  It's not about attacking incident response teams, but I hope we can see that in other norms as well. 
>> SHEETAL KUMAR: I think we'll pause on to Markus very quickly just to wrap us up because we are running out of time.  But I wanted to say thank you to everyone for their perspectives, especially at this point.  You know, all your ideas and thoughts on what is lacking and what the challenges are can help to shape what the BPF looks at next, for example.  And also what other stakeholders, those who are participating here and will access the session later can think about when it comes to norms and implementation which is so important.  So whether it's greater coordination, linking topics across forms and issue areas, addressing gaps in understanding amongst stakeholder groups or what you've just said there, Louise Marie on roles and responsibilities.  There's a lot more to be done.  For sure our homework is not yet complete. I'd hand it over to Markus now and thank you again so much for your participation. 
>> MARKUS KUMMER: Thank you.  Note this year, the BPF did not react to that.  But as we started our work before the road map was out, but I could turn it the other way around, it is actually the outcome as a result of the BPF, does it fit into the road map.  And there the discussion is still open.  I'd like to draw your attention that this year we had an exercise of BPF on BPFs that should feed into the next year's presentation of BPF's.  I posted the link in the chat.  And there we have a few suggestions on how to improve BPFs and that is also part of the broader discussion of the IGF.  I will leave it at that in the interest of time and thank you to our lead experts, Maarten and all the panelists for their excellent work.  And also, obviously, the participants.  It can be slightly frustrating in the webinar format as you never know who is in the room but this time, we had excellent participation.  At one time we had 100 participants in the room and we still have 79 left.  Thank you all for your participation.  Bye bye. 
>> MAARTEN VAN HORENBEECK: Thank you very much Markus, and thank you everyone for attending and have a wonderful day.  Please read the papers, join the mailing lists and do continue the discussion together with us.  Thanks very much to everyone who contributed and everyone who attended.  Bye bye.   
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-12-%E2%80%93-debating-the-future-of-global-environmental-data-governance-in-the-age^^

 
>> KELSEY LEONARD: Hello, everyone, and thank you for having me and for hosting this panel.  I am from an indigenous location located on Long Island, New York.  I'm happy to be joining you.
>> MODERTOR: Thank you.
>> AMY LUERS: My name is Amy Luers, I'm the global lead for sustainability science at Microsoft where we're working to bring science, data and technology together to advance global sustainability. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Amy and finally Rose Mwebaza.
>> ROSE MWEBAZA: Good evening from the city of Copenhagen, Denmark.  It's part of the operation mechanism of the technology mechanism of the United Nations.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you all.  And now I'll ask each one of you to name the single most important issue or question concerning environmental governance, beginning in the same order, so starting with you, Joyce.
>> JOYCE MSUYA: I wanted to say how inspiring it has been to witness the emergence of environment in this IGF.  I want to thank the hundreds of stakeholders that pushed for this and made this possible.
What is one key issue from our perspective is data fragmentation.  Let me just cite some numbers.  There are approximately 700 different environmental data platforms in operation by a combination of public and private sector actors with a new platform launched every week.  More than 7,000 organizations provide earth observation data and there are more than 450 million resources discoverable and accessible.  We need a basic set of principles, standards, and safeguards for these platforms. This is something we here at UNEP are working very hard on and we have been asked by our member states, governments to develop a global environmental data strategy.
We also need an international repository to aggregate and validate the best available environmental data that can be used to monitor global progress, for example, the SDGs and multilateral environmental agreements.  We are building such a platform to achieve this, which is called the world environment situation room. Let me stop here, but that's one data fragmentation is a key issue.  Over to you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Now moving to Joyce Murray.
>> JOYCE MURRAY: Data ownership. I almost hate to use that term because I think what we are looking for is data stewardship.  I think it's very important to identify what are the rules around the data and who is overseeing those rules because it will be generated, collected and used by both public and private organizations.  So there are various interests in using the data.
So the idea that we are collectively stewards of data for the common good, I think is very important.  And then accompanying that is the principle around compliance and enforcement.  I mean, you can have all the rules that make sense but if there are not clear mechanisms for compliance and enforcement, then there will be those who are going to exploit the situation and utilize that data for ends for which it was not intended.
I think there is ‑‑ there are underlying those principles are then a number of others.  One I would say is continuous improvements.  We have to recognize how quickly things are moving in the digital universe, and so we have to make sure that any structures or designs from the outset that they can be updated and respond to the situation.  So continuous improvement and digital principles built in by design, so that is things like user experience being very much at the heart of how this is structured because we can do everything that makes sense from a technical perspective, a design perspective, but if those who are using the data are not finding it easy and effective to use it, then it will not have its intended benefit in terms of managing and improving the human impact on our ecosystems.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Joyce.  And now if we could move to Celina, please.
>> CELINA LEE: I have one that's specific to our experience.  I think that immediately the issues that came to mind for me about data governance was transparency, as a data science competition platform we come across all types of data, especially granular detailed data, the types of data sets we're working with.  We've seen many instances where data sets are out and available.  But if they aren't accompanied by proper documentation and transparency about where the data came from what do they represent, how was the data actually collected, and therefore, what are the limitations of the conclusions you can derive from these data sets ‑‑ so this transparency for me is one of the fundamental issues.
Second is a clear data standard, this is very much related to the transparency, but it means that if we adopt certain data sets and accept certain data sets they have to come along with a standard set of quality standards, interoperability of the data sets so people will know how to use them safely.  And on the point of responsibility, safeguarding data privacy and ensuring that individuals who are the source of the data are properly and appropriately recognized, properly and appropriately benefited by the outputs of the products of the data.
I think those three go together, and then the final one I wanted to mention from a data science perspective and the work that we do is finding the right balance between a robust default privacy standard, which, you know, a lot of times implies aggregating data and balancing that with creativity that can be unlocked by solution and by the data scientists that are able to unlock new products, concepts and insights from granular data.  Finding balance between the granular data and the aggregated data that protects privacy.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Celina.  Now we move to Kelsey.
>> KELSEY LEONARD: Thank you so much.  I really would second so much of what my other panelists have said in terms of data safeguarding and protections.  One of the things I noticed in my own science and research related to environmental data governance in the Great Lakes and related to the oceans is the absence of indigenous people.  Our governments are often excluded from the infrastructure and that's something we really have to remedy to ensure that we're not promulgating more colonialism in digital spaces.  What some scholars have called digital colonialism.
I'm seeing that the in the environmental data space and the way in which environmental data is governed.  There are amazing alliances who just put forward principles of indigenous data sovereignly which I think is a path forward for how we need to be thinking about environmental data governance.  What we're seeing is data is being mined from indigenous peoples and our lands, and it's said that 80% of the world's biodiversity, so scientists are eager and keen to learn from our lands and territories about that richness and about the way in which we have stewarded the lands for thousands of years and we're not then a part of the ownership and control of the data that's extracted from our territories and communities.
Then even further, how that data is used and manipulated to inform decision making going forward.  And so I think that that's a real challenge for us moving forward, how do we ensure indigenous rights are protected in the environmental data governance space.  I think that means that indigenous peoples have ownership and control over our data and the way in which it's used and there are prescriptions and principles outlined.  So thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Kelsey, that was great, thank you so much.  Now moving to Amy, please. 
>> AMY LUERS: It's wonderful to hear these perspectives from different and importantly nuanced angles. To me the overarching governance challenge related to the digital world and environmental sustainability is embedded in the fact that today humanity is interconnected to each other through both the digital and natural worlds.
As a result, we fundamentally need to grasp, recognize that to achieve a trusted and inclusive internet is intertwined with a safe and sustainable world.  From this perspective, a key governance issue is building a trusted and secure internet.  So in trust, of course, these are rich worlds that have many dimensions. Trust is being challenged in the context of environmental issues around misinformation.  Having trust in the information about the trends and -- is critical.  There are a number of open data platforms that are gathering this data together and being able to have a trusted source of what those ‑‑ of the data that is available is critical.
The second point is inclusivity.  And it's critical not just in terms of what data is available to whom and who has the capacity to turn that data into knowledge.  Finally, security.  We need to make sure the data is secure, but again not just data security but security that everybody from different regions of the world feel safe and empowered to participate in the digital data for sustainability activities. These pieces together both from a data and the community that's using though datas is critical for achieving sustainability goals.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Amy.  And now, finally moving to Rose, please.
>> ROSE MWEBAZA: Thank you very much.  I think I want to focus on something that is related to the mandate of the climate technology center network, which is the facilitation of environmentally sound technologies.  One of the key issues that we find to be on critical importance in relation to this is the soundness of how this environment data itself is generated and stored and managed.  We all must agree that in fact the technologies that will enable us to access and to store this data and use it for environmental decision making are not necessarily sustainable.  I'll give you an example.
If you look at the amount of electronic waste that would come out of some of the tools that are used for data storage or access points, laptops and computers.  We're told we put 7 million tons of electronic waste out.  This is expected to grow because we have greater efficiency in production systems that makes these electronic devices cheap, it means more numbers of people have access to these resources.
So this is what we traditionally call the rebound effects, almost an unintended consequence of the development we attain as humans.  And so within the mandate of the climate technology center, which is to enable environmentalists sound transfer between nations this is of paramount importance.  Also because of a mandate is to support developing countries.  It's clear in the countries I work in, at least we have products in around 100 countries.  Actually, there's a huge global digital divide across the regions in the world that's in the countries in the regions.
I'll give you an example, I come from Africa so it's probably easier for me to do that.  The IFC has told me that 40% of all the people have access to digital technologies.  The number of women is even less.  So to go to the question one of the panelists met, data for who?  If we're going to support environmental decision making at all levels from the policy to the community level, who are accessors of this data?  Who has access to this data to make the decisions they need to make that becomes absolutely important?  I think those are the interconnected issues I want to talk about.  The sustainability of this environment but also the digital divide that means that actually contrary to what we think not everybody would be able to access the data and therefore the issue whose data and what decisions are made with it.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, would anybody like to reflect on any of the points that the panelists made?  Please unmute yourself if you would like to add anything.
>> JOYCE MURRAY: I've been so impressed by the ideas that have come up so far and I would say that inclusion and justice and indigenous perspectives is super important, as is diversity, women, and we're thinking inclusively as to who is going to be using and benefiting from this data.  I wanted to mention on the environmental sustainability decision.  There's a group of nations, it's ten countries that work together on advancing our digital transformation.  And the candidates put forward an initiative around environmental sustainability for the digital nations to be working on.
The opportunities for thinking about the equipment and the processes and operations and the waste management, green procurement and so on I think have to be woven into everything we do.  I was very glad to hear you talk, Rose, about environmental sustainability.  Canada's going to be pushing ‑‑ not pushing but leading the charge on that as part of the digital nation's agenda over the coming year.  So thanks for raising it.
>> MODERATOR: Amy?
>> AMY LUERS: I wanted to touch on the last point about the sustainability of the data generation and analysis that was raised.  I think that is a really critical issue.  And at Microsoft, we're taking that very seriously.  We’ve committed to ‑‑ we're already carbon neutral and we're committed to becoming net negative by the end of the decade, as well as zero waste, net positive on water and land.
So integrating the use of how we integrate science and data for solving problems, as well as making sure that we clean up our own corporate footprint and help others is a key part of our efforts.  I think we need to think of those as a continuum, not separate issues.  But as an integrated piece.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Now moving on, what are the two ‑‑ one or two key principles or safeguards you would like to propose as part of a global governance framework?
>> JOYCE MSUYA: Thank you.  First, it's important to recognize that environmental data exists in a digital ecosystem and that we need to structure data and analytics to achieve specific outcomes and support specific decisions.  A number of panelists in the previous section talked about it.
Thinking about environmental data for a purpose.  In our case within the united nations for example, we would encourage looking at the structure of a digital ecosystem of environmental data to be able to monitor global commitments.  For example, the STGs, but also the multilateral environmental targets.  But equally if not more important, use the data to inform and shape policy options to inform markets, supply chains and consumer behaviors.
If you look at things like sustainability production and consumption, unless we have the data the consumer's behavior would not shift.  Second is standards, international standards are needed to ensure that environmental data can be aggregated at the global level and can be interoperable with other environmental data such as the socio economic data through the use of standardized application programming interfaces. So we need an API for the framework.  
Lastly, environmental data sets should be as open as possible looking at data as global public good.  I think Minister Joyce from Canada alluded to this.  And as agile as possible because context for the data matters, so depending on specific use cases and potential risks, the environmental data governance should adopt an agile approach that favors experimentation, iteration, differentiation and adaptation as needed, thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Joyce.  Can I just ask our audience if they have any questions then please do write them in the chat on the right‑hand side of your screen.  Hopefully we'll have time to take a few questions later.
Now if I could ask Joyce Murray to add to the safeguarding debate.
>> JOYCE MURRAY: That's a pretty critical element to be thinking in advance and I think it's not ‑‑ I mean, right from the beginning those kinds of principles need to be factors into the design.  It seems very complicated to me after just coming out of a briefing on the government of Canada's plans to improve our data manage and multifactor authentication so we can have a single sign in for various government of Canada programs.  I see the complexities of that just in one country.  I think it's critical that the kind of access the authentication, multifactor authentication for people utilizing this data having access to it because there may be personal data, there certainly is commercially valuable data.  And there also will be data that as was mentioned ‑‑ I think it was Celina talking about ‑‑ sorry, it was Kelsey talking about indigenous owned data.
As we have the theme of data stewardship, we also need to understand the indigenous perspective and ownership of their data.  So that's just ‑‑ I mean, that's a lot of stream of consciousness there.  I understand there is international human rights law and U.N. guiding principles on business and human rights that talk about ‑‑ for example, artificial intelligence.  Let's not reinvent the wheel.  Let's find best practices in terms of the use of machine learning and the use of data access and authentication and make sure those things are built in from the very beginning of this project because it will be much harder to change it later on and adjust for that.
I think the other thing we have to think about is, is there anything that could create national or regional security risks and how is that data treated separately or not.  How is that addressed?  We're going to need a range of formal and informal agreements that should be ‑‑ should lay out in a transparent way how this is being set up and how it's being governed and how it's being complied with.  Openness and transparency I know has already been mentioned by other panelists, but that is a core principle. At the same time we have to think about confidentiality and authentication, we also need the realm of openness and transparency to be a founding principle of what we're doing here.  A few thoughts.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Joyce, and now moving to Celina, please.
>> CELINA LEE: Thank you.  I agree with all of the other panelists are saying.  I want to add a bit from our perspective at Zindi, working with data scientists and working with companies and governments that have very specific problems that they're solving.  One of the things I wanted to highlight is in order for data to live up to its promise ‑‑ we can talk about data in high‑level terms and big terms.  But in order for data to be translated into the impact that we want to see, we have to ensure that we are also understanding the entire value chain and the market that drives data and drives data from turning into just data into actual insights or products.
And so at Zindi we ran a competition recently where we used sentinel 5P data to extrapolate air quality across Africa.  A place where a continent where if you look at the data that's available on air quality, it is extremely sparse.  I think we found a couple of sensor data sets from South Africa and maybe Kenya, but the rest of the world was covered with air censors and constant real‑time data that was constantly being uploaded onto the internet and freely available to everybody.
One of the questions we asked was how can we fill in the data gap?  We used 5P data to develop machine learning models.  Our scientists build the models and now it's being hosted on the South African Earth Observation Network.  To understand how the data is collected, who gets access to the data so they can analyze it and turn it into actual insight and then who ends up hosting the data product at the end are all questions we have to address and acknowledge as important.
What I want to point out here is underlying what everyone is saying about inclusivity and representation, this is where representation matters.  That we understand the entire value chain and representation has to insert itself in every single step of the way as we look at the data value chain. So yeah, I wanted to highlight accessibility of the raw data itself.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Celina, now Kelsey, please.
>> KELSEY LEONARD: Wonderful.  Thank you.  Thank you again to the panelists for this robust conversation.  I would say that in terms of safeguards and principles, we need environmental data for justice and equitable outcomes, and what does that mean in the space that I work in particularly for indigenous peoples is we need disaggregated data that actually measures environmental indicators for indigenous communities and our nations.  Right now, you can go to any of the major environmental data sets and we're absent.  We can have aggregated data based on sometimes potentially race and ethnicity but mostly in at a national level or subnational level data.  And we are just sort of marginalized from the collection.  If we're not counted how can you matter in decision making. Also, when we think about data accessibility how can our government and leaders use data accessibly to be informed decision makers.  That's a real big issue that we have to come to terms with and think through sustainability solutions for the environmental data ecosystem, in particular because our communities, indigenous communities are on the front lines of the climate crisis.  What is the important of environmental data right now in our human history?  It's to hopefully tackling this emerging crisis that our world is facing.  For indigenous people being on the front lines, we need access to data that is meaningful and that counts our people.  That's a really big safeguard and principle that I hope we could build into a future ecosystem.
In addition, one of the things I wanted to outline before I bring a path forward that other scholars have created is the way in which English, the English language is monopolizing our data infrastructure and ecosystem right now and how that disenfranchised indigenous languages.  We right now are seeing indigenous languages around the world ‑‑ 2019 was the U.N.'s year for indigenous languages.  We're seeing the loss of those languages, the languages go dormant because they're being forced out of operation, out of use, out of consideration and care. I think when you think through data governance, because so much of our environmental knowledge is captured in our indigenous knowledge systems and languages, we need to create data ecosystems that uplift those languages in their structure and in their creation and design from the outset as others have said earlier.
So the Global Indigenous Data Alliance has put together the care principles for enacting indigenous data sovereignty for indigenous data.  Those stand for collective benefit, that data ecosystems should be functioned that support indigenous people's rights.  That we have the authority to control those data sets that are coming from our communities.  And also, the responsibility of other data scientists, those working with data, about indigenous people and coming from our territories to share how that data is being used to support indigenous self‑determination.  Lastly, ethics, we have to be good human beings on this planet.  And part of that is also the way in which we use and design data systems.  Hopefully they'll respect indigenous rights in upholding those ethics, thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Kelsey.  Questions can be moved on either in the chat or in the Q&A function.  And you'll find that under the more button at the bottom of the screen.
Now if I could ask Amy her thoughts on safeguarding, please.
>> AMY LUERS: Great.  You know, I think some of the principles that ‑‑ the number of principles to think about, I guess one of the ones I wanted to highlight is the need to really recognize ‑‑ to focus in on essential sustainability data that needs to be available.  We're in the information age where we're flooded by data and that's been highlighted for sure.  But there are critical information that we don't have but that we could have if we focused on.  For example, in terms of our biodiversity there's a lot of information that isn't available but if we focus in on that we could make decisions in a much better way.
So recognizing that we need to agree what are those essential data for managing the systems?  These are one of the things we're doing here at Microsoft in the context of building a planetary computer.  Trying to identify those data sets so we can make them available to everyone who is working on conservation efforts around the world.  What are those key variables is taking a multistakeholder approach?  This is where these kinds of forums are valuable to bring together government and private sectors, civil society to identify what those are regionally and sectorially.
A piece of that is the essential variables aren't ‑‑ data sets aren't valuable unless they're accessible and open to the diversity of actors engaged in what is a multistakeholder, multisectorial participation in environmental governance.  And honing in together in deciding what are the key variables, making sure we actively go out and assure we have validated access to the data so we can make decisions I think is a core principle that we need to move forward with and ‑‑ if we're going to be able to know that we're managing this correctly and make decisions wisely.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, and now finally to Rose.
>> ROSE MWEBAZA: Thank you.  I think the panelists have raised really important information and just the last speaker highlighting the importance of, you know, what is the essential data we have from my point of view climate data is important to create resilience in the more vulnerable communities as well as other categories of data.  I think it's really important at this point in time where there's a whole range of data that is available.  The environmental data that we focus on that it is the kind of data that supports the decision making that is good for nature and for people ultimately.  So that's the way I would put it.
The whole issue of leaving no one behind, so if it's data that creates resilience or better livelihoods or protect people's information on air quality, that's data that's important.  It's good for nature and it's good for people.  So leaving no one behind and creating data we need.
Lastly, the one I think as a community that we could work with is the large body of work we already have an environment reviewing data and making sure it's aligned to this new huge digital agenda to make sure it's environmentally sustainable and that we do not have to deal with the unintended consequences of what it is that we're trying to do.  I think that system is at a point where it has to extend beyond the nontraditional areas where we've been looking at an important issue of environmental sustainability.  So really those are the two key issues that I would like to highlight at this point in terms safeguards.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Rose.  Now, moving to the questions from our audience, we have one from Monica Emmett.  She asks, there were several mentions of the need for standards for environmental data.  Who shall develop these standards?  The floor is open.  Would anyone like to comment on that? 
>> JOYCE MURRAY: I don't have a specific answer to that question, but what I was wanting to bring into the conversation to add to the idea of essential and critical data for the solutions add to the whole data chain idea which I think is so important and the disaggregated data for social justice purposes.
What is the role of governments?  I mean, maybe it was ‑‑ I'm not sure who mentioned that this is government civil society, indigenous peoples, it's business, it's stakeholders.  But government can play a very productive role if we're thinking about governments right from the beginning.  Because there is a tremendous capacity there to facilitate or to undermine, I suppose.  So what occurs to me is that there are organizations that bring governments together, not that we want to have something big and cumbersome and hard to get agreements, but something like the open government partnership is a group of 78 countries.  It's been meeting for 11 years, represents over 2 billion people and it's all about the partnership between civil society and government in having really an open approach and principles to the use of data but also to the engagement of people with their governments. So let's find some ways in which government can be built in without it slowing down or, you know, creating a lot of bureaucracy I suppose.  But bringing them on board to this initiative early on.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you. Amy, I believe you want to add to this conversation.
>> AMY LUERS: Thank you.  I wanted to stress again, as was said earlier, that, you know, the answer to who sets the standards does have to be a multistakeholder approach.  There is a critical role for government for sure, which it has a different character than the other players and thinking that through is certainly critical.
What I wanted to highlight there are standards in two different pieces.  One is what data is available ‑‑ you know, what are the essential variable and how do we decide that and that has to be multistakeholder.  How, you know, it's safeguarded and open and so forth and interoperable.  I think there's another component that's critical as well especially when we're talking about environmental data.  That's the verification, you know, what is the essential ‑‑ what is the data in which we make our decisions in terms of global environmental issues?
We have a process for this in terms of scientific information.  We have a peer review process to say these are the ‑‑ looking at the insights that are drawn for data.  I don't think we've tackled that in a way that is going to suffice that is going to really draw from the data that what we can ‑‑ if we don't tackle this issue of what is the trusted data in terms of the science?
There is an emergence of looking at large datas and looking at trends and making predictions which is a huge asset in terms of how we manage in near real time these challenges coming in front of us.  How do we connect that with the scientific community that understands natural and social systems from a process point of view?  That is a challenge in front of us that is also a huge opportunity but is one that we haven't grappled with.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Amy, would anyone else like to answer Monica's question?  No?  Can I ask the panel for one voluntary commitment you'll undertake in 2021 to take forward the themes discussed in the panel today, starting, again, with Joyce Msuya, please.
>> JOYCE MSUYA: Thank you.  So I'm going to give you one external.  External because we have to be nimble.  We commit to engage and potentially co-lead with the IGF process.  Not just IGF but any other stakeholders that may be interested.
Internally we're committed to contributing to our Secretary General's road map and co-lead an action plan on digitalizing environmental sustainability.  That entails working with other U.N. entities that work in the environment space.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Joyce.  Now to Joyce Murray, please.
>> JOYCE MURRAY: Thanks.  I think my previous intervention may have ‑‑ when ‑‑ who should make the decisions.  I started talking about government.  I think clearly the multistakeholder approach is the right one, so I just wanted to make sure that that didn't come across as I want government to take this over.
A commitment. One commitment I have made recently is as the outgoing chair of digital nations was to put it in front of the group and have it accepted that digital nations would have an environmental sustainability theme and so we'll continue over the coming year to promote and seek allies for this initiative in the lead up to the U.N. climate change conference and see if there is interest from other countries.  That's a digital nations initiative.
There's also ‑‑ I just talked about the open government partnership.  I think there's a possibility we could get commitment in the fifth national action plan on open government that we are working with civil society to produce that we could implement an open data, an open science specifically to help fight the climate change as one part of our Indonesia action plan.  This would, of course, include annual public open data reporting on the environmental footprint of federal operations which is being done through our center for green in government.
I can't commit to this national action plan element because we do it in partnership with civil society.  We're in those discussions and consultations now but that's something I'm personally very interested in doing and that would be then part of the broader open government partnership discussion and commitments.  As I mentioned, that's quite a number of countries that could then start to be connected in with this initiative that you've put on the table today.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Joyce, now Celina, please.
>> CELINA LEE: Thank you.  From Zindi's perspective we're driven by the mission to make AI and data science more accessible for everyone, to serve everyone regardless of race, gender, even geography.  So our goal is to create opportunities for young people to continue to upskill in the area of AI, machine learning and data science and through our platform also help make some of these valuable data sets more accessible and more public for real impact on the ground.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  And I'll invite Kelsey now.
>> KELSEY LEONARD: My commitment is a commitment I'd ask of my panelists is to familiarize yourself from the care principles I mentioned as well as united nations declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples.  If you've never read it, I think it's a pivotal document for you to read and to use as a framing guidance for developing standards that should be guiding data moving forward.  It's my call of action to each of you to hopefully take these two principle documents and see what you can do with them in your own individual data ecosystem and hope that that will move the needle forward.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Kelsey.  Now, Amy, please.
>> AMY LUERS: can you hear me?  Well, first I want to say sort of a personal commitment and I think coming from this panel it's been a great discussion.  I'll reflect on the various different angles this panel has brought.  I want to thank you for sharing those.
From a Microsoft perspective, there are two commitments.  One is to become a net positive for the environment in the context of our footprint and our role in the global economy.  More broadly, though, to work with partners to make sure that we can identify the essential variables, make those available in what we're developing in terms of the planetary computer, but within context of these discussions. We want to engage in the dialogue and best practices that the forum is developing and integrate those and empower others, everyone to do more with sustainability data to achieve our sustainability goals.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Now finally to Rose, please.
>> ROSE MWEBAZA: Thank you very much.  The commitment I will make within our mandate, which is promoting environmentally sound technology.  Really, the commitment I can make is that in this context to focus on some of the two issues that would have the most significant environmental impacts which would be the amount of energy that required to drive this agenda and the digitization.  So the technologies that would promote deficiencies, reduce greenhouse gas emissions but also to work with the member states, you know, that give us this mandate and electronic waste which is growing and potentially becoming a global challenge.
This would include, you know, as we promote this in countries, creating awareness, the dialogues and conversations we need to have where the different stakeholders engage and make those decisions so that we are taking them with the agree of ethical understanding of what their consequences are and why it would need to make decisions that promote sustainability.  I think those are the commitments I would make. Then, of course, the ‑‑ dealing with the digital divide we have, promoting this to developing countries.  Celina was talking about the actual data gaps we need for sound decision making, thank you very much.
>> MODERATOR: Right, thank you for completing that section.  And we've had a fascinating and thought-provoking exchange of ideas.  I want to thank the panelists for what they're developing on this topic.  The IGF and U.N. have pushed this issue to the top of the agenda, and now the U.N. is considering making digitalization of environmental sustainability a four‑year priority.  The media, too, needs to report more on the environmental data and the implication of using it sensibly.  Please do contact me at Digital Planet about this.
As we have heard on the panel today, every scientific assessment is giving us ten years left to solve climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution.  Living as we have been living, and doing business as usually is clearly not working.  And we need to find ways to make exponential progress in these three areas.  Digital transformation is going to play a massive role if it can be harnessed for environmental sustainability.
The stakeholders need to establish together how environmental data and metrics can be hard code into application platforms, filters, and algorithms to fundamentally change the incentive structures for sustainability.  If we are to see any benefit to our environment, working together with environmental data could decarbonalize and detoxify the global supply chain.  Together we can take collective action on environmental digital cooperation and commit to concrete action with the support of the IGF and UNEP.  Thank you to everyone on the panel today and those behind the scenes, translators, and scribes as well who have made all of this happen.  I hope to come back next year to hear about the tangible progress that has been made.  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-12-%E2%80%93-high-level-leaders-track-wrap-up-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> Thank you very much to our panelists, it was a great session.  We will be having the closing session in this room, in the same room, so if you want to stay for the closing session, please stay and those closing session panelists, just stay in this room and we will upgrade you to panelists if you're in the audience.  So thank you again and we'll see you in 20 minutes.  Thank you.  David do you want to say something?
>> Fantastic work, but everybody left.
>> Sorry. 
>> Cheers. 
>> Good afternoon or good morning to you.  Can we just test our cameras and microphone? 
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN: If you want to listen to the interpretation ‑‑ 
>> Under Secretary General, can you switch on your microphone just to have a mic test, if you can hear me.  And also Vallarie, welcome. 
>> VALLARIE YIEGA: I can hear you loud and clear, can you hear me?
>> We can hear and see you, thank you, great.
¶¶
¶¶
>> We have more relevance to our lives than the responsible and effective governance of the internet and digital technology. 
>> MODERATOR: Hello my name is Jonathan Charles, I'm the managing director of communications.  The many years I was a BBC foreign correspondent and lucky to have attended several physical meetings of the IGF.  Here we are, it's come around very quickly.  The closing high level session of the 15th annual Internet Governance forum.  I've been lucky enough to see the conversations myself and I hope you caught some of them as well.
The internet has never been more important in the world in which we're currently living.  Over the next hour or two, we'll be examining just what the future holds, what does that mean for governance.  First of all, we're going to start with some remarks at this closing session by the United States Secretary General, we're happy to welcome Antonio Guterres. 
>> SECRETARY GENERAL GUTERRES: It is a pleasure to address this closing session of the 15th annual internet governance forum.  The COVID‑19 pandemic has shown a spotlight on the importance of digital technologies and transformation and the need to enhance the IGF.  This year has brought new evidence of the benefits of connectivity.  Internet access is promoting healthcare, job and lives.  But the pandemic is exacerbating inequalities of all kinds, including digital divides.
Those without access to visual technology, almost half the world, are denied opportunities to study, communicate, trade, shop, work and participate in much of modern life.  Close to over a billion students are affected by school closures and the most margealized are at a risk of never returning to school.  For those online, it's increased vulnerabilities to harms and abuses of many kinds.
It threatens to reduce the uptick of any effectiveness of any vaccines that become available.  Hate speech and discrimination are running riot in digital spaces.  And the risk of fragmented internet is greater than ever.  These are critical areas and my road map sets a way forward for its vision to protect and respect all people online.  I welcome this forum's focus on diginal inclusion, which is essential to building a strong recovery.  We need to address the growing digital gender gap.
The pursuit of inclusion must determine not just our approach to expending connectivity, but also how we manage data.  We need to look at how we can make the best use of digital data for the public good, and develop the govance frameworks that recognize diversity and businesses and communities and advance the sustainability development goals.
Many of you representing different communities from governments, the private sector, civil society, the technical and academic communities are working closely with the united nations to further the aims of the road map.  This includes narrowing digital provides, promoting digital inclusion, achieving universal connectivity and protecting human rights online.  Together as we seek to build a strong recovery from the pandemic, we can reduce the harmful aspects of digital technology and then unleash its power as a true equalizer and enabler.  I urge governments to make sure your plans to make ‑‑ the discussions over the last week have been important and meaningful.
The IGF is a vital role in connecting the dots of the global digital map.  But this cannot fulfill this role unless it reaches decision makers.  We must act urgently to stress the IGF so it can enhance its unique role in the digital architecture.  After more than a decade of consultations, we have identified several areas of improve.  This aims from funding sustainability to proposed multistakeholder within the IGF that can translate important discussions into concrete impacts.
My road map sets off a series of actions to this end and I intend to move quickly.  We need an IGF that is relevant and impactful.  We need to to be place where companies, experts and civil society from all parts of the world come together, share ideas, develop solution and agree on common standards and principles.  I congratulate you on your discussions this week and I thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed.  A big thank you from the united nations Secretary General.  First of all, we're going to watch a video, IGF 2020, let's see some of the key messages from the events of the past few days. 
>> In the least developed countries, only 19% individuals were online.  We are leaving a larger majority behind.  We need solutions that help bridge the digital divide so that the benefits of digital technologies can reach those being left behind unconnected.
>> The SDG target of achieving universal connectivity by 2020 has not been met.  3.6 billion people continue to lack access to the internet. 
[ No audio ]
¶¶
¶¶
>> MODERATOR: Hello, and apologies for those of you who had trouble hearing parts of that video.  It is available online by the way.  You will be able to see it any time you like.  Go and take a look.  Here we are, the first of our panels now.
We're going to be looking in the next few minutes at what's happening with the internet now, what's next.  And is the internet ready for COVID‑19 recovery.  Let me introduce the panel, if I could ask them to make sure their cameras are switched on and their sound is switched on on panel one.  First of all, let me introduce vice minister of national planning and economy economic policy from Costa Rica, Carlos Molina.  Maxim Parshin, from the Russian federation.  Krzysztof Szubert and Vera Songwe for the Economic Commission for Africa.  Finally, Anriette Esterhuysen, very important of course in this event.
Let me start I think by looking at the future host countries.  We've got Poland hosting the IGF in 2021.  Ethiopia in 2022.  Russia in 2025.  And I'd like to start with those ministers, perhaps the Polish minister first, the republic of Poland, Krzysztof Szubert.  Knowing about the trends and development, in what areas do you think the IGF should focus in the future in terms of internet governance?
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  So for me, as a former member, it gives me great pleasure to be here with you today online.  And I would start with a couple of comments on the question posed.
COVID‑19 has demonstrated the importance of digital technologies.  It's clear we can use technologies in digital response.  COVID‑19 pandemic accelerated many projects that had been long overdue which is actually quite our experience from the last weeks or months.  It worked out to the effect that priorities were changed in order to favor digital based approach in general and it has been our experience in Poland.
Back to your question, is the internet ready for COVID‑19 recovery.  I would say that, yes, in fact this is the best recovery plan we can have, digital solutions based on internet action has allowed mediums to continue working in lock down so the strategic importance of the internet has been confirmed.  If there is one thing remote education has certainly taught us it is that modern digital infrastructure is extremely important to actually ‑‑ in addition we must ensure cybersecurity, guarantee trusted and secured data processing in our digital and cyber education.
In the era of shaping a new digital cyber society, the process of building open, same and transparent global internet becomes particularly important.  I would also add that we need more international cooperation on big projects, especially like in our case in central eastern Europe across political formats we have in place such as treaties formats.  And it puts a bigger focus on coordinated investment and funds, such the lack of investment capital may soon become a major issue worldwide, keep in mind that 60% plus of innovation is within digital segments.
There is still a lot of work to be done in this area and there are still many questions that we will seek answers to during the next editions of IGF in Poland in the upcoming year.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Just to come back at you with one question.  You talked about the growing ‑‑ how we've seen the growing importance of the internet in recent months and it will be very important in the recovery.  What does that mean do you think for the growing need for some form of internet governance?
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: What I see from at least our experience or across Europe that many governments realize the importance of digital technology and so they're up to date.  I think the digital transformation, it's much higher right now on the agenda, which is good keeping in mind the situation you have with the pandemic.  So I would say that the ‑‑ having it on a certain level, be focused on the technology, see how it can be helpful within different sectors of the economy is not only digital transformation or digital economy, but most of the sectors in our economy, they are influenced by digital transformation.  I think that's the answer.
We should cover maybe on the next panels or next meetings next year in Poland, also the economical aspects.  I think that investment funds, economical aspects, they're extremely important.  Such without funds, without investment there will be no digital transformation at all.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, for the moment.  Let me move on to the country after Poland who will be hosting the IGF.  That will be Ethiopia, with me is Ahmendin Achmed.  What does it mean for governance in the COVID‑19 period?
>> AHMENDIN AHMED:   I would like to take this opportunity to thank the democratic republic of Ethiopia to take part in this meeting of the Internet Governance forum.  (choppy audio).
>> MODERATOR: I think you are breaking up.  You're breaking up on your signal.  Perhaps I could ask you to turn your video off and speak to us just in audio only and maybe the signal will be better. 
>> AHMENDIN AHMED: So in the future, I believe in order to bring a lasting impact we should focus on infrastructure in the end user.  When we say the infrastructure, we should focus on the international and the national gateways in increasing the capacity in finding and innovating ways to reduce the cost.  We should focus on access and we should focus on standardizing our data center for local content delivery.
The second thing we should focus on is the end user.  We should work on improving data literacy because the COVID‑19 is impacting the older sector as mentioned by the previous speaker and the Ethiopian government is working on initiatives.  And within this framework we have national initiative and making affordable devices widely available.
We do have a transaction problem, so we should encourage the user of digital and online payments in the future.  So from the policy perspective, initially the policy framework should focus on exhaustively utilizing internet ‑‑ increasing accessibility for sustainability development and prosperity.  The second one is policies that help government to focus on quality of education and avail the education system with additional content that help to shape the future and policies for the economy that result a better living standard.  It's a very important thing and we should focus on big data, the internet of things, cyber security and human rights issues related to the mission.  Thank you, Jonathan.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed.  The sound was very good, thank you in the end, thanks for persevering with that.  Let us move on to the next country.  Russia will be hosting the IGF in 2025.  Maxim Parshin is with us.  How do you see this question of the internet now, the internet of the future and the governance issues that goes along with that?  [speaking non‑English language] [speaking non‑English language] 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, Minister, for joining us.  Just so everyone's aware there is translation available by the way.  You'll find the translation buttons up there on the screen.
Let's move on to another country, let's go to Latin America and vice minister of national planning and economic policy, Carlos Molina.  When you look at the challenges that Costa Rica faces, what are they?  What are the unique challenges you're facing in this arena and the challenges that Latin America is facing?
>> CARLOS MOLINA: Good morning, good afternoon, good evening to all of you around the world.  Thank you for having us.
We have seen three areas where we have faced different challenges that are in education, work, and health.  During this crisis, it's shown us a key issue regarding poverty and internet.  Related with income increased with the last register, but most are stable so we have good news.
We showed household internet use dropped 5% compared with the last register from 20% to 50%.  Considering public and private education has been driven through the web as well as remote working, internet literacy is a key driver for access and protection.  In case of women, the country has shown a reduction regarding the gap to the computer access comparing male and female.  Now internet access has moved from computer use to other devices so it's easier to bring internet to everyone.
Our 2020 national review showed also about SGD4, quality education.  The percentage of educational establishment with computer connected to internet for education purposes in elementary and elementary school increased significantly.  And the challenge is the capacity being used due to confinement.  So investment should be considered with internet access.  Consultation has been done through telephone and internet via video conference, so access broadband internet is crucial for health and service access.
Detailed gaps were already previews in this crisis, so the current situation has showed these gaps, digital gaps and to manage several market, and human skills for employment and production.  What we know right now is digital transformation is reversible.  And that's why public investment should be around 1% GDP per year for social inclusion.  Also the countries should create digital market basket including smartphones, tablets, computer, plus internet plans.
As I mentioned before, education and health depends in this time, in this new normality of internet access.  Internet is a key driver from the 2030 implementation.  What are the financial alternatives?  Latin America has a public financial trends, so the target for digital inclusion can be crucial for those countries and to the world as a whole.  Middle income countries has 75% of the population of the planet and including India and China.  And one third of the global GDP and have the ‑‑ so target finance for this digital inclusion can be a global outcome for the 2030 agenda implementation.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, Vice Minister.  Let's turn to Vera Songwe.  I mean, Africa has some very distinct challenges of its own.  How do you see them?  What are the unique challenges the continent is facing?
>> VERA SONGWE: Thank you.  Good morning, good afternoon, good evening, everybody.  And thanks for having me at this amazing and interesting conversation.  You've heard a lot of was said.  The first focus is increased connectivity.  We've heard from everyone who has spoken to the importance of connectivity.  When we have it on the continent it's expensive.  It does not imply access because it's prohibitive.  We need to bring down the cost.
The third thing is speed.  It's connectivity, it's cost, and it's speed.  And I think you're seeing some demonstration of that.  In our continent if you want to open a Google page it takes you two and a half minutes, in the United States it takes two seconds.  It makes more expensive to develop a business if your broadband is not fast enough.  Those are the three things our governments need to focus on.
In addition to that ‑‑ and I think one of the sort of horrifying statistics is the fact that almost half of the continent, maybe a third of the continent does not have an identity.  So even when they have access, they can't really participant in a meaningful way in any activities because they don't have an ID in countries that require identity.  One of the things we're working on is to see whether we can ensure in a much faster way that Africans have access to an identity card.
Of course, we've talked about the importance of digital technology, but there is a risk.  I think we continue to mention that.  Which is the digital divide.  Those who have access will have more access and those who have less access will have less and societies will become even more unequal.  I think we've seen that particularly now in the education age in houses where you can afford it, seven people have access to the internet and everybody's on Google and it's working.  Where you cannot afford it, even one person does not have access and it does not work.  We need to ensure that we don't ‑‑ with this movement to a digital age ‑‑ exacerbate our inequalities.
Seven of the most unequal countries in the world are in Africa.  A few of them are in Carlos Molina's environment.  Most of them we have the distinct pleasure to have seven of the most unequal countries.  We're hoping the digital divide does not make that worse but hopefully closes it better.
We have launched the digital center of excellence.  First of all, as I think Mr. Molina said, to ensure we have the right environment and ensure consistency and harmmannization of rules and regulations across the continent and secondly work on digital privacy and ensure that with identification we don't create more disunity and chaos in our system.  I'll stop there for now and we can come back as you continue this conversation.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed.  Just one question perhaps to follow up.  You know, one reason that Africa has many issues is lack of investment.  Where do you think the investment comes from?
>> VERA SONGWE: Thank you.  That's a perfect follow‑up question.  One of the things we've just done, I think we did it two weeks ago, we launched a center in Congo.  And as part of that process we actually worked with some of the largest companies on the continent.  And to create and launch a program called the African communications and informations platform.  And essentially what we're trying to do is bring together all of the telecom companies of the continent and we're trying to do that in 36 countries, to come together and see the value in actually using the internet and technology as a means of getting closer to their service delivery clients.
I think that is where the private sector and investment comes from.  Governments need to ensure that the regulatory environment is predictable.  That it is stable and clearly that when you come in you can actually get your profits.  What the private sector needs to do is see where the benefits come from.  I think with the African agreement, Africa has launched probably one of the largest investment programs in the world today.  And therefore, the private sector needs to come in.
We have, then, I think multilateral development agencies the World‑bank, the EIB, I think that can drive down the cost of investment.  When you have that you begin to get more private sector coming in.  When you look at Kenya, it is all about the accessibility, the effortlessness in which, you know, the business environment can exist.  And I think once you have that and then you have the basic enabling infrastructure ‑‑ which is mostly public and private ‑‑ then you get the rest that follows.
We're thinking about launching 5G in ten African countries.  We now have about 20 countries calling us and saying why didn't you pick my city, tell me what to do to make sure my city becomes part of the top ten.  When we create that you can create emulation.  It is all about the regulatory environment and the cost of capital, of course.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, Vera.  Very interesting question.  Certainly sitting here with my European bank reconstruction hat on, I believe the private sector can be brought in and the emulation effect is very important as well.  I think demonstrating it can be done in some countries as a great way of showing others that they can follow down the same route.  Thank you very much, indeed.
Finally, in this round, the chair of the MAG, how do you see this?  What can the IGF really do for this question of governance going forward?
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN: Thanks very much, Jonathan.  I have to take this opportunity to thank everyone who has contributed to making the virtual IGF 2020 a success.  That includes you, Jonathan.
I also want to thank the future host countries, Poland, Russia, Japan and Ethiopia.
I think the IGF needs to be aware it doesn't exist in a parallel dimension.  And the inequalities that we see on the internet mirror inequalities in the world, conflict, dislocation, injustice.  The power of the internet to enable rights is immense.  It can also enable harm.  But ‑‑ ultimately if we don't ‑‑ and then the internet will remain also divided.  So we cannot solve all the internet's problems on the internet alone.
Secondly I think we need to be bold.  We need to recognize there are real challenges and differences in approach to policy solutions.  Regulation, for example, of large internet platforms.  There are different perspectives on that.  Taxations across borders.  The differences of views in that as well.  And then I think we really need to be inclusive.  That's the third thing.  The IGF needs to be inclusive of diversity of people, of abilities, languages, and perspectives.  We also need to become more inclusive of institutions.  Other decision making forums including governments but also regional institutes that deal with internet policy.
As the internet becomes more ubiquitous, more and more institutions that are not internet focused as their first priority are having to deal with internet related policy issues.  We need to bring them to the IGF.  We need to listen to what their needs are, integrate their voices into the IGF conversation.
Finally, the IGF needs to strengthen its own processes.  Be willing to evolve, to build its own capacity and its relationships with the U.N. system and other institutions beyond that.  But it must never, I believe, lose its uniqueness, it's character as being inside the U.N. but also separate.  Being bottom up and having a community of people that are committing time and space to it, volunteering time and space to it and use it as a strength.  As a space for their conversations.  So as we grow the IGF into this part of this digital commerce to use the term the Secretary General's road map uses we need to create it into a more robust institution, you know, for want of a better word that can interact more effectively and listen to policy makers around the world.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed.  It's come a long way.  You know, I think if I remember fondly in 2008 ‑‑ my memory is not as bad as I think.  And then, again, you know, I think you see the IGF really growing all the time.  And, you know, I think that's a great tribute to the multistakeholder approach.  So thank you to you for that.  You're staying with us for the next panel as well.
Let's move on to voluntary commitments.  I'd like to ask all of you in no more than a minute each to make a voluntary commitment on behalf of yourself or your institution you represent or the government you represent to furthering this whole area of work.  Perhaps I could start with you, Krzysztof, what's your voluntary commitment you'd like to make?
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Let me start with the comment that we're fully committed to the organization of the 16th edition of the IGF between 6 and 10 December next year.  And also I would like to spend a few moments on the ideas of the IGF for the next year, so what we can expect and maybe it will pbe a good moment to share with you the ideas and welcome all your suggestions as well.
As Poland we wish to deeply involve the youth community in the IGF process.  In particular to listen to their voice regarding the challenges they face, for instance, concerning education and employment but also dealing with psychological effect of the COVID‑19 pandemic which I think is very important.
Moreover, building up on the current experience, we will work on the continuation of the involvement in IGF.  So our colleagues from Germany launched this project last year and we wish to continue this good practice in cooperation with other institutions and entities as well.  We wish to involve as well the 2022 IGF host and join to deliver interesting agenda for 2021 and seek continuation in Ethiopia which I think may make a lot of sense.
Based on the IGF opening panel, which I had the pleasure to co‑moderate, so I think that environmental issues in the era of transformation, digital transformation might be very interesting to continue as well, especially the environmental topic has not been the key issue at the IGF agenda so far.  So it's also a very good point I think we can make.
Last but not least, we have been bringing completely ‑‑ or new communities into the new IGF.  Like, for example, to propose the broader involvement of programmers and gamer communities into the IGF.  Just to let you know, at the time that Poland has recently ‑‑ so we can share with others.  And maybe a good area to discuss would be as well as investment and general discussion on recovering economies after COVID crisis using digital transformation and digital technologies so it might be interesting to cover as well.  So that's the perspective and the ideas from my side.  I hope to see you all in the fourth quarter 2021 physically, hopefully, in Poland, thank you.
>> MODERATOR: I look forward to being there physically.  Thank you very much, indeed Krzysztof.  Let's move to Ahmendin Ahmed, hopefully you're still with us from Ethiopia.  Your voluntary commitment on behalf of yourself or indeed, your country.
>> AHMENDIN AHMED: Thank you, Jonathan.  As mentioned earlier, the challenges has to be addressed and solutions could be provided as three levels.  The international collaboration Ethiopia is engaging in collaboration with that.  And that would be one of the biggest steps for the IGF contribution.  Regional solutions such as reducing costs and the content delivery networks will be another contribution for the IGF.
When it comes to the country's solution, the case of Ethiopia, the government has approved digital transformation strategies, but in June 2020 which is digital Ethiopia 2025 so we're going to have IGF 2022.  And this strategy fixed most of the problems witnessed during the pandemic.  Some of this may be the addition of the telecom network, the privatization is one.  And this would be one important contribution.  The mobile phone market, to make them affordable.  The upgrading of the existing government network to increase access to the network, to standardize the data center, as well as in facilitating the implementation of the digital economy, implementing a national ID.  Ethiopia is expanding the cybersecurity potential.
I think this will be a contribution in expanding the intergovernmental and the commerce services and enabling policies and regulations such as the start up act which is going to be approved soon.  We do have a national initiative in Ethiopia and promotion of the system, and of course, a very important thing is improving the availability of electronic power in terms of power generation, distribution and coverage.  Because that is one of the challenges and I hope we'll be committed to solve this problem for IGF 2022 and our government is working to ensure this by investing in different technologies, including the hydroelectric power and solar power sources and I hope to see all in Ethiopia in 2022 for IGF.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Ahmendin Ahmed for that.  Maxim Parshin.  Your voluntary commitment on behalf of yourself or your country.  Maxim Parshin, are you there?  It doesn't look as though he is at the moment.  We'll move on.
Carlos Molina, perhaps I could turn to you in Costa Rica for your voluntary commitment.
>> CARLOS MOLINA: Well, our voluntary commitment is ‑‑ Costa Rica is a small country that dreams big and acts bigger.  We protect 25% of national parks, our energy is 100% sustainable and next year we're going to celebrate 200 years of being a republic.  Our commitment is to create what we call bicentennial network, 100% access to all students, high school, primary and universal students in order to leave no one behind.  That's our most important issue.  Digital access is not something to have been done in order to accomplish all the policy that we have.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed.  Vera Songwe, perhaps I could ask you for your voluntary commitment.
>> VERA SONGWE: I'll make three commitments.  I think the first one is with the African communications platform we're already able to identify locate and talk to over 700 million devices.  Not people yet.  And we're hoping that with this we can maybe help accelerate the spread of the digital identity across the continent.  That's our first commit, is to see how using that platform already ‑‑ because we're in those houses ‑‑ ensure that we can profile better identity.
The second commitment we'd like to make is to ensure the digital divide is not gender biased.  We would like to target particularly young girls and ensure that they can become programmers, they can have access to the internet and that they can develop.  And, finally, intellectual property rights.  I think one of the amazing things about the digital age is the new commodity is ideas.  We have to make sure that we can protect Africa's ideas and we have to make sure there is a system and a regulatory environment in place that allows us to do that.
As the commission for Africa, we're working very hard to ensure the ideas, the inovation ‑‑ Africa wants to use the devices but we also want to create tools that can be used on these devices.  But for us to do that we need to protect our innovations.  So creating an IPO agency on the continent that allows young Africans to protect their innovation and maybe create the next unicorns for the world is our next commitment.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: That would be a good thing to see, thank you very much, indeed, Vera Songwe.  Anriettea, your commitment.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN: Thank you.  To work with the advisory group and the U.N. to build a parliamentary track that does more than just come together once a year.  Then I think secondly ‑‑ this is actually part of this ‑‑ to respond to the opportunity presented by the rules, road map for digital cooperation to strengthen the IGF as a platform for policy making, for public participation and to strengthen the IGF's relationships with other institutions including national governments.
And to evolve the existing mechanisms, the best practice forums to become more effective and have more impact.  And ultimately, to retain the IGF's bottom up and open character.  You know, in fact not just to not lose it but to make it more inclusive and diverse and a place that's safe for debate, safe for dissent and being creative and finding solutions.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, for that.  You'll join us in a minute, few minutes for the next panel as well.
We have one more voluntary commitment and that comes from Japan, Japan, of course, is the host of the IGF in 2032.  We have a video from the minister for internal affairs and communications. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, for sending us that video.  And a big thank you to all of our panelists on panel one for the first part of our discussion this evening.  It was very kind of you to join us from all over.  And now we move on to panel two, and I will ‑‑ let me introduce the panelists, we're going to be discussing in panel two how can we better face global challenge and opportunities in the next decade.  That is the topic we're now moving on to.
Our panel are Toomas ilves, Fabrizio Hochschild.  Vint Cerf, Goran Marby, the internet cooperation for assigned names and numbers, ICANN, the president of that organization.  Vallarie Yiega.  Mats Granryd and Anriette Esterhuysen is still with us.
Let me start, if I may, with Fabrizio Hochschild.  How can we make sure this remains responsive to this quite fast moving digital environment?
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you.  I think at the starting point we have to have a common agreement on what the challenge is.  And I would argue that based on listening to many especially during these days that the root of today's changing and making the most (choppy audio) is what some have referred to as the pacing challenge.  That's the discrepancy between having a technology that is never spread and penetrated the lives of so many people in such a short time.  There's nothing that comes even close.
In barely 25 years, this has transformed lives of half the globe.  That's never happened before.  And, of course, policy makers, those responsible to international regionals for promoting the greater good through the rule of law have had a hard time keeping pace and steering these technologies.
I think there's also, you know, there's an assumption that governance is somehow the enemy of freedom or innovation.  Jonathan, you'll be familiar with the lesson of Lord of the Flies.  The absence of governance more often than not is not freedom and innovation, but tyranny and domination of the most strong.  Tyranny and domination of those who profit from an absence of the rule of law.
And we've seen that.  We've seen that in the scams, we've seen that in the rise in child abuse on the internet.  We've seen that in the interference in our politics . we've seen that in the rise of human rights violations and surveillance of human rights defenders.  We've seen that in many different aspects that go hand in hand with the huge benefits.
So I think the challenge for all governance mechanisms, including the IGF, is to keep up and to move forward with similar speed and impact and in concrete terms I think what that means for the IGF is to continue on the road and it has made important strides forward of becoming more inclusive.  More inclusive by region, more inclusive by stakeholder group having civil society but also better representation of business and government, especially from the Global South.  And also being better linked to other government mechanisms.  Internet Governance will always be decentralized but we have to have more impact.
Definitely bottom up as Ahmed emphasized, but bottom up can not be end in itself.  Legitimacy for impact, for that next to being bottom up we need much stronger leadership as the Secretary General emphasizes.  I think we need more stable funding and a stronger capacity.  I think we also need to progressively transform this from a one off important event to a process that happens throughout the year and can also have a say on developments as they unfold.  The internet moves by the second.  We cannot move in a once a year format.
Those would be my suggestion and I know much excellent work is being done in this direction and my pledge is to continue to support that work.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed.  A very good point about the pace of change compared to the pace of an annual meeting.  That's the first time I've heard of the Lord of the Flies, but I like the analogy very much, thank you.  I wish you well with your next appointment.  Thank you for joining us on this event.
I'd like to go to Toomas Ilves next.  I wonder how you feel ‑‑ what you feel really the U.N. and the IGF need to do to take all this forward?
>> TOOMAS HENDRIK ILVES: Well, thank you very much.  First of all, I am glad the U.N. has actually convened the IGF, but I agree that it should be much more of an ongoing process.  Certainly there have been a lot of new and intriguing ideas.  But I'd like to focus on how it can cooperate more ‑‑ am I not unmuted?  I thought I was.
>> MODERATOR: We're hearing you well.
>> TOOMAS HENDRIK ILVES: I got a little pop up here.
The challenge that we have to really face is how do expand the possibilities of the internet to the rest of the world.  And I don't know if we understand how crucial it is.  We get bogged down in a lot of crucial questions.  But we need to know that now these days ‑‑ yes, there's the development in the 19th and 20th Century was a function of physical infrastructure from highways to telephone connectivity.  In the digital era we have entered sometimes even unwittingly, we need to move from mere physical infrastructure to the software development.  I mean that quite literally.
Of course we need broadband coverage, but far, far more important than that, as well as our discussions on synergies, multistakeholder process and sustainable solutions for a broad mix of interrelated issues, all in quotes, we require the developing world to be quickly able to adopt secure software infrastructure, including digital identities to employ effective open source architecture and to guarantee data integrity, including privacy.
All of this is technically possible today.  Indeed, it's existed for two decades.  If we do this we'll move from talking about guaranteeing human rights online to actually implementing them.  Especially in privacy and data integrity, which lie at the heart of human rights and the age of the internet.  These are not just words.  These solutions exist.  They're not overwhelmingly expensive.  Indeed, we are still able to take advantage today of Moore's Law which says the cost of computing halves every year and a half.  It's half the cost in a year and a half.  It would be 13 times cheaper to build the ‑‑ my country's complete digitization of governance today than it was when we did it as a not very rich country 20 years ago.  And in doing so, guarantee freedom and human rights online.
There are only three things you cannot do online.  You cannot get married, you cannot get divorced and you can't sell or exchange real estate or property.  I mean, all of this ‑‑ if we're to safely implement responses to COVID‑19 where privacy and integrity become key issues.  So that touches upon contact tracing, supply chain integrity of PPE, of respirators and so on.  And also one hopes, almost importantly ‑‑ I mean, most importantly the safety of any vaccination and the supply chain for vaccinations.  We have to know all of these things to avoid the kind of disasters we have seen in the past.
So I mean, there are solutions.  What can we do?  In my country we actually offer these solutions for free.  I mean, we just give away the software.  And it's been taken up by some 30 countries around the world.  I mean, you have to do a lot yourself, obviously, but these things are not that expensive and you can make huge moves in these areas if we actually decide to do them, have the political will to create national identities, digital identities secure using two factor authentication and then encryption to have a secure architecture.  There are many models of that.  And to employ them most modern technologies of distributed ledgers, also known as block chain to guarantee the integrity of data.
So I would say that on the tech side, we don't have that many blocks, sort of huge steps to take.  We can do these things today and I think that the U.N. really is the place to do that.  I should also say that the U.N. is the one place we really need to work on avoiding the fragmentation of the internet.  Allowing the internet to split based on different countries' understanding of access to information will re‑create the divisions in the world that we laid to rest with the end of the Cold War.  And time since then access to information and global connectivity has transformed billions of lives.  None of this would have been achieved without a globally interoperable internet connecting all of us.
We need to preserve that and that's something that really should be a strong role for the U.N., especially now during the worldwide health crisis where we've seen the global connectivity has helped us stay connected during the pandemic and certainly decreased the damage in all our countries to the economy thanks to self‑isolation and quarantining.
Basically I'll say that we're at an important juncture right now.  Where we need to be guided by our core values.  When advancing internet government issues we must find ways to protect human rights, democracy and the rule of law in the digital age.  It will be equally important to improve the trust and confidence in the internet, much of which you can do through technological means that guarantee trust and confidence.
So I'd say the bottom line is the internet must serve the citizen first and only then governments and corporations while the values of the universal declaration of human rights remain just as important today as they did in 1945.  And I'm confident the new IGF will be able to find a global consensus of creating a free, open and decentralized internet, thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, Toomas Hendrik Ilves, very interesting thoughts there from a country that's certainly come a long way when it comes to global connectivity.
One of the youngest countries, so maybe we should go from that to our youngest panelists, Vallarie Yiega, you're hear representing youth.  I wonder what your vision is for the internet moving forward?  What's it look like in five years' time, say 2025?
>> VALLARIE YIEGA: Thank you so much, Jonathan and thank you to all the panelists and the attendees joining us on this platform and from other platforms as well.
I think it's important for me to state that the youth are not a homogenous group.  They're different in terms of the aspects of the regions they come from, the needs they have.  With that said, looking at the future for young people in five years' time, some of the objectives that young people have coming into the internet include things like business, human rights, climate action, education, jobs, and access to information, especially in the wake of the pandemic where we've had so many people having transitioned to the digital platforms.
Just like the previous speaker said, the issue of access affects young people differently because the access for a young person in Africa would be different for someone in a more developed countries.  As we look into the youth moving into the future we have to look at young people in terms of what they can contribute. ‑‑ (choppy audio) it was spoken about how they're trying to do the block on digital identities and teach young women in the African continent, it's my pleasure to say we have ‑‑ and as young people would like to see a future is having institutions like the U.N. and other cooperations, private companies, also governments to make meaningful contributions.
We'd also like to bring into light some of the youth initiatives, especially in this virtual IGF.  We've seen the youth coalition.  Proposals, to mentor ‑‑ (choppy audio) to be able to just bring more youth on when it comes to Internet Governance.  We have seen what young people are doing in their regional and local areas just to be able to make sure that they are more involved and aware and can meaningful contribute.
I liked what the minister from Poland said when he said they were going to work more with young people in the next IGF because that is what as young people are looking forward to, to be part of the organization, be part of the proposals, be part of the panels where it is not only youth ‑‑ or young people sitting on those panels, but they're sitting together with decision makers who can actually make impacts.
With that said, we've heard a lot about how young people are now thinking globally.  I would like to mention the working groups that have been developed by the German information society.  And it actually brings together young people globally to discuss on pertinent topics such as fair use businesses, the intersection of tech and environment and it's very important for us as stakeholders for us to be able to see what the young people are doing so they can be incorporated in the right spaces.
Now we're seeing young people bringing into context the problems that is seen on the internet.  Issues such as encryption, issues such as human rights violation.  I like what was said earlier about making the internet governance a safe space where people can come.  Human rights defenders can come and sit on the panels with the governments and discuss the human rights.  We've seen what's happening in Nigeria and how the young people were able to organize in a community setup using the internet and being able to create that awareness and what can be done.  We're seeing issues of that, and we're seeing young people organize themselves in the same thing.
Also, I'd like to talk about youth mentorship.  More than ever now we're seeing young people in terms of getting into the Internet Governance space.  It used to be a struggle of can we get into this panel.  Young people are bringing young people into the space and allowing them to have an opportunity to learn.  And with that said, of course, we'd like to appreciate some of the internet mentors who are young people who are working for us.  Young people who have been in this space and are creating more space for young people to come online.
I'd also like to ‑‑ as I close up ‑‑ some of the national governance, which has played a key role in bringing more and more young people in terms of just educating them on what Internet Governance is.  Of course, I would like to share the experience of what is being done in Kenya and how they're using that space to meaningfully contribute.  Going forward, we are going to see more young people in these spaces.  We're going to have more young people to have a position when it comes to the Internet Governance forum, thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Very good to hear.  Let me turn to Vint Cerf from Google.  There are so many priorities, Vint, so many things to do.  What do you think should be the number one way forward if we're to make progress in this area?
>> VINT CERF: Let me thank you so much, Jonathan.  Let me start out first by simply congratulating the IGF team on the technical access of this event.  Not only the webpages were amazingly so helpful from my point of view and organizing everything and, of course, this online conference has also been striking, including the interpretation capability which I really appreciate.
Let me come to a sort of primary expression to answer your question.  I think that making the internet safe while preserving the openness that has produced this cornucopia of applications is our primary challenge.  How do we make it safe?  Of course, there may be varying definitions of what people consider safe.  But I think if I were an engineer I would be asking questions like that.  If I were a policy maker, I would be asking myself the same kinds of questions.
Second, fragmentation which has come up frequently in today's and earlier conversations, is a real threat.  And it will destroy the benefits of the internet, which are largely derived from the free flow of information across international boundaries.  So we need to do everything we can to avoid the harmful effects of fragmentation.
The third thing is that multistakeholder dialogue I think is still vital for the production of good quality policy.  And that includes things like asking the man in the street or the woman in the street as the mission publique has managed to do asking citizens what they think of the internet.  I have to say the Secretary General Guterres' comments were comprehensive and I think he expressed them extraordinarily well.
It's an attractive term but I worry it could be misunderstood and misinterpreted to faster fragmentation.  I agree that we need to seek local solutions to local problems, but not at the expense of destroying the interoperability of the computers and the networks that make the internet useful.
Last point I would make is that our task now, as many have already emphasized, is to achieve broad sustainable, useful, safe, affordable and inclusive access to the internet while protecting human rights and keeping the internet open.  Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Vint thank you very much indeed.  One quick follow up, Vint.  I saw you looking intently when we heard earlier from Africa this whole question of two and a half minutes to open a Google page in Africa, two seconds in the United States.  How do you resolve a problem like that?
>> VINT CERF: Well, actually, we're trying to do something somethings technically to deal with that.  One of them is called AMP which makes the ads load more quickly and coding schemes and other things.  But the real answer to that problem is more bandwidth.  We've made some contributions there in Uganda.  I think we've done something similar in Ghana.  We tried to demonstrate that wholesale tactics which allow for a resale of capacity is a tactic.  Certainly one could also argue that improved wireless access to the internet, whether it's 4G or 5G or wi‑fi also contributes to solving that problem.
But the real answer is investment in capacity and driving costs out, which is a very important point made earlier to make these things affordable for everyone.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, for that.  Let's move on to Goran Marby from ICANN.  Really, same sort of question that I put to Vint, which is so many priorities, you know, what's your priority?
>> GORAN MARBY: Thank you very much.  Representing the technical community, because a lot of the things I would say is repetition of what was talked about.  I think a lot of the comments here, I would like to take a step back.  The first thing, how do you be more effective, you have to define the problem.  I think IGF has talked about it.  One of the problems is the amount of connectivity in the world, and especially in place where's it doesn't have it today.  And Vint has made a good case for that, of course.
One thing that's important to remember is that how do you define the internet at the top?  The way I define it away from the technical community is when the internet doesn't exist as an entity.  What we contribute to is the sort of language that makes it possible for people on all those devices, all those different platforms to communicate with each other.  That's the internet for me.  That's the intermobility to it.
And a lot of the questions that arise when you talk about fake medias and all those things that's happening is happening inside the internet itself, it happens inside the social media platform.  I use them all, I mean, I'm not taking ‑‑ saying it's negative.  When you leave ‑‑ when you walk into a media platform you actually do leave the internet itself.  You're inside someone else's computer.  And I think that we sometimes miss that small but fairly important factor into this.
There are things to be happening inside a closed environment, I think the governments know around the world are reacting to that.  But that's very different from this view to go on what your particular network, what your ISP, your wi‑fi or mobile, whatever you're using and you can connect to me here.
That leads to something quite interesting as well.  We often talk about it as this fantastically global thing.  It is fantastic and it is global.  But it's also very local.  And one of the things I see when we look is that when you're actually using the internet ‑‑ when my daughter wants to communicate with me, she is very local, she's in the next room, she communicates on a social media platform.  It's very difficult, the traffic is very, very local.  And what we're seeing now to be able to really make people the opportunity to go online is that we actually turn this global device into something local.  Internet has to be the ability to be local and global at the same time.
So that's why ICANN is working on IDMs which another way of saying people should be able to use a keyboard ‑‑ they understand what is on it.  The symbols on that should be something they actually understand.  They don't need to be forced to read from left to right with dots in the middle because many scripts doesn't even have a dot.  Because I think people are smart.  We often talk about ‑‑ coming back to the investment part.  You know, I worked in the industry as well and I also worked as a telecom regulator.  It's much more easier to have the investments if someone wants to buy it.  There needs to be a demand for what you do.
I think people in many regions around the world, to be able to see ‑‑ wants to have the localized internet, free platforms, but they should be able to do that.  What we're doing right now is working in different forums.  We think that people to be able to take the next step needs to be ‑‑ internet needs to be localized.
So but then again, it's one common language for all those networks.  We have to make sure that we don't create alternatives to what we call the internet.  Because you want to do something very, very local.  Because then you actually do fragmentize the internet and takes away the whole idea behind the internet which is about connecting people.
And I think this conversation ‑‑ I mean, I followed the discussions on IGF and I agree this has been a success not only from a technical perspective but from the perspective of people coming together.  More and more, those discussions is becoming more in depth.  What are the real problems?  What are we talking about?  How do you create this connectivity?  How do you make it global and local at the same time?  So I see new discussions and away from the technical part of this, we have a simple task, we provide a service to the world, but actually makes it possible for you to connect.  That's everything we do.  And I think that that recognition has been coming up during this conversation.  Because then we can actually start talking about the problems.  It's not the internet.  It's often everywhere else that the problems might exist.
Then I think it's an important discussion to continue, too, thank you very much.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed.  Let me turn now to Mats, what's the one thing that needs to be done to foster cooperation between countries?  Particularly some of the more economically challenged countries, perhaps?
>> MATS GRANRYD: Great pleasure to be here with you.  And as a fellow Swede I feel sorry for you and your daughter.  You might want to talk together on the couch instead of sending text messages, but that's up to you.
We are committed to the preservation of the collaboration model for Internet Governance and decision making.  Today the mobile industry, we connect roughly two thirds of everyone on this planet.  And we contribute some $4.1 trillion to the global GDP.  This brings responsibility, especially this year when mobile connectivity has been so vital to all of us to continue to do business and live our normal lives.
But the area of the digital cooperation that really needs our attention is the persistent digital divide.  We know that today roughly 50% of the world's population is connected to the internet.  And 50% is not.  And the 50% that is connected is connected through a mobile device or through a mobile internet as has been described before.
Roughly four billion people are still not connected to the internet.  And I think we think this is more important and maybe the biggest challenge that we're facing ever.  The four billion people that is not connected is the sum of two things.  Number one is the coverage gap which means that people who live outside of areas of mobile broadband networks, 3G, 4G or 5G to some extent.  This coverage gap is roughly 700 million people.  The second area is the usage gap where people live in areas covered by mobile broadband but they decide or choose not to use it.
So the mobile industry, we have made strong progress against the coverage gap by investing some $320 billion which has brought 1 billion more people online.  That's good.  It's not good enough.  Today I call for a greater attention, an action to reduce the big gap, the usage gap by eliminating the barriers that we know exist and accelerating the mobile broadband use so we can bring people online and finally close this digital divide.
The usage gap is currently roughly 3.4 billion people.  The main barriers as has been discussed, affordability, lack of skills, I think honestly that's a small one.  Safety and privacy concerns, and maybe most importantly lack of local relevant content.  There's nothing there for me to use.  If the current trend continues, over 40% of people in low and middle income countries will remain offline by 2020.  For these people, there is only one way, mobile of getting online and receiving life‑changing students.
The mobile industry will invest in $1.1 trillion in networks from now to 2025 to build out capacity and installing new 5G equipment as Vint talked about earlier.  I urge our partners, public and private, to invest at the same level to bridge the big gap, namely the usage gap.  There has never been a more crucial time to bring people online and advance the STGs to full completion by 2030.
2020 has reinforced the connection between technological advancements and human progress.  Thank you for that.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, Mats for that.  Finally in this round, Anriette Esterhuysen, what do you think the IGF can do the further this cooperation now?
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN: Thank you.  It's challenging to add to all the relevant points that have been made.  I think I'll start by saying the IGF should not underestimate the complexity of the problems and the complexity or the difficulty in finding consensus.  I think that is important.  I think the IGF is designed to deal with complexity.  But I think we don't always agree even if we understand what the problems are.  For example, there are different views on how to protect the public good character of the internet.  And how to strengthen it.
I've touched on this before, and I think Fabrizio did as well.  There are different views on the internet as a tool for democracy and human rights.  There are states that feel that the internet creates a platform for challenging regimes and they are not comfortable with that.  And then there are masses of citizens who use social media to criticize government and they feel empowered by that.  And actually, often these different stances do come into conflict.
When it comes to access, also, it's not so simple.  We actually know what the solutions are.  We know that we need dynamic spectrum regulation.  We know that mobile penetration, as Mats has just said, is leveling off.  We also know that community networks is a viable solution, small businesses.  We know that we need public access and public sector investment in skills and content and yet these things are still not happening.  Community networks are viable but they often like the licenses and enabling financial investment frameworks.
I'm not being cynical here at all, actually, I'll just saying that finding these solutions involve as President Ilves said earlier they involve political will and I don't think it's always that easy to find that.
To come back to the role of the IGF in particular the IGF plus, we do need to strengthen cooperation at a global level within the digital internet community, but also beyond.  But I believe very firmly that we also really need to strengthen cooperation at the regional level, the national level and the local level.  I'm not sure if Fabrizio is with us but I don't think bottom up is about legitimacy, it's about getting things done.  That's where the changes are made.  When the networks are built, where the internet change points are put into place, where the skills are developed.  They're developed on the ground at the local level.
That nuts and bolts element of the internet, yes, it can be encouraged from a global level but it has to happen at a local, national and regional level.  I think the IGF and its national and regional initiatives can play a role to support that.  Let's build on that and less continue to do that.  Let's not simplify it but let's be up for and inspired and brave.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, yes.  The local level challenge is clearly very, very important.
Now it's time to have voluntary commitments from this panel.  I'd like you to think about what commitments you'd like to make either on behalf of yourself or your organizations.  Toomas Ilves, a voluntary commitment you'd like to make very briefly.  You're muted.
>> TOOMAS HENDRIK ILVES: I have to do it twice here apparently.  Anyway, the E governance academy of Estonia, which I'm on the board, has for some 20 years already been teaching people from all over the world, mainly government officials, on the basics of digitization and we have also sent people wherever needed when requested, the government's funding of it is probably enough to maintain people coming to us if they get there by themselves.
With funding from the European Union and other international organizations, we also send people to assist in long‑term digitization projects around the world.  The goal being learning the basic skills ‑‑ I have to say this is not really basic in terms of how does the internet work.  It's what are the essentials of a security digital identity, what you need to do on what kind of architecture you need to set up and once you do that moving on to data integrity issues.
But we do that and it's the solution we use in my country is open source, nonproprietary software.  That's all kind of free.  But what it does require is that countries themselves commit to build these things out once we show how to do it.  As I said we've done it in about 30 countries and the E governance academy is happy to assist countries that are genuinely interested in digitizing public and private and government services for the citizens.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, former president of Estonia.  Let me move on to our youngest panelists, Vallarie Yiega, I hope you're still there.  Perhaps you'd like to tell us what you would like to commit to.
>> VALLARIE YIEGA: Thank you, Jonathan.  What I would like to commit to and also what ‑‑ on behalf of the youth we'd like to commit to as well.  There is more bold representation of young people in the IGF processes, decision making in terms of organization of the IGF and also in sessions that actually are meaningful and have impact.
Also, you're going to see a lot more local actions from young people, collaborating with their own regional and local initiatives.  Definitely going to see more in this space, thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed.  Vint Cerf, I hope you're still with us.  A voluntary commitment you'd like to make.
>> VINT CERF: Let me speak to two of them.  I promise I'll spend less time admiring the problem and a lot more time solving them.  And I think it's very important we share with each other things that work and things that have not worked and explain why, what were the local conditions that made a difference.  That's my primary commitment.
But I want to suggest another thing which Vallarie's comment inspires in me.  We should get more people involved in the problem solves because they're too young to know you can't do that.
>> MODERATOR: I like both of those very much.  Thank you very much, indeed, Vint.  Goran Marby.
>> GORAN MARBY: We will continue our commitment to the IGF.  We think it's a very important platform for discussion and an important place for people to come together.  The other thing is our other commission is we're increasing our efforts to work together with software houses, equipment providers and others who are essential to bring a more centralized internet to local people because technical things has to read technical things in the right way.  And that is a commitment we'll be making.
We will talk about how this will work to make anyone to be able to access internet using their own language and their own scripts, thank you very much.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed.  And I move to your fellow Swede, Mats, perhaps you would like to make your voluntary commitment.
>> MATS GRANRYD: Thank you.  I'm in the Vint arena of listening to youths, young people and learn from them.  Because they are not only the future as we know, but they haven't done the same mistakes we have.  We should listen to them and make sure our fellow business leaders listen to them.  The industry will continue to improve technology and bandwidth go forward but listen to the youth I think is important.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Mats, it's a good one.  Finally, Anriette, you've already made a voluntary commitment but if you have another one we'd like to hear it.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN: Just to promise the IGF is intergenerational.  I agree with Vint.  Yes, it's good to get young people because they have the courage and they're willing to go before those who know it might not work.  The intergenerational character of the IGF is as important.
I think Jonathan, to work with those that sport the IGF and many of them are in ‑‑ this virtual ‑‑
>> MODERATOR: You're freezing.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN: Just to bring in more people from outside the existing IGF bubble so we have more creative and more collaboration.  That's it.  And not lose the IGF community as we also strengthen our top down leadership level character.  I've said it all.
>> MODERATOR: We definitely got that message in the end, thank you for persevering.  And thank you to our panel on this particular section of our closing event.  Some interesting thoughts from all of you, thank you all for taking part.
We have two other, two further voluntary commitments on video, the first is the president of the Swiss confederation.  [speaking non‑English language] 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, very much, indeed.  And we do have another also voluntary commitment, we're going to hear from Brad Smith, president of Microsoft.
>> BRAD SMITH: I think this is a time that calls in the world to take urgent action and it's a time that calls on those of us who work across the tech sector to step up and to do more.  I think in part we need to use technology to make the world more accessible to everyone on the planet.  That's why we at Microsoft have offered a concrete commitment in our Airband program to use new technology to reduce the cost and expand the reach of the internet through broadband.
This is also a time that calls on us I think not just to think about giving people access to the internet, but providing them with the skills they'll need to make that access more effective, more important and productive for their own lives.  Around the world, the jobs of the future involve more digital skills than in the past.  That's why this year, we at Microsoft stepped forward with a commitment that we will reach 25 million people before this year ends to provide the kinds of services that will connect people, not just with skills, but with their next job.
And, finally, we need to recognize that one of the most important issues of this decade and, indeed, every decade to come, is the needs of our planet.  To address climate change and sustainability more broadly.  That's why at Microsoft we've committed ourselves to be carbon negative by the end of this decade.  That's why we've committed by 2050 we'll remove from the environment all of the carbon that Microsoft has emitted since it was founded in 1975.  And it means that we are also committed to building a technology resource that will serve every part of the world.  That we'll provide the kinds of tools all of our customers will need to measure and monitor and ultimately reduce their own carbon emissions.
It's why we're committed to building a global data set that every community and country and government can access to measure and monitor and manage their own biodiversity.  More than ever, these are the challenges of our time.  And more than ever, they require the work, the collaboration that comes from IGF.  That's why we as a company are not just supportive of the Secretary General's call to make IGF even more important, it's why we are so committed ourselves to being an active participant in playing a critical part.  Thank you very much.
>> MODERATOR: Brad Smith, thank you very much, the president of Microsoft corporation.  Let's look ahead to next year's IGF in the remaining minutes we have.  I'd like to call on the Secretary of State of the chancellery of Poland.
>> MAREK ZAGORSKI: Thank you very much, participants of the 15th IGF.  If the famous novelist came back to being today he would not be surprised to see us talking in front of our computers.  I mention him because next year we'll celebrate the 100th advisory of his birthday.  He has become an inspiration, not only for many enthusiasts.  Let's just say this, he inspired the creator of many games, for example.
In the current situation, Internet Governance is the key to ensuring development, human rights and security.  Thanks to the internet the future has come as a present.  We were supposed to meet earlier this year, but due to the COVID‑19 pandemic circumstances, unfortunately, we could not.  However, this difficult time has brought us new experiences and it was different it was not worseron at the time who he was writing his novels, the host city for the host city 2021 was one of the most important locations for coal mining.  Since that time it has gone a long way to becoming a vibrant modern city.  It is also now known of being a hub for the gaming industry and game enthusiasts.
This is a feature we'd like to build while organizing next year's IGF between 6 and 10 December.  I truly believe it will take place on site in December next year.  We want you to have the opportunity to experience traditional Polish hospitality and learn about the tourist attractions of this region.  Our motto will still be eternally united.  And IGF 2021 will be a platform of discussion of open, free and divided internet where users can enjoy the rights.  That's the big idea and we want to bring new communities to this.
IGF, please be with us next year.  Your voice is crucial in this important debate and we want to hear it.  Ladies and gentlemen, dear friends and colleagues, I would like to give thanks to the united nation and IGF secretariat for the commitment and efforts in preparing the 2020 online edition.  Congratulations on the wonderful organization and the incredibly successful meetings.  I'm very much looking forward to continuing our open dialogue on every level.  In this difficult time the IGF is a perfect place to conduct such a discussion and work solutions.  The multistakeholder and inclusive spirit of the IGF forum is now our most valuable asset.
Myself and my colleague, Mr. Szubert and the whole time of IGF 2021 is at your disposal and suggestions you might have regarding the next year's IGF.  See you all there.  Thank you very much.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much I hope we'll be there physically as a sign of solidarity at this difficult time.
Thank you very much, indeed.  Now, let's hear some closing remarks on this IGF.  I call on the underSecretary General for economic and social affairs.  He made a speech at the opening session, and now he delivers some closing remarks for us.
>> LIU ZHENMIN: Thank you, nice to see you again.  We met last week.  Participants, colleagues and friends from around the world, I'm honored to join you with over 6,000 people from 173 countries gathering online at this year's Internet Governance forum.  Over the past days through the online meeting, I'm very glad to see so many friends both old and new.  But it is also a stark reminder the world continues to witness the devastating impacts of the COVID‑19 pandemic.
Societies are reeling from shutdowns, stay at home orders, and widespread and mounting infection.  As a result, we are moving towards an increasing early virtual world.  You heard from the Secretary General Guterres, the COVID‑19 pandemic had a strong spotlight on the importance of digital technologies and transformation.  And an urgent need to enhance the role of the IGF as a platform for dialogue and proposed solutions.
The lively discussions captured the overarching theme of this year's IGF, the Internet Governance in an age of uncertainty.  My own takeaways of this year's IGF are, number one, that we can no longer separate development tracks of digitizization and sustainability development.  And number two, more than ever, we need cooperation.  These are critical for governance issues, the environment, inclusion, and trust of cross borders, sectors, disciplines and generations.
We need to extend the multistakeholder approach and we need to continue integrating solutions and the capacity built into the IGF.  Participants, as we close the 15th IGF, we also crossed the halfway mark of this ten‑year mandate.  Renewed by the U.N. General Assembly in 2015.  Guided by the Secretary General's road map I'll share the following reflection and how we collectively can advance the IGF.
First, having a more focused agenda.  A strategy to have a selected theme and well‑defined issues should continue.  It is our focus on what matters most on streamlined discussions and outputs of the IGF.  We started last year implementing that and we're going to continue in the coming years.  There should also be continuity between annual sessions.  We see, for example, the spotlight on data this year during the discussions last year in Berlin.
Second, integrating high level leaders, I'm encouraged by the change and concrete policy recommendations that we heard at this year's high‑level leaders track.  The focus on the role of internet and the digital technologies in responding to COVID‑19 and uncertainties and how we can recover better.
I am encouraged by the active participation of parliamentaris from around the world and by corporations between parliaments and the Dynamic Coalitions that were forged at this year's parliamentary round table.
We also made renewed efforts to report the outcomes of the IGF to the U.N. intergovernmental processes.  I would be remiss if I do not highlight the essential role of IIAHs, the bottom up inclusive nature of IGF.  Even though the network of IRIs is expanding, national governments, legislators and businesses can benefit from improved representation of the IRIs.
I strongly encourage the global community to invest, contribute, and strengthen the role of the IRIs.  The U.N. family including the U.N. department of economic social affairs, is committed to working with all partners to provide more capacity development and instructing it, we have collective work on the part of the global IGF ecosystem.
Integrating programs, intercessional work of the IGF, the relevance of the IGF's best practice forums and the Dynamic Coalitions have been clearly proven.  But we need to do more.  Establishing linkages between sessions with other intergovernmental and international bodies.
The long‑term stability of the IGF, the IGF and the secretariat function well.  During the pandemic our donors continued to support us.  I wish to extend a big thanks to all donors.  I also think the Polish government for their financial contribution to support this year's virtual IGF.  Sixth, enhancing the visibility and identity of the IGF, I extend a special thanks ‑‑ they support IGF revamping its portal and underlying technology so that the IGF can better serve as a platform to the global community.
The IGF will also benefit from effective communications strategy guiding its work, starting 2021.  Under the personal leadership and the guidance of the U.N. Secretary General, let's work together to advance the implementation.  Participants, ladies and gentlemen, COVID‑19 has caused loss of life, brought untold hardship and uncertainties to people around the world.  At the same time it has shown spotlight of the new normal which is more digital than ever.
Not only is this the first ever virtual Internet Governance forum, allow me to mention other firsts.  (choppy audio) high level and main sessions are streamed for the first time, receiving high visibility.  Number three, not only are we ‑‑ we also have the honor of having the president of the you know General Assembly.  IGF 2020 will be remembered as a year of focus and use.  I believe the commitment to engaging in use will continue in 2021.
I would like to acknowledge the efforts of the multistakeholder environmental group, MAC and its chair, Ms. Anriette Esterhuysen, by adjusting to the challenges posed by the COVID‑19 pandemic.  They worked tirelessly in the past few months to bring you this virtual IGF.  At the beginning of the year we met with Anriette.  But after a few months, immediately we shifted to a virtual session.  I thank you to all members and to many others who contributed to this year's program of IGF.  I also thank our future hosts, Poland in 2021, Ethiopia in 2022, Japan in 2023 and the Russian federation in 2025.
And I invite other member states to consider hosting the 2024 IGF.  Dear colleagues we're in a deep commitment of these host companies, we expect increased participation of developing countries.  We stand ready to support stakeholders to carry forward the IGF's mandate.  Colleagues and friends, we're at a critical moment.  The world faces challenges of a historic nature.  I'm deeply encouraged by the success of this virtual agenda, yet it is our physical world that helps to define our humanity.
I look forward to our physical gathering in December 2021.  I thank you all of you for support of this year's IGF.  I conclude my remarks by thanking Jonathan for your moderating many of the sessions over the past week.  I thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, indeed, Under Secretary General.  It's also a pleasure.  I've always enjoined my engagement with the IGF.  I'll very glad to see you all and thank you again for coming to us, to speak to us on this closing session.  And that is it.  We have been here in our homes in lockdown or some of us in offices but all virtually.  It's the end of this remarkable IGF as the Under Secretary General was saying.  It's now closed but I would be remiss if I didn't leave you first of all without thanking you and secondary I'll leave you with a video so we can all look ahead to Poland in 2021.  Good bye. 
>> We all live in a digital world.  We all need it to be open and safe.  We all want to trust. 
>> And to be trusted. 
>> We all despise control.
>> And desire freedom. 
>> We are all united. 
>> You're muted.
>> As usual, sorry.
>> Thank you very much, everybody, I think that's a wrap.  We are going to have an open mic and feedback session on the 25th of November.  1400UTC.  I would invite you all to please come there and because your feedback is very important so we can improve our things for next year.
And with that, thank you to all the scribes, interpreters, and also the virtual ‑‑ volunteers for their rooms.  Thank you very much, you all did a great job and have a good evening or a good day.  Thank you. 
>> I really want to thank the secretariat again and to tell everyone that the secretariat has IGF outputs out on the website.  If you go to the IGF homepage you'll find the link and you'll find initial messages and recommendations and outcomes.  Really congratulations to the secretariat.   
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-12-%E2%80%93-ws216-governance-and-business-models-for-inclusive-development^^

 
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  I have a ‑‑ let's see.  Share screen.  Can you see that?  
     >> SPEAKER:  Yes, we can.  To there we are.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  So there we are.  Nobody has slides.  
     >> SPEAKER:  I have slides.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Good.  Somebody has slides.  That makes for a variety.  You want to share?  We haven't started yet, right, or have we?  I think it's:33.  I just wanted to know.  
     >> SPEAKER:  We are live on YouTube running.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Well, let me start and introduce our panel.  I want to welcome everybody to the panel on our other session, workshop session on governance and business models for inclusive development.  
              Clearly, from the title, you can see that we have two themes.  We have a theme of inclusiveness, and here I'm looking at it in the sense being from the world trade organization of doing business by populations and communities that we would like to see more included in the digital economy and governance.  I'm taking governance for this panel in the broadest possible sense.  
              I mean, there is probably a narrower sense of Internet governance specifically in terms of how the Internet functions.  I'm looking at it more in terms of all the different actors of governance, and we would then be looking at the national level of government activities, measures that relate to the digital economy.  
              Obviously, we have myself from the WTO, and we have a small part in what people refer to as Internet governance at the multilateral level in all the forms and we have somebody from UNCTAD as well as well doing interesting work we'll hear about.  
              We try to take these intertwined  topics to work together.  We want to come up with what is it that the private sector is accomplishing?  At the same time what are the challenges of doing more business and gaining for value from the digital economy and what are, in fact, some of the government and other kinds of governance issues that can make it easier for, say, small and medium enterprises to participate in the digital economy productively.  
              I think that we have a very interesting panel here.  I would like to sort of introduce them as I give them the floor, because you can see from the website who we have.  I'll also say we have Agatha and Kian Cassehgari together as fascinating and we worked together to organize this panel.  
              They will be helping us out and collecting the questions that any participants wish to put in the Q&A section.  Feel free.  
              People who are attending can use the Q&A to pose questions.  If we have time at the end, we'll take some actual physical questions, virtual physical questions so that you can participate.  And I will be asking at the very end my panelists to mention if they have any recommendations of what might be done by the private sector or the public sector or any other stakeholders to improve the situation for inclusiveness in the digital economy and if you have ideas on recommendations, we would also take those.  
              Let me start.  We have one panelist who we're looking for.  So let me start.  We would talk about the business perspective on having to do both with connectivity and business models in terms of digital participation, and I'll start with Claire Sibthorpe, who is the head of connected women of the ‑‑ What's your subdivision?  
     >> CLAIRE SIBTHORPE:  Connects women at GSMA.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  You have another division there.  So I would like to give you the floor to talk about the very interesting work that GSMA has been doing in this area.  
Thank you.  
     >> CLAIRE SIBTHORPE:  Great to be here.  You need to look at what's connects, if you look at digital business models, if you reach people they need to be connected and also for entrepreneurs and businesses who are using online, COVID highlighted the importance of digital inclusion.  If you think of women entrepreneurs and other people that rely on the Internet for livelihood.  
              I'm talking about mobile specifically because it's a primary way to access the Internet and so it's important when we talk about inclusive digital models.  Obviously, there's a lot of work and strides to get people connected, but and driving that inclusion, but, you know, half the world's population use mobile Internet.  There's still a gap.  
              If we talk about inclusive business models, we need to read them online and to understand that issue we think about it in two ways at GSMA.  We think about the coverage gap.  So those who don't have the basic connectivity who are living outside of areas covered mobile broadband networks, and that's just under 6 million people.  
              They're predominantly in a rural area where infrastructure can be twice as expensive and revenues ten times lower.  We look at the usage gap in thinks about people who live within coverage areas want using it.  That's a lot bigger where a lot of work can be done to address inclusive business models.  There's probably 3.4 billion people who live within areas covered by mobile brand baud network but aren't using it.  
              They're not able to use it.  The usage gap is six times higher.  Those not connected and included are female, illiterate, older and persons with disabilities.  And you think about gender and specifically for example there's a gender gap, women are 20% less likely than men to use the Internet.  That's a huge portion of the population, despite the fact that so many women entrepreneurs and media microenterprises are very female dominated, and then simply don't have the ability to access and use digital services.  
              So if we think about how to reach these and enable these on this segment, we need to think about what's causing ‑‑ what are the barriers that these groups are facing?  
              So as I mentioned, one is around access.  So there's at coverage gap, but it's other access issues at play.  People lack access to formal IDs.  They might struggle with the usability of the services and handsets.  I maintain the usage gap is times as big so affordability is a key barrier.  If you look at the data to understand why people are not accessing and using digital services hence, the affordability comes as the key barrier to own a mobile phone and particularly spark phone, which is critical in the business space.  
              Then even those who have a handset and are aware of the opportunities and the Internet, digital skills among that population, it's the biggest barrier.  
              These are the ability to use these services and get online.  Other key issues that need to be considers are around safety and security.  That has emerged in recent years as a barrier includes harassment, data privacy, and also ensures relevant content services that are relevant and meet the needs.  If you think about things, also, other factors outside the barriers, it's important not to forget social norms and social inequalities.  
              Things between men and women, for example.  We looked at whether women in low and middle income countries had the save levels of education, income, literacy and employment as men, there would be a gender gap.  It shows issues much harder to measure are at play, which is causing key barriers for women to be able to participate.  
              So I guess to achieve the business models and inclusive approaches, we need to ‑‑ that improve the livelihood of all communities we need to address these barriers.  If we don't, they have the potential to reinforce or exaggerate the inequalities.  That's what you need to look at in the digit space with the business models.  
              What we also know is some of these issues vary a lot depends on where you are.  Any approach needs to be grounded in an understanding of the local context to understand the specific needs and barriers of that context and the groups that you're looking at.  
              It needs to explicitly consider inclusion in the policy and strategies that are being developed without a specific explicit focus, for example, on gender or inclusive issues, it doesn't happen by default.  In needs a targeted action.  
              Then you need to take targeted action to try and ensure that inclusion we want and achieve.  Those are the comments I wanted to make on this.  I'll hand it back to you, Lee.  
     >> KIAN CASSEHGARI:  Lee, you're muted.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Yeah, I'm clicking everything.  Thank you very much, Claire.  I think that that's incredibly important work because the work we're doing at the WTO on small and medium enterprises, our understanding is the majority of them are actually women‑run.  
              So they can't be forgotten if we want people to be more engaged in the economy.  So let me move now to Daniel Annerose and the CEO of Manobi Africa in Senegal.  He's working extremely hard for a very long time with microenterprises, I would often say.  
              I think he has some very interesting stories to share with us.  So Daniel, I will give you the floor now.  
     >> DANIEL ANNEROSE:  Thank you very much.  I don't know if I can speak French or English.  We're in a very particular situation, probably everybody knows that.  We have to look at the opportunity that we can have thanks to the extension of the region with the population here in Africa.  On other side we focus to two major areas in Africa (?) population in sub Saharan Africa depends, and it's not so good today.  
              Africa continues to make products, which we had to talk with some people working on the (?) and we were talking about almost 5 billion imported ever year with rice.  Probably in the next 20 years the African bank mentioned we would import about $150 billion by Africa.  They have the potential to produce.  
              So we do see the second sector which is the (?) in which we are involved too.  We use technology to provide drinking water access to people that decent have access to water currently in Africa.  
              The point is that during many years we thought that it is important to develop the channels to extend the Internet capacity to everyone and then we can access to the services we're looking for.  We have to look at this for Africa and we're doing actions that way.  
              That's to say base odd what we have all right, a variety technology we have, the communication channels are available in what you live.  Which kind of solution and business services that can be provided particularly to the small players or the small actors in the enterprise into any single value change.  
              The interests point is that when we go through this specific value chain, it's much more easier to develop proper business models, which combine with a significance event on the well‑being of the population.  Currently in seven Cal and also in other countries where we're involved, we are combining the expertise of the value chains with digital technology as an observation and mobile Internet, IoT to organize and develop inclusive systems that involve smaller ones contracted with larger agribusiness players.  
              We did that in 24 banks, so that's all the founders currently don't have access to credit.  They don't have access to credit today.  Almost 80% of them.  We make them attractive for banks and insurance companies and attractive for inputs of wires.  
              You can understand that the people that live in the areas to which small farmers are connecting into a contracted base for the issuance, and we look at the technology and the ability on channels.  It could be on this.  
              It could go 3G or 4G or whatever you want.  The most important thing is can we develop this which will improve the productivity of the farmers?  Can we improve the quality of the product that these families would be the industry or process to transform this product, could we optimize a distribution channel of the suppliers and the certified suppliers to these farmers?  
              Can we provide insurance companies solutions which are exempt and their insured risk and covered risks regarding the risks due to malpractice, for instance?  Could we optimize the extension service qualities so that every farmer can have the best practices?  
              Those the kind of questions that you're able to respond to using the Internet is important to do that.  If you can do that and create an added value, figure out what would be the new business that we sustain the development of the infrastructure.  
              So my point is that right now when we conclude on that and I can give you the example in the sector as well, currently we guide a $600 million project, and then we decided that every single household must have access to water in the house connected to the water pipe system.  We decided we can bore holes in this, and then we have water systems with large tanks and if we do that we need to up monitor the system and be sure that every single system is working efficiently.  
              So engaging into structuring or orchestrating these value chains, I would say it creates added value, and you can define a business model that you can implement for us to support the development of Internet and to create at the same time a value for the beneficiaries.  
              So that's my point, and I think it's important that you ‑‑ that it pushed past to consider, we have to be part of the solution.  We have to supply chains.  We have to involve our population and not only the top players but the small ones into the chain.  We have a chain where we have transparency and transactions in an inclusive situation.  We reduce friction between the players.  
              I think that the opportunity we have today, and that's a way for which we can raise the issue of connectivity and also the issue of affordability of this technology and of this Internet particularly.  
              Thank you very much.  I'll give it back to you, Lee.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you very much, Daniel.  I had a question for you.  I know you engaged a lot of people and small holders with technologies.  What are some of the kind of technologies you have worked with people on in particular?  When I first met you ‑‑ 
     >> DANIEL ANNEROSE:  You can see this.  These are what we just developed a few months ago.  It's a (?) costing $50, which can be installed by any farmer.  It's very small compared to the cost of product of other ones.  
              With this we connected it to ‑‑ we use the information, which is collected by this truncated to the platform to provide advice to farmers optimal, which is particularly important to know in our areas ‑‑ in sub Saharan areas where we only have three months of rain and we have to optimize it.  That's one of the things we recently developed for the farmers.  
              Another one is test observation, so we have ‑‑ we just completed a program with the European commission, it's a 2020 program, which is called Madeira.  We're using that to optimize the advice to the farmers and optimize the practices on the ground.  
              The good thing is that the things we develop in Africa right now, we have complaints in Europe.  It's funny to see that.  The technologies like this one we're using right now we developed in Africa for Africa.  We found clients in Europe using these technologies, and we have hundreds in France using our platform.  
              Again, the point is not too much technology but more as added values that you will bring to your customer using this solution combining this.  I'll say it's expertise and digital and also set ‑‑ set a proximal which is very important in Africa particularly where most of the farmers and small and  businesses don't have the background of the digital environment in Africa like in Europe.  
              These are some examples of what we're using.  We're using agents to do that for farmers.  We have a combination of technologies here.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you, Daniel.  I've known you for a long time, and your work is always fascinating.  
I'd like to introduce Sissi De La Pena.  He's a manager for regional digital trade in an organization called Ali.  I think ‑‑ I'm really looking forward to hearing from her as well.  Let me give you the floor now, Sisi.  
     >> SISSI DE LA PENA:  Thank you very much.  It's a pleasure to be here with you discussing how we can encourage the development of business in this digital environment.  
              Something I would like to remark on, I will say what we have said.  It's about connectivity and what are the key components that may be able to promote the development and inclusiveness of business for all the small enterprises.  
              Claire mentioned something about connectivity.  All the components that need to be improved or put forward in order to have more inclusiveness within the business.  From our point of view and I would like to emphasis that we're the Latin‑American association that puts together digital companies such as Amazon, Twitter, all the major digital company that is work in the Latin‑American region.  
              Obviously, we are encouraging to have more digital companies to be involved in Ali.  We basically promote and talk to governments and to relevant actors to promote a public policy for Internet in order for to promote digital economy across the region.  
              We have had a more inclusive digital economy in the Latin‑American region, we highlight a connectivity and all the issues that Claire identified, they haven't really been resolved in the Latin‑American region, and that's a major barrier.  
              After that we find out that the skills represent the basic or a major challenge for people in the news in the region.  And apart from that, we also see these challenging regulatory framework.  We know that digital economies about an economy that doesn't geographical barriers, and therefore we have seen in the region a breakdown of unilateral framework that the only thing that they're promoting is this pressure and breakdown of how businesses can work across countries and can interact and things like take the flow or thinking like this Internet service provider and responsibilities or things like location of data centers that sometimes some governments which are not really having these basic principles home generalized or across basic principles across the whole region.  There are basically facing or putting a very high barrier for the small entrepreneurs.  
              This is particularly important because all or most of the regulations are always focused or developed for these big companies, but the ones who really suffer in the regulatory frameworks are the small entrepreneurs.  That's basically stopping them from getting into the digital economy and the inclusiveness within the digital sector.  
              In this we also see a lack of a national digital strategy point of view for many countries in the Latin‑American region.  It's things that countries have not really focused on how to identify where they want to go in terms of digital development in their countries, and apart from that, as I said before, the digital economy is not any more a geographical barrier or is not limit would by the geographic barriers.  So it should be also in accordance with what across the region wants to achieve.  
              So this digital vision of the region and vision at a national level, it really represents a barrier for small enterprises and small businesses, and that was something I wanted to emphasis from what our previous panelist said.  
              These are really big challenges we need to put across to develop the digital economy across the Latin‑American region.  We need to identify how we can put this discussion forward not only with the people that are always in the discussion, which are the people in the technology and information sector, will need to bring up to the conversation to all sectors in the finance sector, health sector, education sector, which sometime are not really involved on what are the challenges of implementing regulatory frameworks that are not really HOMO generalized or really in accordance to what a national level and regional level want to achieve in a digital environment.  
              That's basically what I wanted to highlight.  I think I may have exceeded my time, but I will like to see that connectivity, digital skills and a set of principles across the region and regulatory framework and a national digital and regional digital strategy is essential to develop these business enterprises.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  In fact, you were exactly on time.  We move on to our two panelists from the public sector for any comments they have about the business landscape and what they say from their perspective.  Thank you very much.  It sound like quite a challenge.  
              Let me call on Mercy Wanjau, who is the director general on the communications authority of Kenya.  She has a lot of experience working on all aspects of ICT, which we keep changing our terminology.  Now we would say that Mercy deals with a digital world, and so from that percentage, I'd like to hear more about what she's seeing as a regulator in terms of the business activity that related to her world.  
     >> MERCY WANJAU:  Thank you very much, Lee, and to the presenters in the business panel on the issues that they have raised.  Yesterday I spent about six hours from that robe by the capital city to launch some base stations that opened up communities to the experience of voice and data at the same time.  It was a heart‑warming activity to see the things they had already started to do within three months of receiving this signal.  
              It really brings home the point that Sissi is making by policy and regulatory requirements and the question of what are the barriers that these requirements present?  From our regulator's perspective, the comment I would wish to make to this situation is that the need to be open‑minded to the possible development of new business models that are likely to thrive within this kind of new and emerging situation, and the need to ensure the policy and regulatory frameworks do not present a barrier.  
              Indeed, when you talk about communities like women, small and medium enterprises, the models are for business that we have been used to before might not be applicable or might need to be redone in this new environment and the need for policy and regulatory structures to be supportive, enabling, to be sensitive and perhaps even sensible to accommodate the new and emerging opportunities that are arising.  Thank you.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Great.  Thank you, Mercy.  That was a perfect story about combining the businesses and the technology and what people can do.  
              Let me turn now to Rishab Raturi.  He's an expert on eCommerce and trade working with the ITC policy section of UNTAG.  
     >> RISHAB RATURI:  Good afternoon.  The other panelists have raised points on this particular issue.  There are three things I will speak about which is eCommerce skills.  
It's noted that the lack of eCommerce business skills is identified as a major constraint to the sector's development, and although there are businesses and incubators that exist to address this issue, the awareness of their existence appears to be limited across many countries.  
              Now, business incubators can be established to do start‑ups for two things.  The first is to ensure the right skills are provided for success and viability of the company, and the second is to ensure that funding is appropriately there to develop the business.  
                   This could be done by channeling funds through perhaps start‑up things like done in Myanmar, that's a good model to look at it.  
Affordability is grate challenge for MSNEs and also women entrepreneurs.  For example, the price of Internet and telecommunication services are unaffordable in many developing economies.  There's a need for better infrastructure as well as development of business models to lower the service delivery of costs so that they can be aligned in an affordable matter.  
Another challenge with regard to affordability is the price of IT and electricity supplies, and of course, the access to electricity itself.  
              The third issue with regard to regulation.  From the point of view of regulation, it would be important to appropriately and clearly disseminate rules and regulations on eCommerce but also the Internet.  Also, these regulations should be dropped in the manner that are clear, concise and easy to understand.  
              The regulations should also aim to provide legal coverage to innovative ways of business interactions.  This may, for example, is this it done tension by influencing regulation stand boxes.  Lawmakers should ensure the manners are not harmful to third parties or in contrary to public interest.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you, and that concludes round 1.  We have one question from the question box.  
              There haven't been too many, but I had promised to give Kian the floor to go over these.  Kian.  
     >> KIAN CASSEHGARI:  Thank you.  We have a question for Daniel.  The question is related to the power supply and the use of electric digital devices in remote rural places.  
              It seems that the power supply is an issue to use those electronic devices, and they're asking you, Daniel, if you can give your views on how to deal with the power supply issues in Africa to fascinate the use of electric digital divisions in remote, rural areas.  
     >> DANIEL ANNEROSE:  Thank you for the question.  I observe that there's a tremendous effort right now connected to trying to fill the gap about the electricity concerning access to electricity for people in Africa.  We're far, far away from the objective, but we see similar technologies with companies looking for small and major companies developing the energy access to rural populations.  
              I think this is a value chain that certainly requires some development and which offers without any doubt opportunities to develop and appropriate good business models and efficient business models.  
              Particularly and I should suspect that the question was asking because they probably have an idea of what he wants to offer to this particular sector.  Yes, this is a big issue.  
              I think it's important.  Even we see a lot of development.  We see that in the sector, and I think that this is a one that is causing a lot of problems in terms of developing the connectivity in Africa.  We need this developed more accurately on our continent for sure. 
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you, Daniel.  
              We'll start part 2 of our panel now with the public sector people.  As I said, Internet governance has many different levels and actors.  I start with the national level with Mercy Wanjau again that I introduced.  We talk much more about her regulatory work since we're finished with the private sector part.  Thank you, Mercy.  
     >> MERCY WANJAU:  Thank you very much, Lee, and thank you for this opportunity to put in some words for policy and regulatory initiatives to promote inclusion and we want to look at regulatory tools.  First, the national brand strategy.  We have a strategy captured from 2018 to 2023 setting a road map on how broadband could be applied for opportunity and for economic growth.  
              As part of that strategy, it did identify there would be a need for special initiatives to provide digital access and access for devices for persons living with disabilities, initiatives for women and affirmative action programs.  This is because we do recognize the need for affordable and quality broadband services and platforms that would exist to businesses, exploit digital technology.  Whether this be big businesses or small or medium enterprises, an economy like Kenya is powered through small and medium enterprises and a lot are run by women.  
              So there was then a forecast that in the operations, in the strategy, in the marketing that there would be encouragement for local businesses particularly in rural areas and other areas to adopt the use of ICTs.  
              This, obviously, leads to a growing focus on inclusiveness, and the COVID pandemic has just been the chief technology that we're all waiting for, because you don't need to explain too much today about the enabling role of the Internet in driving business, in driving commerce, education, and so many other services that are now writing on the ICT platforms.  
The national broadband strategy seeks to ensure equitable and sustainable development, because we do recognize now that in order to bridge the gap of exclusion, you have to look broadly across special groups like youth, women, persons with disabilities, minorities and even people who live in marginalized areas.  
              One of the initiatives we have developed to ensure this is to put in initiatives for STEM, the science and technology programs, and also capacity‑building programs for we can to acquire digital skills in collaboration with other stakeholders so that it would afford women equal opportunities.  That's the national broadband strategy for Kenya 2018 to 2023.  
              This is complemented by the digital economy blueprint, which is yet another broad policy framework that seeks to improve ability to leapfrog economic growth for Kenya and for Africa.  This strategy is applicable across the African continent, and it recognizes that the digital economy does offer new and unique job opportunities for youth, women, maul and medium enterprises.  SMEs are recognized that they will exist at the center of the digital transformation process.  
              As a result of that, there are a lot of digital entrepreneurial programs that exist and campaigns to promote this new eco‑system for SMEs including the issue of financial inclusion, which has been used to really broaden the issue of digital finance across the board to enable growth enterprises.  I'll stop there from a strategy perspective and go into the regulatory tools that we have put in place to break down or unpack the policy aspirations for benefit of SMEs and women and indicate that the universal service fund is an initiative which seeks to bridge the gap to ensure that connectivity, Internet access is not only available, it's accessible and it's affordable.  
              This is what people experience happening when they have Internet for the first time because I was surprised, you know, women have come together in small groups.  They're showing you about ‑‑ they're showing you the boxes they have opened on Facebook, and they were posting it.  In this area they sell HAMI, so we bought it on Facebook while standing there, and this was absolutely beautiful.  
              I'm looking forward to see what this will mean as the months roll by.  The other initiative we have to put in is to make sure we revise the ICT‑related law in order to promote trust and confidence online.  
              Through this we have a very robust cyber security program that seeks to ensure that the Internet space is safe and to deal with detention and deterrents for offenses that would be committed online.  In November last year the data protection account was enacted, which we step in to safeguard data and the privacy issue that is come with that.  
              We are also in the advanced stages of rolling out a national address system, which will solve very many purposes, one of them being the promotion of eCommerce, because without a proper, robust system, the eCommerce is limited.  It's very, very constrained, so we're very excited by the rolling out of the national addressing system to boost eCommerce and security and to make people and properties and residences identifiable.  
              We also are working towards a launch of national public infrastructure, which will allow for digital transactions and really streamline authentication on an online contract.  I believe that the biggest beneficiaries of this will be the small or medium enterprises because it then allows a cheaper platform that is an equalizer, which businesses can access and be able to do business across the world.  
              I believe my colleague will speak to it in a bit more detail to evaluate how responsive is the platform in Kenya?  The result for this is because we recognize, well, it is okay to have policy and regulatory reform as an anchor for development of businesses and indeed the first panel's spoke to that.  We recognize it's a balancing act and the need to stop and pause and reflect and ask how relevant are the policy and regulatory requirements we put in?  How sensitive are these regulatory requirements across the board?  
              For big businesses, for small businesses, for businesses that are run by women, and this way you identify the barriers, and you identify what interventions can be put in place in order to make it happen.  I will close there.  I believe I'm just about on time and welcome any questions that would arise out of this.  Thank you very much.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Mercy, we're doing so well on time.  Everybody has been almost perfect to the time.  I was not going to stop you at all, because I love to hear you talk about what you're doing.  
              We won't then cheat Rishab at all.  His work for some time is interesting, and what he's doing right now a lot of governments are very excited to have him work on the studies that they do.  Let me hand the floor over to him now.  
     >> RISHAB RATURI:  Before I begin, I want to share any screen, and I would need the ‑‑ I would need confirmation that you can see the screen at the moment.  Is the screen visible?  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  I can see it, but you need to do full screen now.  How you would normally do the ‑‑ yeah.  Perfect.  
     >> RISHAB RATURI:  All right, perfect.  Thank you, Mercy, for that enriching presentation about the tapestry of ICT policy in Kenya.  My comments are more general and more generally appear cable to eCommerce and infinite governance from the point of regulatory framework.  
              When choosing a policy governance model, it would be important to keep in mind that such a model needs to fit the requirement of the country.  For instance, within the context of a developing economy or an LDC, that would entail being aware of the uneven levels of institutional majority, but also the technical capacity.  The idea, therefore, is to establish a conflict approach to developing governance frameworks for the Internet of eCommerce.  At present there are a couple of gender challenges that we currently note that have been faced, particularly with regard to LDCs and across the world.  The first is lack of trust.   
              This creates an environment of mistrust and fear of being scammed amongst users.  In certain countries lacking laws that are necessary to ensure the correct functions of eCommerce services result in perpetuating this trust deficit that we have.  In fact, even in countries where appropriate regulations have actually been introduced, the complementation may be a challenge.  
              For example, in a study from the assessment, it was noted that Mali economy could not afford digital signatures, so there are various reasons why implementation might be a challenge.  
              The second issue is data legislation.  Lack of up‑to‑date legal frameworks on eCommerce or Internet governance affects the ability of developing in countries to engage with global businesses or, in fact, even attract foreign investors.  This would result in a domestic uptick of eCommerce.  
              Many of the law relating to privacy which is an important aspect of eCommerce and the Internet in general date back to the 1980s which is prior to the Internet.  Many laws don't contain the nuance required to deal with the issues pertaining to eCommerce on many occasions.  
              Another important issue is the lack among policymakers on global developments.  It may very well be likely that policymakers are unaware of national agreement, be it perhaps in the deal or digital partnership agreement or, in fact, even the development of norms in Internet governance forums.     
              This lack of information might percolate into policy, which will do a disservice to that country's policy in general.  
              The fourth issue is regulatory and institutional coordination remains a challenge.  For example, in many countries there's a ministry of technology or a ministry of ICT that wasn't the technical aspects of ICT policy‑making in general, but they require close coordination with other ministries, prominent are the ministry of commerce and ministry of finance.  
              Often important aspects of regulation developments are diluted due to lack of coordination amongst these ministries and other agencies.  Last is the level of awareness by the private sector and communicates who are very important stakeholders in the discussion about the existing legal framework that exists.  With that said, there are certain frameworks on trust and equitable solutions.  Tools like E documents and e‑signatures it with legal recognition or legal sanctity of sorts.  It may require that party to actually physically travel to that place or ship a hard copy to sign only a document.  
              This results in an increases in time and cost of the transaction and would E documents are an invaluable part of the global value chain and the importance of doing business today.  
              The second kind of regulation is regulation that enhances trust.  Now, consumers typically have no face‑to‑face contact with vendors anymore.  This leads to fewer visual cues such as location, facilities, and personalized interactions that generally help the consumer gauge the supplier's sense of professionalism.  In this environment when a consumer is also disclosed sensitive personal information to a retailer, to an online intermediary or a digit at platform, a sense of that trust is very likely to depreciate.  In that regard it's a greater challenge for countries still in their infancy of using the Internet.  
              In light of this there are four sets of regulations to are promote consumers' trust.  An effective framework has consumers be better informed of the characteristics of goods and services they're purchasing, but also know about the terms of the transaction.  In fact, consumer protection rules today are quite broad and included all kinds of transactions and in fact it's the most modern framework of consumer protection that actually addresses specific I object us that relate to immerse and the Internet.  
              The second issue is with regard to cyber security.  Our cyber security framework further improving trust by making sure firms meet certain technical standards.  The third is on data governance.  As consumers are required to provide personal, sensitive information and financial details, a strong data governance policy is essential to give individuals control over their information.  
              Lastly, cybercrimes.  It's always better to have a situation where a provision is in existence that can determine malicious activity of criminal intent online.  
              The last kind of regulation is what promotes eCommerce.  An enabling environment also entails rules with anything with a set of services or activities essential to the functioning of eCommerce in general where one is E payments and we have creative customs.  
              Of course, it requires an enabling regulatory framework that has global providers and suppliers across the world.  This will mean clear regulations on customs clearance, transport, and conditions for eCommerce for packages.  We also have issues with regard to intellectual property.  
              In particular those focus on intermediary liability as well as the fair use of intellectual property gain traction in the discourse on eCommerce regulations.  Now, we have a situation where regulations on eCommerce including data governance and platforms progress in many countries across the world.  
              More so in countries with the stronger digital sector.  We have a cyber law tracker where you have this data available in front of you which goes to show E transaction laws available across the world.  With that being said, there are certain points that we must recall irrespective, the first is that comprehensive regulatory frameworks for digital markets still remain in use and are found in developed economies.  If you look at domestic regulations across the world, they seem to suggest that it does not necessarily is indicative of the soundness of the country's regulation.  
              In other words, just having cyber laws increase is not positive of a strong framework.  How it's implemented is important.  
              The third is having an essential aspect of eCommerce regulation such as intermediary liability or data governance.  These are still quite new and require trial and error experimentations over the course of the next few years.  Lastly, our aspects are by high‑income companies with the skilled institutional barriers.  Whether these rules suitable to smaller countries with the developing economies still remains uncertain.  
              Thousands -- we have a situation where you have rules on eCommerce, how they interact with each other is a very important aspect when we talk about regulatory governance.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you very much.  Your work is very challenging and the E‑readiness reports identify rather where there's a lot of work to be done, sometimes the report makes it like extremely daunting.  Other governments have a matter of tweaking it would seem.  
              But I think your work is very much in demand and very appreciated.  I thought what we would do is turn for comments on the regulatory frameworks to first our private sector people, and then we have a couple of questions from the audience.  I have a couple of questions of my own.  We'll launch into those as soon as we had our commentary by that.  
              To this I would like to introduce Daniel first, if he has any comments on what he's heard about the regulatory frameworks.  
     >> DANIEL ANNEROSE:  One of the strategies is we have to propose is also to see what could be the linkages of the specific framework of this sector with one of the other sectors.  I'm thinking that if we consider that access to Internet, access to communication is a basic right like access to water and access to sanitation and access to headlight or any other area of this to produce on this land, if we put this question in the regulatory framework within the similar question for other vertical sectors, I think that will be very useful for us to figure out how to push this framework in a direction to create value or certain sectors.  
              I will pursue that by creating value in these particular sector is a way today to promote and develop the access to the community to finance this access to the cost of infrastructure and to bring this to pushing this more easily is less efficient than we can see today.  
              That's the part I would like to say.  Not to stay in our own environment and try to figure out how we can establish this so that we have a strong content for the way we look at the regulatory framework on this specific sector.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you, Daniel.  Let me turn now to Sissi for her commentary.  We will start questions as soon as she and Claire have made excellent comments.  
     >> SISSI DE LA PENA:  Thank you, Lee.  Let me highlight Mercy and Rishab.  I want to make a comment regarding something that the two of them mentioned.  
              One of the questions there from the participants that Internet now is the means of thriving businesses, and then move on to prescribe or provide a very, very good analysis how you look at governance framework should be understood and worked and understood in order to make this happen.  
              In addition to that, the question from the audience mentioned something about whether the regulatory frameworks include some human rights perspective.  In in sense I want to highlight from my experience and I would like to look at the comments from these three individuals.  It's very important to make this regulatory framework to happen in the right way.  One of the samples I want to put on across to open the debate that it's really ‑‑ if we don't do it right, the regulatory framework, if we don't do it right we can go against human rights and one of the things in America and particularly in Mexico, for example, is that in these hunger to settle back for regulatory framework for the regulatory framework, the government the Mexico has passed a law that says that for those cannot comply framework in the tax VAT compliance.  That's very restricted.  The digital companies are going to be disconnected from the Internet.  
              And that framework is where the human rights attempt freedom of speech and another human rights are compromised.  So we could understand that the government wanted to have a mean to try to collect more taxes, but in this sense in giving themselves these attributions to connect or disconnect in Internet platforms as they wish, then we have a high risk against human rights and freedom of speech.  
              This was given the governance of Internet.  This is something that we shouldn't happen.  We know that the governments of the Internet are on a multisector basis.  If governments start doing this because of an argument on the tax framework or education or privacy framework, we are really risking the compromise of human rights.  
              That's the comment I wanted to highlight.  Thank you very much for the opportunity to highlight this and very interesting thoughts on this presentation.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you.  Let me turn to Claire now.  
     >> CLAIRE SIBTHORPE: I agree.  A very interesting discussion.  I think a couple of things I took out of it from the presentations I really agree with is that we need a data‑driven approach and really understand what are the specific barriers that are and challenges in each country.  I think it was great to hear when looking at which segment you want to focus on and prioritize, we heard from Kenya for people with disabilities it great.  
              It came out quite strongly and I completely agree that we need to take a holistic approach.  So I think, you know, in Rishab's presentation he talked about tax on businesses and we need to think about the respect to the users, not just the businesses but the individuals creating business or uses of the businesses.  
              Taxes have a huge impact on affordability by the businesses they're trying to reach and those trying to set up a business.  I think it needs to be looked at from a business perspective as well as the impact of issues on users.  
              As I mentioned earlier when I was talking, I think our data shows it's affordability and digital skills are two critical, critical barriers.  Anything that could be done from policy‑making perspectives to address the two barriers is really important.  This encourages investment and supports innovation in the barriers.  I would agree with what's been said earlier about needing to think about this holistically and across the different sectors and focus on some of these key barriers or key issues we need to address.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you, Claire.  It's a big interrelationship between these two topics it would seem.  We have one outstanding question on human rights that Sissi addressed.  Do you have anything about the human rights aspect of digital regulation.  I know some of people here have been thinking of it.  
              Much of the developing countries access Internet over mobile phones, so the question is, you know, there's a lot of talk about 5G coming on.  I think it's slower come on in the lesser developed countries.  How critical is the 5G for SMEs in the digital world?  It might be a more ideal way to access sophisticated Internet services over their phone.  
              Do we have any takers on that?  
     >> SPEAKER:  From my perspective where I work we focus on low and middle income countries, so really looking at some of those regions, and 5G on that perspective is a bit of a way off.  
I think, you know, and we need to enable that development to happen, but at the same time recognize that in the countries where we work and in Africa and Asia, it's really 3G that's it and sometimes 4G people are accessing and increasingly 4G.  
So not to forget people have that, but at the same time enable that progression to 5G and to not halt that because also recognizing what is the reality of what people are accessing and the different things to sort of kind of not forget that aspect as well.  I'm sure others have some comments as well.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  I know I had spoken in a preparatory conversation about Daniel about the question of 5G.  Did you want to say anything?  
     >> DANIEL ANNEROSE:  I would be very brief.  If we have 5G today ‑‑ I'm talking about Africa and what I see in Africa.  When I look at 5G, to invest in 5G or the applications or services, solutions which can provide the well‑being of the economy of our small and medium and I need that, too.  So I think we can ‑‑ to tell we have this today is to be able to able to demonstrate the existing communication system we have.  In terms of priority, I think this is why you're away you must invest in the technology or something like that.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you.  Daniel.  It's going to be affordable when it becomes available anytime soon.  
     >> DANIEL ANNEROSE:  In terms of privacy, didn't say no.  I think ‑‑ I think we have a problem and one week ago we had a program in Senegal where we have that and you try to cross on small boats and we can make this interesting for young people and let them do business ‑‑ and given an opportunity to do business in our country.  
              If I have to invest again, would I invest in a new technology like 5G, or would I invest to create jobs for this use?  Recently we launched an academy to develop a small microenterprises in specializing in providing extension services to farmers, and we could use the community to develop this business or wait on 5G to do it?  
              Those are the questions that we already have, because in Africa we're not in a continuum of growth and of development that you can see in your Europe.  We're doing jumps.  
So maybe you will not have the 5G, and we have the other things.  
              The majority minority is for the environment and different from all the communities in our continent, and I think it requires that we develop application and we develop services and solutions for all these with these communities.  
     >> MERCY WANJAU:  I'd like to look at the 5G as one end and we look at aspects of a business connectivity that we are very much need within populations, because 5G and the capabilities that it brings will power certain niche use cases for which they will support models for small and medium enterprises as well as big businesses, and there's a place for that.  This carries on because 5G will not feed that part of the spectrum.  
              So I want to view this as a complete R complementary service and solving different population segments and different needs.  Looking at our national spacious where we're quite big on innovation, there's a space for 5G.  At the same time, we also do participate in conversations around universality but we haven't closed the gaps at 100%.  
              If we could view the two and separate and complementary, perhaps it will give space for both conversations to develop in parallel.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  With all three of you, I hear that 5G is sold to the consumer is go where they can see more fancy videos and play games on, but I'm beginning to hear people forget don't forget that 5G will have an incredible number of sophisticated business applications.  So you wonder if the goal post is always getting higher with things like that.  
              So seeing that the capacity is cheap enough that there's actually an alternative in rural yeas.  
              We have a few minutes left, and I think what is interesting is to has anything to say about the human rights and SDG questions.  It's integrated into about everything that is offered sometimes whether we know it or not.  So if anybody has comments left on human rights, other than that I'll going to the question and answer section.  
              One thing that's interesting because we have a grade with IGF and an output is to ask you if you could make one or two recommendations of something that really needs to be done either by governments or other stakeholders or even by the private sector itself, what would your one or two recommendations be?  
              I know that's limiting you to a very few field of work that needs to be done.  But let me go in the order in which we originally were looking at and ask you to come up with what you think might be one or two key recommendations for what needs to be done to improve connectivity and participation by developing countries and their SMEs in the digital economy.  I'll start with ‑‑ if we go in the order we are originally planned to go in, I'd start with Daniel.  
     >> DANIEL ANNEROSE:  There is so much to do, but really again I really think that in which you support more efficient innovation in the continent brought by African companies, African technology digital companies service providers.  
              This is something to work on.  I'm coming again to my point is that if we can decrease this connectivity issues within the ‑‑ within our main area of developments for a continent, which are, again, water access, which are access to sanitation if you can take that kind of access, if we can have access to headlight care.  
              If we can figure out how to use this technology and see what we can do here as we accelerate the transformation of this secretary for this by using this, I think that's something that's an investigation for our countries in particular in Africa.  That's bring the solution and creating the environment to help people to take benefit of what we already have would be something which we would support that development solution.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you, Daniel.  Sissi.  
     >> SISSI DE LA PENA:  Thank you.  I'm going to be brief.  Regulatory and institutional coordination that consider not only the economic aspect but the human rights aspect of it.  How an accessible regulatory environment could either diminish the development of ecommerce and digital economy among small enterprises and also could diminish or hurt freedom and speech and human rights.  That's what I'd like to highlight.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you.  Now I'll go to Claire.  
     >> CLAIRE SIBTHORPE:  There's a lot to be discussed or said.  I'm a huge, huge believer in data driven based approaches.  If you don't understand want issues and challenges, you can't address them.  
              I guess to pick one thing, get atop of the data and understand the challenges and issues in specific markets and take concrete, specific measurable action to address them, and then I'll sneak in a second point.  
              It needs a collective or collaborative effort by all stakeholders.  My main point would be to understand and take a data driven evidence based approach.  Otherwise, we're going to leave people behind.  We're going to, you know, from a human rights or inclusion perspective, it's not going to work.
So we need to have that strong focus and lens into what we're doing.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thanks, Claire.  We need AI to regulate?  
     >> CLAIRE SIBTHORPE:  No.  I think it's about talking to the ‑‑ the businesses and the individuals.  It's about understanding from them not using necessarily supply ideas.  We need to speak to those excluded and don't have the challenges and works there for the efforts.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Let me ask mercy to give her recommendation.  
     >> MERCY WANJAU:  This speaks to the need to Fed assessments on the policy and regulatory tools put in place so we can evaluate with a measure of precision on what the user experience is across the board.
              Businesses are set up for special youth, women, persons with disabilities so this way we ensure as much as possible the regulatory tools and the regulatory profiles we have, that they are actually achieving the intended purpose for which they were meant for in the first place.  
              I take the view that we can no longer assume a neutral approach for policy and regulation and assume that it applies the same for all because of that is it need and to evaluate.  With the president‑elect Internet has a utility value.  What has been referred to on this platform as a human rights perspective and, hence, the need to identify if there are any barrier, any constraints being experienced by certain groups this is a measure for urgency to overcome the barriers for equal participation.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you.  You're going accolades in the comment section.  
              Let me turn to Rishab.  
     >> RISHAB RATURI:  It's to look at where things stand and where you want yourself to be in the next five years or so.  The second would be to look at eCommerce and how to update relevant things in the information.  We can also (?) But lastly need to look at regulations and putting an issue on the tools across MSMEs and also other relevant stakeholders in the eco‑system.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you.  I think these are all parts of the same thing, and I know it was a difficult question.  Let me use my last two minutes to turn to the audience.  We have time for one or two people in the audience.  If you could make one recommendation, what would it be on these issues we've been talking about?  
              Anybody from the audience?  Is there a hand‑raised function here somewhere?  We have Kenya, hold on.  I have just turned you on.  
     >> AUDIENCE:  Thank you very much.  Can you hear me?  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Yes.  
     >> AUDIENCE:  I would really appreciate the fact that you've discussed human rights so much.  Thank you for bringing my question into here.  
              If I could have one second to make a recommendation I would say that the stakeholder engagement is key because whether we talk about human rights discussions we look at capacities that weren't in the private or public sector always in terms of ( indiscernible ).  There's a huge security that has no expertise that we're happy to share.  The broad stakeholder engagement would be very much appreciated.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Anybody else in the audience?  I have turned on Arthur.
              You need to unmute yourself.  
     >> AUDIENCE:  Can you hear me?  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Yes.  
     >> AUDIENCE:  Thank you for giving me ‑‑ okay, the floor.  I would like to thank all of the panelists for the presentation.  What we have in the is we need more collaboration between people and take this in order to remain with some support (?) For the benefits of our countries.  It will be whether all the stakeholders work closely together.  That's my final word and recommendation for this session.  Thank you very much.  
     >> LEE TUTHILL:  Thank you, Arthur, and I think that's a very appropriate point for us to end, because that's what IGF is really all about, bringing stakeholders together on Internet and digital issues.  
              I would like to sincerely thank the panelists for being so articulate and so thoughtful on the various topics we've discussed and thank all of the participants as well for sticking with us and being so interactive to let us know how things are going technically and otherwise.  I would like to thank my co‑organizers ago that and Kian for keeping us honest.  
              I look forward to working with all of you in the future.  The attendees here, I'm really happy if you have any other questions to get in touch with me or any of the others of us.  
              I know that we're aware of people who are putting together regulatory impact assessment tools.  The WTO within its very small niche does a lot of technical assistance in country and within regions on a lot of digital and eCommerce issues, so I think I can speak for all of us when we would be happy to have this discussion to continue on.  
              So I'd like to say thank you.  It's now two minutes over, but I'd like to say, again, thank you to everyone.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-12-%E2%80%93-ws219-co-designing-policies-for-a-sustainable-digital-industry-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> VICENT TOUBIANA: Do you hear us?
>> Yes, you loud and clear.
>> VICENT TOUBIANA: I think Annie is not here.  She's having a sound issue? 
>> So before we begin, I want to remind everyone that the session is recorded and hosting under the IGF code of conduct and UN rules and regulations.  Thank you.  So I think we should start.
[ Speaking French ]
>> VICENT TOUBIANA: Okay.  So maybe we shall start.
Okay.  So let's start.  I hope we'll find a way to have all the panelists speaking to us.  Well, good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  My name is Vincent Toubiana, and a work for an French independent called the French Digital Council.  It aims at proposing new regulations and it was created in 2011.  So we'll soon be celebrating our ten‑year an any verse a and for the last three years we have been participating and organizing workshops at the IGF.  And we are very happy to be able to participate to this year's forum.
The council has 34 members with different backgrounds and come from academia and ten from civil business and society and four MPs.
Members are nominated for two years mandate.  And the last mandate just finished and normally we should have new members very soon.  Over the last two years as the members have been working on a variety of topics.  The Working Group led by Annie, who is one of the panelists and other members of the council come back with 50 different stakeholders including academics and public institutions and administrations:  We propose this workshop to share feedback on how co‑design work and learn from designing roadmaps an projects related to digital transition.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the panelists, who are going to share their experience with us.  I would like also to thank Lucien Castex who is going to moderator.  He is a member of the multi‑stakeholders adversary group.  That's it for the introduction.
I will leave the screen to Lucien.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you, Vincent.  Good afternoon, good morning, and good evening, depending on where you are.
Thanks again for joining us.  I will be moderating the session.  While the goal is sim, discuss the positive and negative impacts of the digital industry open environment.  So today, we have four distinguishes speakers around the table.  A few rules.  First, Rule of term be civil, first, ofously.  Present yourself on the chat.  It's quite important to do so.  So you can speak to one another and to the panelists.
Also, use and abuse the chat discuss the issue, to exchange ideas and use the Q&A pod to interact directly with participants from the panel.
My colleague Mary Lou Leroy will help me with moderating the chat in the Q&A.  So we're looking forward to having questions from you.
So first off, I would like to give the floor to Ananya Singh.  You are an economic scientist and Internet Governance advocate.  How do you pursue the role of ICT in the context of sustainable development.
>> ANANYA SINGH: Hi, good morning, everyone.
First of all, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to be a part of this amazing workshop.
So because I have been associated with the United Nations program and Samsung's engineering sponsors, as the eco generation for over five years, I'm pretty much deeply affected and I do deeply care about this topic of sustainable development.
Interestingly, it's one of the focusing themes of IGF 2020.  So sustainable development has been a focus of international public policy, since the 1987 report when it was first announced and the Earth Summit in 1992.  It identifies three core objectives for human development.  The first one being economic growth, and the second one is social inclusion and the third one is environmental sustainability, the one which we're going to discuss more deeply today.
Only by pursuing these three goals together can we achieve development that meets the needs to be present without compromising the ability of the future generations, to meet their own needs and this is precisely what sustainable development is all about.
The past 30 years have seen tremendous growth in the capabilities and the reach of information and the communication technologies.  The Internet, especially has become a critical enabler of social and economic change, transforming how governments, businesses and decisions interact and offering new ways of developing developmental challenges.  Connected devices promise to be the major drivers of change within the coming few years.
The pandemic which we are going through right now has disruptive lives, limiting movement, closing schools and constraining people to work from home.  But billions of people confined at their homes, the Internet traffic has surged over the last few months, it's probable that you have already relied to a couple of emails and scrolls through Facebook and started a Zoom call, in fact you are attending a Zoom call right now and seen live videos from YouTube and maybe performed a quick Google Search.
As the day wears on, you are doubtlessly going to spend more time breezing outline, and streaming videos, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So each of these activities that you perform online come with a cost, a very small cost, that is a few grams of carbon dioxide, due to the energy needed to run the devices and to power the wireless networks to access.  Less obviously but I have even more energy intensive or the data centers and vast services to support the Internet and still the content will be accessed over it.
By Google's own estimates one search on its Jen calls 0.2 grams of carbon dioxide emissions at an average of 47,000 search requests every second, you have 500 kilograms of emissions offsetting.  A common convenience like speaking lights on by speaking to a digital assistance, create a chain of reactions from beyond your home as information travels back and forth.
But we rarely consider that there is an energy beyond what shows up on our bills for electricity and mobile data.  Less surprising is that hardware production requires a lot of financial ‑‑ like, you have so many phones and so many devices, even if it is easier now a single ewaste, when we buy a physical new gadget.
The physical manifestvation requires fuel to run.  For example, in India, it takes about 8,000 liters of diesel to keep a mobile tower running as backup per year.  Data centers like those run by Facebook and Google and that essentially power digital lives consume about 3% of the world's electricity and you are responsible for 2% of the global green house gas emissions.
The energy consumption of the Internet is enormous and the studies have suggested that global communications technologies will be responsible for more carbon emissions in 2025, that any country of China, India and the United States.  This puts the carbon footprint of the Internet at approximately the same level as global air travel.
If the Internet were a country, it would be the sixth largest in the world, based on the energy it uses, ahead of Germany and a little shy of Russia.  Now that we have successfully established that the Internet poses a great threat to the global lime.  It's hard to regulate the ICT or the Internet in particular, because so many of us use it for so many different reasons.  One of the most energy intensive uses of the Internet being watching or streaming videos.
Online videos have represented 80% of the global leader of flows with the remaining 20% representing websites, data video games, et cetera.  Imagine ten hours of high quality video comprises more data than all of the English energies and Wikipedia and text.  Watching a half hour online leads to 1.6 kilograms of carborne missions.
Let's look at it from a completely different view point.  Email made physical mail essentially redundant but more than the convenience of it, would appear to be a promise for our future was that email was environmentally friendly.  This was not only because fewer forests or trees were going to be destroyed for paper and onwards but also because massive amounts of transportation fuel was going to be saved.  For our generation, this was the larger promise of the Internet.  But according "The Guardian" an email has 1/60th carbon footprint.
In power we send several times the number of emails than we did in letters making the statistic redundant.  Imagine you trying to squeeze all of your thoughts on a piece of paper when sending an email multiple times with single sentences of two or three sentences barely.  The same report estimated that sending, sorting and filtering of Spam email around 63 trillion annually utilizes like 33 billion‑kilowatt hours of electricity.
The carbon footprint is 0.3 grams and one with a long attachment is 50 grams.  Can you imagine the amount of carbon emissions that we have done by now at this time of the day? 
The Internet's promise of a greener world, hence, needs to be evaluated.  With higher demands for this technology from both the public and the private sectors in the next few decades we will obviously need to start shifting towards greener technologies.  Thank you.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you.  That was great in setting quite inspiring.  I would like to give the floor to Annie.  Annie, you are a professor of law, at IMT Atlantique.  Can you present the roadmap of the French digital council, and its elaboration? 
(no audio).
I can't hear anything.  We might have a small issue that's being sorted.
(Background conversation).
>> VICENT TOUBIANA: Sorry.  I'm trying to call her back.  Trying to find a solution.  Give me ‑‑ give the floor to the next speaker.  Sorry, Lucien.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Well, we will move to the next speaker and give Annie Blandin floor.  And next we have Esther.  Can you, present the public policies on environmental aspects of digital technology.
(conversation in French).
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Vincent, we can hear you.
We lost Esther for some reason.  She might have had a problem with her connection.  Well, I guess we'll move to Pierre and try to get back to the speakers just next to Pierre Bonis.  You are the executive director.  Can you give us a practical use case.  So domain system is a key part of the Internet.  Can you tell us more about its environmental footprint?
>> PIERRE BONIS: Hello, everyone.  I hope that you can hear me.
So thank you very much, first of all, for inviting me to this panel, and as I intervene just after this ‑‑ this setting that we had on the Internet, I may just start to share some thoughts about the limitations ‑‑ the limitations from my point of view of this approach.  Trying to present every action on the Internet and giving it a carbon footprint.  I think it's very interesting to do that, but at the same time, it's no the giving justice that the Internet is a materialization economy, which means that when you look at carbon footprint, you look at the carbon footprint that's issued by the making of the computers, the making of the infrastructure and if you want to reduce the use of this infrastructure, at the same time, you increase the average carbon footprint of every user.
It's a little bit like when you are on a plane.  If you want the plane to stay on the ground, of course, the carbon footprint of the plane will be equal to zero if you don't think about the making of the plane.
But in the plane flies, it's better that it flies with 100 passengers than two passengers because if it flies only with two passengers, the average carbon footprint for each passenger will be much higher than if it flies with 100.  It's the same thing for the Internet infrastructure.  If they are used, it reduced the average carbon footprint infrastructure itself.  So adding a name to a video, to a research, to each and every interaction that we can have on the Internet, to me is once again interesting but can may not be exactly what we are trying to do.
So in order to share what AFNIC has done since 2012 on this issue.  We started to do our carbon footprint in 2013 with an objective aim of reducing our global carbon footprint from 20% in ten years.
So far, I mean, we have not reached the ten years because we are in 2020, and not 2022.  We have reduced a little bit, but we didn't reduce it to the 20% that we had as an objective, and one reason for that is that the carbon footprint for an organization such as AFN IC which is a relatively small organization as a registry of domain names, we are around 80 people working in the registry.  The reason why is mainly because we have grown till 2012, and we have hired more people, and the carbon footprint of the people working and I'm not talking about the machines or the infrastructure, is increasing normally because they take the transports to go to the office, even if now they are not taking any transport at all, but this is another question.
Because also they eat, they go to the restaurants, they use some computers.  So ‑‑ so it's ‑‑ it's about reducing the ‑‑ the best way to reduce it for a ‑‑ for an organization like AFNIC is ‑‑ after having gained some carbon footprint with the internal organization, is to put pressure on the contractants that we have, to try to ‑‑ to try to contract with people would have a strong vision on the reducing of the carbon footprint, trying to find some equipment that are ‑‑ that consume less energy, for instance.
But even with that, it's ‑‑ it's not as easy as it seems just when the carbon footprint are calculated.  One thing I would like to stress is that we have starred to benchmark ourselves with our European colleagues and the first thing that is striking me is that not everyone put the same thing in a carbon footprint.
Some of us are just focussing on the travel of the people who are working for them.  Some others are focusing on the infrastructure and the core business.  Some of us are including everything in the carbon footprint, which goes for instance even to the coffee that Lucien is drinking currently.  That has a carbon footprint in itself.
So once you do that, there is a ‑‑ there is some difficulties to benchmark.  Of course, for those of us who are targeting the carbon footprint, mostly on the travel, they will have great success these 2020 year on their carbon footprint and a huge reduction of it, because they have not taken the plane, but what about the core business, and how to exactly evaluate the carbon footprint of the core business?  This is another question and even if we have moved forward, there's a lot of uncertainty.  I'm very sure that Annie will give us some ‑‑ some insight on the way that we have to look at the carbon footprint of our core business, but just to finish, I would like to share a ‑‑ an experience with you giving you ‑‑ an idea of the challenges that are ahead.
In the DNS, the Domain Name System, we have to work mostly on the resilience of the infrastructure, make sure that everywhere in the world you have servers that can answer your ‑‑ your domain name or answer any kind of resolution that is asked by any kind of user.
Two years ago, we opened a new DNS spot in New York, just to serve the North America but also the Caribbeans asking for their information.  And we were very happy to install one of our facilities in the best ‑‑ also called Best Data Center New York.  And one year half we did our carbon footprint and it decreased 15% in the DNS resolution in the year before.  And we asked ourselves now.
It was just the no, data center, which is a very modern one and a very excellent one and the data center who has a policy on reducing the carbon footprint is plugged on an energy plant that is using coal.  And in France, you know that most of the energy doesn't come from coal, but from nuclear energy, which has some problems, but not too much problems in terms of carbon footprint.
So ‑‑ so it gives you an insight of the details that you have to look at, when you are contracting with ‑‑ with others and this is in the core of our business, to contract with a lot of people all around the world to make sure that the ccTLD is working well.
I will finish with that because I'm sure I have been a little bit too long but it was a way also to let the others to get connected.  So thank you very much for that, and I'm very open for discussion later. 
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you.  Thank you, Pierre.  Quite an interesting approach on actually benchmarking our carbon footprint.  Sorry also for the technical hiccups.  Some panelists are having problem connecting or connecting to the audio.
Well, I would like to give back the floor to Esther Ngom.  Esther, you are a lawyer and you are the president of the Cameroon chapter the Internet Society, can you present the public policies on the environmental aspects of digital technologies in Cameroon? 
>> ESTHER NGOM:  We have a bit of a problem with the Internet here.  Hopefully now I can follow all the ‑‑ all meeting.  Okay.  In terms of public policy on digital in ‑‑ and the environmental aspect of digital in Cameroon, we first of all, I would like to say that the question ‑‑ the main question on the environmental aspect of digital on electric waste ‑‑ (Garbled audio) to maintain it, and the ‑‑ the carbon footprint coming from the production of the material err we are using.  So you have data that is in force in Cameroon.  We don't have any specific law, any specific text or regulation concerning the digital environment aspect of the digital activities.  We have a range of provision in different text and different domain, but we have text that is specific to the digital.  We don't have any provision on the environmental aspect of those activities.
What ‑‑ (garbled audio).
Right from the carbon print of the ‑‑ are first in the law carried off in the law of 1996 which was the main law in Cameroon.  And this allows for principle participation of all the citizens in the protection of environment, the principle of who is ‑‑ who have carbon print, and the responsibility of the producer of the waste, and those principles are asupplied in specific text on the waste, that is the text from both the ministry of environment and ministry of trade is the text of 2012.  Giving the reports and the technical material in the digital domain ‑‑ (garbled audio).
So there's no specific provision in the digital domain, there's no specific provision on the environmental aspects of the activities and there's also other provision in the domain of energy, but they are very, very few insights in those text on energy, and how it ‑‑ we have to manage the environmental impacts of the GTAG in terms of waste of energy to maintain the system and to use the domain name to have electronic trades.  So this is something that has to be taken into account in the ‑‑ in the next text that we will do in Cameroon.
For now the single law making process is the law on private data, but we are ‑‑ we are ‑‑ we will ask civil society and the Internet Society to probably make a white paper on that question so that we ‑‑ the policymakers and the government should take this discussion into account if you want to have a sustainable digital economy here.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you, Esther, for a great use case.  The IGF is a great place for promoting and tackle the dialogue, but also a great place to compare policies and regulation and be actually able to move forward together on such a global issue.
I would like to give the floor to Annie Blandin.  You are the professor of law at IMT Atlantique, which is a school in France.  Can you tell us more about the roadmap of the French digital counsel and also tell us more about the context of its elaboration? 
(No audio).
>> ANNIE BLANDIN: Do you hear me?
(feedback).
(no audio).
(Feedback).
>> VICENT TOUBIANA: Sorry, just one sec.
>> ANNIE BLANDIN: (Feedback).
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Yes, there is an echo on the audio, and indeed don't use the speaker and Vincent you can maybe turn down the sound a bit.
(Speaking French).
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Perfect on my side.  Yes, it's working. 
>> ANNIE BLANDIN: Hello? 
(speaking French).
>> ANNIE BLANDIN: So I will present the work of the French digital council on digital and environment in the form of a roadmap.  This roadmap was a roadmap on the basis from the French minister of the ecological and solidarity transparencyition and the French secretary of state for digital affairs.
It is also the result of a major concept and fruitful collaboration with the French high person for climate.
This work is in line with the French digital doctrine and measures already in siftence or in the process of being ‑‑ the French digital council has been adopted over the course of its mandate with various partners.  It's important to point out that many measures already exist or will be adopted.  We are not starting from a blank sheet of paper.  One need only sign the law on the circular company to this.
We have therefore lists these mures and carried out the state‑of‑the‑art.  This roadmap is part of a very rich European and French agenda with the Green Deal and the French Recovery Plan, it's intended to lead to action.  Numerous recommendations will be decided within the framework of the interministerial strategies.
Germany is another member of the European Union that has launched its own strategy on digital environment last March.  The ter norrial level is also essential in and already involved.  In the European Union, citizen mobilezation strong and we believe that the time is right to implement a real digital and environmental policy.
This is this operational focus of our work that justifies the method to which the council is loyal and which has enabled and continues to emerge, but also to identify sensitive points.  We have brought together the administrations with competencies area, institutional players but also committed companies, and civil society organizations, experts, and citizens.  We have carried out a real iterative work of intelligence, where the opinion of all could be heard.
Each recommendation of the roadmap was co‑constructed in workshops where we presented ‑‑ and where contributors were invited to provide written feedback.
From the plurality of opinions, strong' realistic opinions emerged.  One might wonder whether these honor continue.  On the one hand, the desire to slow down the pace and curb or financial consumption and on the other hand, the financial sector is more intensive.  It is precisely these tensions that these two transitions if the world does not take the measure of the environmental exchange, and it faces the ecological transition is likely to slide, just as if these were not addressed and the digital transition would not be able to take in a sustainable way.  This is why we wanted to present something that French and Europe will have to support that of responsible digital technology.
A digital system that controls its own environment and footprint and a digital system that supports its provision to a more ecological and socially responsible society.
Here again, noting the digital technology has a harmful environmental footprint, while having the use to support the ecological transition must seem paradoxical.  It is true that the negative impact of digital technology on the environment is more or less measurable while this is more in the form of opportunities sometimes more difficult to perceive, but it may only be a matter of time.
The path we have chosen is therefore systemic, the pillars of the roadmap are inseparable.  There are two sides of the same core point, of course, it's a not question of letting the digital technology slip away on the grounds that each ecological impact would be offset by the services to the environment.  The proposed measures are interwoven.  So it outlines the digital policy in relation to the environment.
The measures we have presented are on two pillars, the first pillar is digital sobriety throughout all the different products and services.  And the seventh is to put at the second of the environmental transitions.  In this respect, there is no shortage of examples for commitment and agricultural to the protection of biodiversity.  There are many potentials to be exported.
Environmental data is the cement that holds these two together, which is why the world map is compiled by the environmental data generating interest.
Although the environment is one of the main challenges in humanity, digital technology has so far failed to demonstrate any distribution to the ecological contribution.  The digital world is seen as immaterial and clean, and this image is false.  Digital technology has harmful environmental impacts even if the assessments are not converted, there is a significant trend and our recommendation concerns profiling methods for assessing the impact of digital technology.
This is particularly managing in terms of materials, metals, and energy and water, in addition to the cost to the environment, there is also the human cost, because the minerals needed for technology have too often been extracted in this regard of human rights.  Particularly by exploiting children.
Downstream users, for the prediction and the construction of electricity, and end‑of‑life management of the collection we use.  This format is divided in three projects, project one, as part of the objective set by Paris agreement to contain climate change, reduce the environmental footprint of digital technology, and adopt digital sobriety for a wider action.
And there is better evaluation in quantifying the environmental footprint of digital technology, and another example of better consuming implies asking an essential question, the question of the relevance of the the certain uses with regard to the environmental footprint.
Project two making digital technology at the quality solidarity, program and putting data at the service of ecological and solidarity transition and mobilizing digital technologies around projects and sustainable innovation, low tech, corporate economy, agricultural energy for the future mobility and sustainable intelligent territories, and create a responsible European intelligence, consistent with the key ecological.
And three, financing, the recommendations of the roadmap, because France and Europe to responsible technologies will not be achieved without massive investment. 
Finally, our work has indeed highlighted the crucial role of environmental data in the ecological transition.  This data are both the source and the product of knowledge the decision makers use to understand, anticipate and manage the environmental programs.
They are also at innovation processes saying that we can say economic performance, social progress and environmental preservation, particularly in the form of digital services.
The potential for using this data, in the energy or agricultural sectors, for instance justifies the need to speak of the data economic driven by the general interest, which is what the European Union is calling for.
We have made a distinction between environmental data by nature, geographic data, for example, and data by destination within the use that can be made of it, such as ‑‑ (telephone ringing) and there is another dimension, which is all the more important, as they are linked to other data in relation to agriculture, for example.  This machine data reminds us that our environmental protection requirements must be integrated foot various policies and actions of the European Union.
Environmental data can be public or private.  Public data are already open.  As for private data, it is only partially ‑‑ it only partially benefits from populous on the basis of sectoral approach.  It is to them that the term of data is currently reserved.  The council ‑‑ the council in its opinion has the visualization of the explicit qualification of data and general interest for environmental data produced privately for its citizens.
It proposing consolidating the status by basing it on the incentive and project based approach of innovative nature of case law, when it gives persistence to the right to information or commercial interests.
The role of the legislative approach would be above all the end stream by drawing all the less ops from the observation practices as far as the regime of data is consumed, the council believes it must be based on the reconciliation of data control and organized.  It must take into account several issues since it's the subject of appropriation strategies by large companies.
Thus the economics of data go hand to hand ‑‑ hand in hand with the geopolitics of data and it is significant in this respect that the union is considering the creation of overlooking the data space whether or a European or local scale the environmental data is a close link with the territory that needs to be developed.
In conclusion, we can see that the ecosystem has embraced a need to reduce the environmental footprint of digital technology as a necessity, but above all an opportunity.  The same commitment applies to all actions and putting digital technology at the service of the environment.  And we can also count on citizen mobilization.  Taking advantage of this context to provide the incentive and obligation in order to create a climate of trust:
It is with this hope of friends and the commitment to technology and the service of the future these interventions come to the end and I would like to thank you very much for your attention.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thanks, a lot, Annie.  That was quite inspiring, digital sovereignty, protection of biodiversity quite a few recommendations, indeed, human rights and sustainable innovation are key aspects, indeed for fostering a strong digital industry for the future.
And now, I would like to give the floor back to Ananya, but to ask her what must policymakers keep in mind when framing policies to promote rapid digitalization without causing irreparable damage to the environment.
>> ANANYA SINGH: Thank you for asking me to speak before I actually address this question, I would like to thank you have for referring to the example of Europeans and carbon footprints.  We discuss this example in our classes.  We just do it in a different context, more in terms of pricing.
About that carbon footprinting, I do agree there that there is ‑‑ there are 50 people traveling on a plane, then there's the same amount of carbon footprint and it's literally going to be more damage to make only two people travel on the same plane, because we will either way have the same amount of carbon footprint.
Here what we have to understand is we are not asking airlines to stop their business all together.  And we are also not asking people to stop traveling via airplanes all together.  We are, though, we are simply asking people to be collective about the number of times we need to travel via the air.  So we are simply asking people to prioritize.  Metaphorically speaking, full stops are never, but shorter and simple sentences are better than a lot of commas to make the same sense.
So the first one, like Annie just kind of touched upon, is the concept of digital sobriety. 
In the treaties such as the Paris Agreement, made commitments to drastically reduce green house gas emissions.  So meeting this challenge demands a rethinking of the world's consumption.  Thus, they must pursue an approach which is based open digital sobriety:  Just in a more findful and responsible way, as opposed to completely cutting it out.
So environmental experts from Paris created a think tank on this shift project which proposed this idea of digital sobriety.  This think tank thinks that this ewe manty is the victim of a concept in which websites employ mechanisms and recommended section of streaming sides to maximize the amount of time we spend as users on the platform.  It allows for a continuous flow of video, rather than a time usage which boosts the large amount of content and generates the associated data.  For example, the auto play own NetFlix, encourage people to watch more and more episodes than they originally attended.  There's little time to opt out before the next episode starts.
This asserts that regulation of content is needed which means we would be aiming at redimensioning the design of platforms to audience behaviors to encourage behaviors where we are trying to persuade people to reduce the volume of content, they are consuming and be more consistent with their exact needs and in a sense this is an approach that we are trying ‑‑ the designers and the makers to make and this is not exactly coming from the consumer side but from the producer side.
The second point that I would like to highlight is demography.  So, for example, a policy that is suitable for India may not be suitable for the United States because both have very different populations and with that, population count with several different accents of people, young and old, literate and illiterate.  Acing to 2018 study, Americans have almost 18 connected digital divisions and whereas an Indian owns an average of one single device and consumes 2gb per month and they don't even have those devices.
So give this diversity, it's inadvisable to provide this digital sobriety.  So where they are making any type of policies where they are trying to advance digitally but also trying to save the environment, we must keep the local emotions and ideas of what is good for us in our mind.
The third point is about geography and politics.  So I would like to highlight the difference of four different countries in Asia.  The first one is China.  A large country.  So China is attempting to crack down on the overusage of the Internet.  But it is noting that the intention of serving emissions.  China announced it would impose on curfews of minors playing video games to curb what it thinks is an addiction.  So gamers under 18 are barred from playing online games between 10 p.m. and 8 p.m.  And during the week, the minors can pay for 90 minutes a day.  So this allotment is extended to three hours on weekends and public holidays.  It may encourage website designers to reduce their use of addictive design mechanisms.
The next example is of Singapore which is a democracy, a very small country compared to China.  They have Internet sensors which are being used to determine when things are switched on and off.  A similar thing has been happening in India under India's smart city mission, which also is increasingly relying on online services to think about transferencey is especially using mobile services hasn't providing services without having to go to multiple municipal offices forming egroups to listen to people and opt in feedback and using online monitoring, et cetera.
While this sounds like a very good one, we are reducing travel and there's a huge cut in carbon emissions we have to understand that India as a country with 1.3 billion people.  Imagine 1.3 billion people logging in at the same time, the amount of traffic it generates the amount of carbon emission it will generate will be huge! 
The next example is also of India.  So India has actually undergone a lot of change, because he launched the digital India campaign and this aims to increase digital connectivity.  And so under this program, the government has planned to introduce public Internet access programs, broadband highways and things as such.
So these are all platforms which will boast the development process an will help the citizens to engage themselves.  Like we have a digital program, a flagship program of digital India.  So this kind of runs parallel with the digital India's vision that every citizen in the country will be provided with a private space on a public cloud to make all of their documents and certifications available in this space through this platform issuance and verification of documents will also be done so we are eliminating the requirement of any physical documents.
So the Prime Minister also launched the integrated case management system of the Supreme Court, the first step taken by the code towards becoming paperless and digital.  So we are having all the litigants now access their data online.  So while all of these are conserving the environment, the physical environment, in some ways, the increased digital dependence cannot be an environmentally sustainable one given that India, like I said has the world's second largest population with over 1.3 billion people.
The other example is of the Green New Deal and it has two pillars.  The first one is the Green New Deal and the Digital New Deal.  Under the digital, they have basically tried to convey the idea that it intends to spend about $41 million to build the 5G construction and cloud computing for the government, as well as for an additional $541 million to promote the industrial convergence within 5G and AI.  What we have to understand here is for the westerners, 5G comes with both its pros and cons.  Wile it has its own set of pros, there's also cons that that was widely discussed in western countries, especially in European countries.
But for countries in Asia, 5G is one thing, it's development and progress.  It means speed.  For a Leymann, it means development.  And anything that leads to development is something that any Asian countries will do.  Most are going digital but they are not keen on digital sobriety.
Many countries in the A P. region have significant populations.  With we have China and India and they are the most populously, they are in the Asia region, right?  That means we have increased dependence and more reliance on the digital space.  We can't simply look at a given technology and energy uses and rule out its use and completely ban its use.  That's not right.
It all boils down to two things.  First one, are people spending more time online and what is the environmental impact of this creased use is there a way to cut down the increased use?  We have to explore the alternatives.  If people are spending more and more of their time of consuming information and entertainment onlines, then this is actual going to have a lower environmental impact.  Are they going to travel or go for a drive, we have to look this activity compared to what else we would be doing with our time and what are the environmental we would be having if weren't doing this.  We have to explore and evaluate the opportunity cost of this activity. 
So is it something which is harming the environment less?  Then that's something that we have to consider while training a policy.  The fourth one is more installation.  Is it being used for, streaming video or texting.
A good policy may be tailored according to the dimensions regarding the patterns of Internet users.  And if it's the most environmentally damaging one, then it's important that policymakers underline soft measures.  So this could range from anything, such as social media campaigns tore advertisements and we need to start using the Internet to save the environment.
And the final point is we have to go for more research and development that will help us to reduce the ecological damage that we are causing.  Like there were reports that they have been trying to move behind 100% green energy to power themselves and pledges from Facebook and Google to do the same.  Microsoft set is up a system to save costs and keeping them cool.  We just have to understand that regulations need to be implemented on a policy level, that balance of mitigation of environmental harm and people's right to information and freedom of speech.
Thank you.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you, Ananya.  Great ideas.  A few solutions indeed.  I would like to give the floor back to Pierre Bonis and ask him, are there any plan, any project you can elaborate on for further evaluate and improve the energy use of a DN ax request? 
>> PIERRE BONIS: Yes, thank you.  Thank you, Lucien, and once again thank you very much to Ananya for explanation.  One of the last points that I spoke about was the foreseen R&D.
I think the first thing we can do is to make sure that we fully understand what is the carbon footprint of the core infrastructure on the Internet.
And I spoke about what we ‑‑ what we are used to speak about as the high level Internet.  She spoke about Facebook, Apple, videos, and this is very important.  And this is quite important.  But this is the underunderlying infrastructure that is still here, and from AFNIC point of view and maybe Annie will agree with that.  We think this is part of the Internet footprint that is not very well none.
So at AFNIC, we are committed to work on that.  When I say work on that, it's not us only.  We will try to share our work with engineers in the IGF during the year 2021, in order to evaluate the real carbon footprint of an average request on the DNS.
Why so?  Not because we are expecting that this is the most important part of the Internet carbon footprint, but first of all, because this is our car business.  So even if we think that our carbon footprint is not compare to the one of the gold mining industry in South Africa, for instance, there's no reason for us not to try to understand very deeply what are we doing and what is the impact of it?  So this the first reason.
Tidy your room, it's your own food, however you say it, this is our core business.  We have to make sure that we know what is our carbon footprint.  And in some cases, it will give us some input to discuss with other organizations that fill this kind of gap and calculate it for us which is not a good idea, I think.  The second part is if we know better about the DNS request, which is at the basics of Internet functions.  Even if it's not seen without the DNS, you don't have the Internet.  With this evaluation maybe and that's what we hope, we will see differences between different kind of services or at least different infrastructure that are center ployed.
For instance, what we are expecting ‑‑ maybe I'm wrong we will see that when we work on that.
What we're expecting is that a DNS that goes from, let's say, an Internet ‑‑ a local Internet service provider revolver to authority DNS server that is in the country, and comes back to the user maybe less consuming in terms of carbon that a DNS request that is sent by the local ISP revolver but goes all through the Atlantic Ocean, for instance, with DOH to a huge American country that ends it back to the local user in Europe for him to access the content that is located for instance, in India.  So I don't know, but this is something that we have to look at.  If we look at the methodology in the carbon footprint, you have some measures that are calculated on an average usage, which means for instance, if you what want to evaluate the carbon footprint of mail that is sent and this is what Ananya talked about, you took about a mail that is sent through Gmail, for instance, with an average of number of attached files, it's ‑‑ if we want to encourage people to change their usage, you have to show them that maybe there are other ways to use the email and lower your carbon footprint.
The only way is not sending less emails.  The way can be that there are other ways to reduce your carbon footprint.  So what AF NIC is committed to do on the DNS requests.  There are a lot of other things that could be worked on, which is GDP, which satellite protocol that could be analyzed and to look at if it has a huge or average carbon footprint and this this is going to be more and more important to evaluate all the Internet protocols, TCP, DNS with the IEFT to fuel the global thinking and the global evaluation of the carbon footprint of the Internet.  I'm not talking about Ananya has said very well that Internet on its own has also external positivities when it ‑‑ I mean, when you send an email, you don't send a mail, for instance.  When you do a Zoom conference, you don't take the plane.  So even putting that aside we really need to know more about our real carbon footprint.  That's that is what I wanted to share and thank you, Lucien for having asked a question.
By the way, answering this question is also a way to say to participants to this excellent panel that AF NIC will not do it alone.  So if there are some volunteers to help us work on that, and especially to the IGF or other engineers that are interested in the Internet for example, we will be more than happy to share the burden with them.  Thank you.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you.  Thank you, Pierre.  Indeed.  I was at core Internet walks and it's its environmental impact is a great way to encourage people to change I would like to give the floor to Annie.  And to ask her could we imagine cooperation of digital and ecological transition?  Could you explain why there is' link with the problem of addiction and of environment? 
We can't hear you.  We can't hear you the at least on my side.
>> ANNIE BLANDIN: Now.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: That is fine but the echo is back.
>> ANNIE BLANDIN: Okay.
(Feedback).
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: It's working fine now.  Thank you have.
>> ANNIE BLANDIN: Hello? 
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Well, we only have about 15 minutes left, I will ask Esther about how could we improve policy making at the global level to foster a sustainable digital industry?  And then I will give back the floor to Annie for concluding remarks.  Esther, you have the floor.
>> ESTHER NGOM: ‑‑
>> VICENT TOUBIANA: And so I'm in line with Annie.  I will try again.
>> ANNIE BLANDIN: Thank you to the question about the measure and the impact or the footprint of digital technologies, we have to measure this impact and also it was told by Pierre Bonis considering the infrastructure.
We have also to take take into account the opposite effect.
And we have to consider the more structural problems and the source of the exponential uses of Internet of digital services is not ‑‑ everybody knows is the economy.  So the in our work, we thought it's fess to regulate the attention economy.  So this is ‑‑ this is a problem that is not addressed for the moment.
The only problem that is addressed at the moment is that of competition with the big ‑‑ the Big Tech industry but regulate attention is really a huge challenge, I think.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you, Annie.  Esther, well, I already asked the question.  I will repeat.  How do you think we could improve policy making at the global level to foster a sustainable digital industry?
>> ESTHER NGOM:  I think the first step is to have a Study Group to study the issue that's inside the environmental aspects of digital economy and then we cannot avoid to have a global text, maybe under the form of recommendation for the countries for the Internet text, or if possible more binding text that will have provision on all of those aspects and this will be implemented at the national level later because the economies are all linked and if you have only your consideration, it will not work this question.  So this is what I see first, the Working Group, like what we did with this session in the most mature way and with thematic sub group and have a binding text at the global level and it will be implemented in each the countries.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you, Esther.  We have like ten minutes.  We have a great question in the great from Sebastian.  It seems that a lot of measures are coming from national government or with some specialized structures.  How can we finance real multi‑stakeholder discussion?  Is it the IGF the place or the first step?
Pierre?  Do you have any thoughts on that? 
>> PIERRE BONIS: I fully understand why this is coming from the national level.  My understanding is that the international level ised to set the objectives that we have to reach, let's say, for instance the cup, '21/22, et cetera, and then after the countries are ‑‑ are taking specific measures to reach that objective, I will give you an example for that.  And it goes back to the example I gave about the DNS facility that we opened in New York two years ago.  This is unto the national authorities to foster the research of Green Energy.  If this green energy is developed in one country, because the data centers will be greener mechanically.  So for me waiting for a kind of global policy is ‑‑ it could delay the concrete measures that could be taken to lower the carbon footprint on the Internet.
That doesn't Thein that it won't be discussed at the international level.  I think IGF is a good level because we exchange experience.  We share the knowledge, but we are as some say a toothless an pal, which means we are not creating regulation.  If we want to find a place where we should create regulation on the global level, I can tell you that the battle with the different levels will last two years before we have an opportunity to take some decisions.  So let's move at the national and regional levels and discuss at the international level.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you.  20 years, right!  Indeed.
And I see Esther would want to take the floor.  Esther, the floor is yours.
>> ESTHER NGOM:  As Pierre concluded.  We need to move at the national and the regional level to have something done and to have nothing done in the towns to address these issues but we need to discuss at the international level to have minimum provision for everybody and as I said before, maybe we can see this first event as the first step, like, Sebastian said, to look more at this question, having kind of Working Group and what I would suggest as recommendation for this day is that all what we discussed today, the genesis we made, the proposition we made, the example we had from some national context, we should create a white paper and send it through the IGF network and ISOC so we start a discussion in all the national contexts so have this important issue addressed.
The policymakers have never looked at that problem in Cameroon.  That will be more and more big because of the digital economies, we growing very fast here.  So as a recommendation, I don't know if we can put together all that we did today that we have a white paper on the IGF network and other network as ISOC so that it touch everybody at the national level and we started a discussion and we start having solution, like Pierre said at the national/regional level and then continue the discussion at the international level using the IGF network as a first step.  Thank you.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you, Esther.
Having discussion at the IGF in the multi‑stakeholder arena and implementing policy at the local level, it's quite ‑‑ that's quite a challenge.  It's quite interesting to be able to actually compare policies and discuss policies.  I would like to give the floor to Vincent Toubiana, for thanks and last remarks since we have like three minutes left.  Vincent, the floor is yours.
>> VICENT TOUBIANA: Thank you to all the panelists for a great discussion and it was very interesting.  And as I was trying to solve technical glitches, I really enjoyed the conversation and we had a very broad perspective not only the issue but on the way to try to saving dress it and also it was an opportunity to see what new consortium could be used to address the digital transition.  And so it was really ‑‑ I really enjoyed that.  And so thank you to all the panelisted for sharing your experience and that was very useful and I think thank Lucien for moderating.  And sorry to everyone for the technical glitches.  I hope next year we will be able to meet in person and, yeah.  That's it for me.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you, Vincent.  Thank you, everyone.  Thanks to the speakers.  Thanks to the participants and to the people following us on YouTube.  See you next time. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-12-%E2%80%93-ws271-multilingualism-online-old-challenges-and-new-perspectives^^

 
     >> MODERATOR:  Good morning.  I'm joining from new Delhi in India.  It's one of the most linguistically diverse countries.  An estimated 40 to 60 languages plus 1600 dialects spoken or month.  I believe Indonesia have 700 to 4 hundred languages.  Most of these languages and so many other countries with different languages cannot be used online yet.  So our topic of discussion at this roundtable is about multilingualism online.  We discuss videos and languages online and expect to gain new perspectives what are the ways forward to make it more interlinguistically inclusive.  
              I welcome you all to the this very interesting inclusion team track.  Thank you, Roberto, for putting us together for this.  
              Before we begin, my request is to be mindful of the Code of Conduct for participation.  I think the links are there in the chatbox already.  Frank has put them up so you can view them.  You can use the Q&A to pose your questions.  They'll be happy to ask the questions.  We also have a couple of short online polls, which our hosts will put up and the audience is requested to respond.  A demo was given already.  
              I think this is the time ‑‑ can we get the first Zoom poll from Frank on right now?  
     >> SPEAKER:  Okay.  I'm getting my poll on.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Okay.  So here are the two questions.  Simple to answer for the audience and attendees.  
              Number one question, is when communicating over the Internet, do you use your preferred language?  Then when communicating over the Internet, do you use your preferred script?  I suppose the audience knowing there's a difference between the language they speak and the script that they use.  
              We already can see a diverse set of responses.  Frank, how long do we wait for the poll results?  
     >> SPEAKER:  That would depend on you.  Whenever you want, I'll close it.  How long do you want the poll to run?  
     >> MODERATOR:  So, I guess people will be responding for a while, so we can wait for some time and come back on the results.  
     >> SPEAKER:  Okay.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Okay.  Thank you.  We'll come back with the results after a short while.  Should we end the poll now?  Are we ending the poll, Frank?  Do we keep it up?  
     >> SPEAKER:  I can end the poll if you want to, and it's ended.  
     >> MODERATOR:  It's ended.  All right.  We'll come back to the results after a while.  Thank you.  
I think the poll results are already being shared.  Do you want to talk about this?  Do you want to talk about the results?  
     >> SPEAKER:  Could Frank show me then?  
     >> SPEAKER:  The results are being seen.  
     >> SPEAKER:  I don't see them.  I see them.  We have people in the majority use the preferred language while communicating over the Internet, and although the same result is that they use the preferred script.  However, we have 14% of the audience that said that they have to use the script that they are obliged to but not that they like to.  
              More or less, the audience is quite convenient with the language.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Okay.  Thank you.  
              Okay.  So let me come back to the topic of conversation after the poll results.  More than 3 billion people still do not have access to Internet.  To fight barriers to the access with economic issues such as affordability, cost of ownership and devices and access prices.  Then there are infrastructure issues, and they are social issues such as gender issues discouraging women and children from the use of technology.  
              There are people with physical disabilities who are deprived, and then there are political issues like displaced people lacking access or denied outright due to conflicts.  Last but not least is the language issue, which we are going to discuss today.  
I think I'm getting the poll on top.  Okay.  
              We talk about the limitations of using scripts as people had said we don't ‑‑ some of them don't use the script they prefer, so we will try to understand the limitations of using scripts or writing systems on the Internet which prevents people from accessing and using the Internet in their own language.  They are prevented from reaping the digital dividends.  
              Having said that, there are significant advancements that have been made, too.  As of this year I think 154 language scripts are supported by unicode, which should mean one should have the ability to by now use a few hundred language systems based on these 104 scripts already.  However, in my experience at least they have not released mine and making much headway.  
              Almost 90% is in English.  This is because of so many native languages and others not yet useable to the Internet.  
              So my first question is about whether 150‑plus scripts being available and progress on the international e‑mail, content is already available in many languages, what's keeping the Internet from being a multilingual system empowers them to use Internet in their own writing systems freely.  
              I want to begin by asking John Klensin and he has the background in protocols for the Internet.  I look forward to him to provide an overview on important issues with barriers to new languages and writing systems, insufficient rendering and all that.  
Before John starts to answer, I will request Ilona to put up the second poll, and start with John in response to the question.  
     >> SPEAKER:  Please go to the menti.com website.  You can insert three fields.  The title of your mother tongue.  We already have two persons that have responded, and we'll keep it for a while so that you can put your answers and read your answers there.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Then we'll come back to see what we receive from the poll.  
     >> SPEAKER:  Okay.  I'll stop sharing the screen, but you still have the opportunity to insert your answers.  
     >> MODERATOR:  So John, what about the question that I posed to you earlier?  
     >> JOHN KLENSIN:  I was going to do an introduction in terminology, but let me start with part of the answer to the question.  
First of all, I think there's something that as we talk about the protocols and the names, domain names, other things, it's important to understand how Internet protocol development happens.  We talk a great deal with interoperate ability.  That's the ability of two applications to work together, and the ability of one version of application to one developer he substituted by the version of application by another developer.  
              What's important about the interoperability issue from the standpoint in our conversations is that getting to A to operate with B to do C is very valuable we quite often get there because the alternative is A and B somehow gets to C, but A and B don't work together in any way.  
              What we should knowing about how this develops is there's no implication that doing C is good or valuable or desirable.  Many times we make decisions about the design of protocols on the Internet, especially in this internationalization and multilingual area.  It's clear that people are going to do something, and it's much better if they do it enough in the same way that it is possible for them to interoperate whether or not C is a good idea.  
              There have been many, many times that we have felt that C was not a good idea but have done that anyway.  I'm going to try to avoid blaming or naming particular applications, but we may get there today.  
              The second observation very generally is that languages are hard.  Translation between languages is hard.  Culturally appropriate translations between languages is harder.  
              Mapping scripts is hard, mapping writing systems is hard.  Those particular problems are not Internet problems.  They've been known for a millennia.  I often tell people in my studies I have discovered that the stories and beliefs of many major religions where they start talking about why languages are different conclude that we couldn't have this big of a mess without divine intervention to make these things that different.  
              Whether one believes that or not, it highlights the differences.  When I look at the poll, I noticed something that isn't obvious in the poll, which is that none of your population who cannot access the Internet because their languages aren't there are by definition represented in the poll because they're not represented in the Internet.  
              So this problem is much worse than things like that poll indicate, and we need to understand that.  So moving to the core of today's problem and I'll come back to the definitions I was going to talk about later if we need to, what we have seen and been doing is, first of all, some confusion over what's important.  We've spent a tremendous amount of time on naming, on identifiers and things like that, but we know, for example, that the typical user doesn't know the difference between domain name, a search term and the URL, and they don't care.  
              So if we can focus on getting to content which is important, that's the beginning and end of the important story with regard to the languages and use of the people not on the Internet.  So let's now move to that issue, which, again, is the important one here.  The thing we see most often is an applications developer will come along and say, I want this to be globally accessible because I feel it should be globally accessible, and a good guy or because it will improve my market or profitability.  
              What they try to do is build an application in one environment and translate it.  Usually they try to translate it by having some machine do the translation.  
              What we know is that that doesn't work.  Machine translation works well when we have a couple of fairly closely related languages, closely related cultures.  We have large bodies of culturally translated text for these machines to learn from, and then the translations work fairly well.  
              To translate between very different languages, especially a minority language where there's not a large body of carefully translated text, the results the machines produce and I think most of us have seen it range from silly to completely ridiculous or culturally terrible.  
              So this approach of making the application and translating doesn't work, and the application itself may not translate well.  It may have been the wrong interfaces and culturally undesirable.  Doing the right things from getting from a left‑to‑right language in its display to a language which runs right‑to‑left or up and down is just not obvious in these intervention by experts.  
              So the question then becomes what do we do about this?  The answer is, I think, that by concentrating on trying to centrally develop these applications and spin them out to the rest of the world, we do nothing about those communities who are not part of the majority populations, majority language groups and what have you.  We don't do well with most of them either.  
              So where we should be concentrating our efforts is on local content that is locally developed, local applications locally developed or local adaptations and translations of those global developments.  
              That means we need to be concentrating on the tools to let the people in the local population who know what their languages look like and knowing how their cultures work to develop that content, and we have been spending very little energy on that as we spent all of our energy on these more global efforts.  
              Do I know how to do that?  No.  I know it's hard.  Until we start thinking about it and thinking that way, making certain that unicode does work for those languages, when it doesn't work to make certain you're articulate about why it doesn't work, and that may require help from the broader community and technical experts and people like me, unfortunately, but there's no reason unless one is writing in a script as complicated as classic Mayan and no contemporary scripts we know is that bad or that interesting, there's no reason why these things shouldn't work from a technical standpoint.  
              But getting the translations right, getting the words right, getting the right semantics, getting the right culture, getting the right displays, that has got to be a local matter because no matter how good we get it globally, it won't be good enough.  Worst yet, if the local languages are minority languages and people get used to the garbage the Internet is putting out, instead of the local languages as they speak them, we help kill those languages.  
              So that's my rough and obnoxious answer to your question.  You're muted.  You're still muted.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Yes.  Here we go.  Okay.  Thank you, John.  Yes, you pointed in the right perspective, and I think the small take‑away for now for me is that the interest should be on developing local and localized content much more than depending on some centralized global applications that could make languages gone in the near term.  That would be much more complicated.  
              It's not expected soon.  With that, I'll turn to ‑‑ 
     >> JOHN KLENSIN:  To interrupt, not expected soon.  If we don't start, Wile never get that.  
     >> GALILA ABDALMONEM:  I want to thank you all.  Before going to answer the question, I would like to share my screen.  I only have one slide to be shared.  Just a moment.  Where is the representation?  
     >> MODERATOR:  I think Frank will guide you on how to do it, how you can do that.  
     >> GALILA ABDALMONEM:  I already opened the file.  
     >> SPEAKER:  Is it giving you ‑‑ you need to ask for permission so you can share your slides.  
     >> GALILA ABDALMONEM:  Can you give me permissions for that.  
     >> SPEAKER:  Yes.  You are co‑host.  
     >> GALILA ABDALMONEM:  Okay.  I got it.  Do you see my screen now?  
     >> MODERATOR:  Yes.  
     >> GALILA ABDALMONEM:  Before I'm going to answer the question, I have one slide there.  Before going to this slide, I would like to introduce myself.  I'm working for Egypt as a manager (?) And a system engineer.  Also I'm an ambassador and now I'm the head of a university and ambassador.  
              Before going into my presentations I have only one slide was a code similar to short code.  I call this a little bit about the ( indiscernible ).  It's the Arabic code of Egypt.  
              The identity of Egypt was there since 2010.  Our registry is CR model, and we have four local registers, and we don't have overseas registrars.  We don't have a big number of names.  
              At the time we started, we have a good number of them and the number is decreasing.  Let us see know what it code means for me.  
              We have two parts for this code.  We have the orange bot that looks like is orange and the other one, which is blue.  For each part we have for the digit number for digit 1 is means for me.  That universal acceptance is a concept that all domain names and addresses should be treated equally.  All domain names and addresses should be accepted and displayed in a consistent manner.  
              The 3 means for me that Universal Acceptance doesn't only care about ( indiscernible ).  For the asterisk, I will try to answer the question as much as I can.  
              I am a technician, so most of my work will be somehow like the view from ( indiscernible ).  Let me answer the question now.  We have some that affect the progress of multilingual application on the Internet or the Internet user to speak their own language on the Internet.  
              The first one is a problem with the containment, and the second one is environment and industry.  Not all systems are Universal Acceptance‑ready.  For example, we have mobile applications, and we have this in here.  I will speak about all of this and the details about this.  
              Number 5 will have application with the interface.  Number 6, we need to ‑‑ we are going to have ‑‑ to connect the users to be existing online.  The last one is an important one, and it's awareness about the use their own local language to access the local content.  
              Let us go for the first point, which is raised by John as well, which is content.  Twenty years ago the English content was 75% against 25% non‑English con at the particular time.  Currently we have 50% English and 50% non‑English.  
                   Expected in the next 20 years to be 75% non‑English versus 25% English, which means that the number of multilingual applications will be increased online, which is good.  Second point, which is in system and consistency.  
              You wanted to access Arabic content with English domain name.  I couldn't ‑‑ I couldn't speak English, so I will not access this Arabic content.  So it should be Arabic domain name to access Arabic content on the sites.  
              I want to send and receive e‑mail like others that use English e‑mail address to send and receive.  So you should use also Arabic e‑mail address with Arabic domain name and Arabic content.  This is system consistency.  Just a second.  This is the second point.  
              So I wanted to keep it consistent.  The second point, not all systems are ready.  You are going to open applications that have Arabic interface, and in case of ‑‑ if you wanted to send an e‑mail, you have to have English e‑mail address to use this mail application, which is not good.  
              This is one example.  I don't want to go into details about this.  For mobile applications, most of the users who can't speak English use the applications, and not always exists downline, most of them don't have mobile applications to be used by these people.  This is a problem.  
              So if I'm an Arabic guy and use the application, I am limited to only the applications that have Arabic interface for limited applications.  So I am having my public services from the government for other services.  
              We are using APIs developed 20 years ago.  It's not enabled by the way.  It's not enabled.  
              On connected users, we need to connect the unconnected, and this will be one of the answers for the next few questions.  However, we need to reach people.  
              We can go to this Arabic website using this Arabic domain name.  You could send and receive and interact with other citizens using your own local language.  
              I think it is enough for me for the moment, and we'll wait again for answers from others.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you.  Thank you for the great view on what's happening in the Middle East in your region.  
I think I would now request Ilona if she wants to show the poll results on scripts.  
     >> SPEAKER:  So we have nine responses so far, and we see they're quite diverse.  Even I don't have what some are.  So they are not very familiar for me, but we still have Polish, Italian, English, Spanish, Russian.  I think that's it.  
              So our participants are quite diverse, and of course, I think that there is not so much content in these local mother tongues that are not even familiar for me.  
     >> MODERATOR:  That goes with what John was saying.  One needs to concentrate on local language development.  
     >> SPEAKER:  We have more.  We have German, (?).  
     >> MODERATOR:  I see Hindi, which is my mother tongue.  So is that about all?  
     >> SPEAKER:  Yeah.  We can proceed to the next question.  Shall we?  
     >> MODERATOR:  Okay.  
     >> SPEAKER:  Okay.  So now I'll ask the audience to write about the script that you use to write your native language mother tongue on the Internet.  I already have one response.  
              For this, you can use the same website and digit code.  You just have to refresh the page if you need to.  So I will stop sharing the screen and we will be back on the results soon.  
     >> MODERATOR:  We'll back to the consults later.  Let's go to Natalia Filina.  I think it's great to have her perspective in terms of the diversity of languages and whether ‑‑ you have had the experience of running both the (?) and the local IVN.  What's your take on this, Maria?  
     >> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA:  So, it's very interesting discussion that we have, and thank you for having me here.  So I have in my mind just a quote from the "Alice in Wonderland."  When you have understood the scripture, throw it away.  If you can't understand the scripture, throw it away.  I insist on your freedom.  
              This is maybe some reflection of our discussion today and the behavior of our users.  So I just want to share with our audience some thoughts on what is multilingual.  According to the dictionaries, the multilingual means using of more than one language by a person or a group of speakers.  
              So what we are talking about today, because if persons ‑‑ if you use just two languages and we know that half of the world's populations according to the statistics speaks at least two different languages regularly every day.  Maybe we're already multilingual because we know two languages.  
              All we're talking about how to make the Internet be lingual, so all we're talking about is how to make the Internet to support all these 7,000 languages and dialects that already exist in the world.  
              So I think that our strategies can be quite different in each of these cases.  As I'm representing the registry, I just want to share our experience, of course, but I would say that according to the freedom of users, I think that and I'm sure that users need to have this freedom to use those languages or writing system that they will really want to or get used to.  The Internet should be well prepared to provide such services for them with the highest quality.  
              So this is actually my opinion.  And as I'm representing once again the Russian registry and we are supporting the (?) and so we have varying experiences, and I think they're we're in a very lucky position now because Russian language is also one of the majorities of major languages that are quite well‑used on the Internet.  
              Still, we see some problems as well.  And so, for example, this year we are celebrating the tenth anniversary of our domain name, so that was delegated in 2010.  This year we have lots of discussions on the topic of how the domain names are supported in the Internet.  Not only about that and also about the inclusion and the support of native languages.  
              Still, this is closer to me, to our activities.  So I must say this this experience never delays that users don't care about the domain names as mentioned, but we see the project as successful.  Even those experts, Internet experts who were against its launching in 2009, they now ‑‑ now they agree that users really want to use domain names and e‑mail addresses in their native language.  
              We see lots of examples of how they use the domain names because the names are quite popular and they're used for advertisements of online projects, brand of companies, brand of projects and we see them all around on the streets, on TV, on Internet advertisements.  
              They're quite popular, and they're really good in usage.  This year I think because of this pandemic situation and because many of businesses will transform to go online and social services as well, so we see 26% growth of the registration of domain names in our zone.  
              So I think this is quite a good demonstration of how they can be popular, but from the other hand, so can you imagine a person who spent his or her time on the Internet?  According to the report, the digital report if I remember well, so as an average a person spent on the Internet six hours and 43 minutes.  Can you imagine ‑‑ if you're a native English speaker that you spend all this time every day only using the English language.  You write, communicate, read and speak only in the English language.  
              Will it be comfortable for you?  You can imagine when you visit such international conferences like this one, but in person, of course.  So you spend almost a week by communicating only in English.  It isn't as stressful for you, so for those who are not native speakers, so isn't it stressful even if you use such virtual meetings now with translation services?  
              So how do you feel about it?  So I can say that I sometimes am stressful, yes.  I must say that, for example, speaking, of course, it can be easier for us, but when you read and write different languages not native to you, you should be very well concentrated on these skills.  You should pay much attention to make no mistakes in different languages.  
              So I think there are many, many other cultural and also psychological and linguistical problems and features, which are related to every language.  We should take this in mind, especially when some companies or services provide translation.  Yes, we have these differences, and they are not so obvious.  
              They are in place.  We, for example, see this when we are talking about the implementation of (?) because this is a history, yes.  
              The key technology platforms or software platforms are created by the English‑speaking communities.  By this reason it seems that they just can't understand what difficulties can meet such persons not a native English speaker.  
              By this way they just not really interested maybe, and can't really understand that their software and products are not universal.  They can be used by users from other language groups very well.  
              I think that from the register perspective, I can also mention that many registers in the world are registered and are also very concerned about the e‑mail addresses, the unicode symbols.  This problem is quite ‑‑ John is saying yes.  
              This is quite a problem, because such ‑‑ I'm a register, yes.  I'm very interested in providing such services, and yes, I want to provide them with high quality.  I think that the domain names should be used for e‑mail addresses as well.  So thank you.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Interesting, Maria, for you to have mentioned that.  The report of the USG, I noted only about 9% English services are compliant, so there's a long way to go.  That's where I see John shaking his head on the amount of, you know ‑‑ the tremendous amount of challenges to make these services available qualitatively, as you said.  
     >> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA:  I can provide very short example of using e‑mail addresses.  I'm a mother, and I often use some educational portals.  You know, that e‑mail addresses now are used for verification.  So I use it like a log in.  
              I need to pull the menu.  I'm not really comfortable to use them in English as well.  Some of them already provided log in and password in the screen already, because these services are for schoolers.  Thank you.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you.  So the other interesting thing that you mentioned, Maria, was about the popularity of the IDN in the Russian language, which is surprising to me because from my experience of being with some, ideas haven't been really so popular and they haven't really been kind of taken up by many users.  They still go back to the typical (?) and that's what I explain.  
              We struggle to have some business plans, but we are still kind of lost there.  So I guess there's a lot of work to do there.  
              Okay.  With that, I think Roberto, can I invite you to have a few words on this, please?  I guess Roberto is a rapporteur for this session, so he has a hard job, but at the same time we're also asking him to do a little bit on trying to give us his views.  I think he has a bad connection.  If you can't speak, get out of the video.  
     >> ROBERT GAETANO:  So thank you.  I'm sorry for being not so well prepared for the task.  Unfortunately, there was a speaker that was intended to speak about all the work that they are doing in Latin America with the local languages, indigenous.  I only have some information about this.  
              I cannot speak with the same authority that Sylvia would have spoken with.  It started ‑‑ I mean, it started many, many years ago, but one of the key moments was on the international summit on indigenous languages held last year in Guatemala.  
              So this has been a very interesting event, and there is now a group of people that are working in different countries in Latin America to promote the use of the indigenous languages, including their presence on the Internet.  I don't know all the details, but I'm sure that we can share some URLs where people that are interested in this can get more information.  
              And also, I was also wondering if among the (?) section there is somebody who wants to talk about activities on indigenous languages or other minority  languages and bring this experience.  
This is still something that will be very interesting to share.  Another piece of information that I would like to give is that when we think about local languages, we think often about remote locations mostly under the developed countries, and I invite you not to think this.  
              Our endangered minority languages even as ‑‑ in the heart of Europe, I can report here that we had a session at Europe in June where the theme was Universal Acceptance but also more on the Internet.  
              At that session we had the ‑‑ we had the speaker from a language minority in Italy that spoke about what they are doing promotions and help the development of the local culture also by the language and providing services for helping the further use of the local minority language.  
              I think that there are situations like this all over the world.  I think that we must be attentive in making sure that the Internet maintenance and development of the local culture and language, and not to focus on the few important languages.  
              There's six U.N. languages is a good thing, but there are thousands of languages full of local content that can be expressed on the complete regional language.  And that is another task for the Internet for supporting the culture and not on the communication.  
I will stop here, and I will post maybe a couple of URLs in the chat.  Of course, I'm available for questions.  
              Back to you, Amitabh.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you, Roberto, for the roundup on the indigenous languages and various cultures to promote on the Internet.  That's one of the last points that you made about being mindful of promoting apart from the six U.N. languages, other languages as well, which can be expressed on those languages properly and cannot be translated.  
              We're talking here about asthma Rhea already said about 7,000‑plus languages across the globe supported by 377 different scripts.  So I think it will be a huge task, and it will require a globalized effort to move in that direction, but that's a good thought to have and take with us.  
              So I'll just ‑‑ before closing this part of the session, one last comment from John.  He was shaking his head on Maria's comment about this.  So I think he has something to say about the possibility of ideas working in some places and not in other places.  
              John, would you like to just quickly go through this before we go to the and answer.  
     >> JOHN KLENSIN:  From an implementation standpoint, it's easier or harder depending on how much local interest there is.  If we had an hour, we could talk about why they're more interesting locally in some places and less in others.  
              The e‑mail mailbox names pose a special challenge, and we knew when we designed the mechanisms that they were going to pose a special challenge.  The special challenge is that as long as you have somebody in Russia writing in surreal lick to someone else that reads Russian, there's no problem.  
              As soon as they start trying to communicate with ‑‑ I'm not concerned about the domain name part of the address, but the so‑called local part, as soon as they start trying to communicate with someone who speaks, for example, in Arabic, and they don't read Arabic very well, and the Arabic recipient doesn't real Cyrillic very well, you end up with a complicated problem.  
              And it's not a technical problem, but it's a complicated problem.  And the problem gets more complicated if the Arabic ‑‑ picking on my colleague here, if the Arabic application is designed for working with Arabic, and its special characteristics certainly include but not limited to running from right to left, and that message reaches the Russian reader who is used to left‑to‑right languages and Cyrillic, you end up with a communication difficulty, which is a language difficulty and not a technology difficulty.  
              And a translation or applications difficulty and not a technology difficulty in the usual sense.  So the difficulty, which we anticipate when we design the thing was that people were going to try to use this non‑ASCII e‑mail address internationally would have to maintain two e‑mail addresses, one ASCII and not and the search between the two done by software because people won't get it right consistently.  That software is hard to design from a thinking standpoint and not a building standpoint.  
              To make it more complicated, think about a message being sent among these panelists each using an address in his or her own language and writing system.  So we now have copies of the message in each of these scripts, and I think I can read three of the scripts, which are represented in the panel.  
              That may put me ahead of others in the panel and certainly would put me ahead of a general audience.  So that's the problem.  
              The difficulty is that we knew how to solve this problem and solved it in a funny way in 1991, I think.  That is that e‑mail systems and clients at the user level make a distinction between what is called a personal name or a display name or other words like that, and the actual mailbox address.  
              We're seeing today that most mail user agents by number of users don't display that but the names.  We display the names in local characters in writing systems forever but not the e‑mail addresses, the mailbox names.  So if you want your international interoperability, you might want to focus on the personal names rather than the mailbox names or not.  
              As soon as you start focusing on the mailbox names, it helps to be a large country with a big population, with a single dominant language where most of the people communicating most of the time are using the same language and the same writing system.  
              We have a few instances of that in the world.  Russia is one of them using other Latin scripts.  Russia is one of them, and China is the other one.  That's want end of the list.  
              So this is a peculiar problem we've create would for ourselves, and we can make it work, and I personally think it's highly desirable to make it work.  We need to understand want limitations.  
              And one of those limitations is for example a message going and forth between this group of panelists, if we were all using local language addresses, would be relatively a big problem.  
              It gets to be a worse problem when the message which comes in isn't among a group of people that know each other but it coming from some important figure or some Spammers and malware distributor, and you can't tell the difference because you can't read the script in which the address is written.  
              So these are all issues.  Again, they're not arguments against internationalized e‑mail addresses.  They're arguments against understanding what the limitations of the properties are and accepting those and dealing with them rather than hoping that by saying, well, everybody should accept internationalized e‑mail addresses, these problems what go away.  
              If I gave India advice, it would be to focus on the personal names rather than local scripts because you just have too many local scripts and not enough of your people read local script and another local script and a third local script rather than English and local script.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much.  Maria is raising her hand.  I think we will be running short of time if we keep on going with this.  
              It's a long discussion that we can continue to have.  So before I come back to the next set of questions, may I just get back to Ilona to tell us about the poll.  
     >> SPEAKER:  Here we go.  We have ten responses, and I guess that probably people do not have ‑‑ do not see the difference between scripts and the language.  You see we have English, Spanish.  That is kind of Latin, and Latin with diacritics, and we have these like Japanese, Cyrillic and Indian.  We have different scripts that people use.  
              Probably it will be better if speakers can comment on the difference between the language in the script so that the audience can grasp the difference.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Exactly.  So let me just start with ‑‑ I note someone has written in Hindi.  Hindi is not a script.  It's the language.  Script is (?) and that supports a few of the languages.  So that's the difference, and I think that's the explanation they will be able to provide.  
              The difference between the script and languages is wide.  The script is not the same as the language.  
              Like we said earlier, 377 scripts around the globe support about 7,000‑plus languages.  There's the difference between native language and mother language and mother tongue.  Without going into that, I guess, yes, there is a disparity, but at the same time we understand that English is a preferred language, but at the same time we need to do a lot more to encourage other scripts as well.  
              Okay.  I'll go to my next set of questions.  Maria, I'll come back to you later towards the end of the summary when we can talk about whatever you want to say.  
              I think the second question that I have we'll not spend too much time on this keeping the time constraint in mind is I was thinking that maybe, you know, with the rise of social media and mobile applications with video and multimedia being prominent, there are lack of different writing systems we have discussed, does it still continue to remain sort of the beginning of access to the Internet or a limiting factor for the non‑English speaking to access the Internet.  
              I think one surpasses the barrier when it comes to using multimedia or the writing system.  I'm trying, to say so why some emphasis on writing systems and whether there are alternate ways that people can work through this barrier of language and scripts on the Internet.  
              So let me start with John here again.  John, your thoughts on this?  
     >> JOHN KLENSIN:  I think another portion of the language and script distinction which you didn't mention, I know you know, is that we have a number of scripts which are used to write many different languages.  Sometimes with variations in how they're used for those different languages.  
              Latin script is the most important example, Cyril lick and Arabic are certainly second and third and I don't know which order.  We also have some languages that are written in multiple scripts so they could be written in ‑‑ let's skip the details to save time.  That confuses the language subscription and the ‑‑ and some of these other issues, again, especially because the same script may be used very, very differently in different languages.  For those that speak both English and French, the rules for getting uppercase letters to lowercase letters are different in two.  
              Same Latin scripts and basic characters, but differences in characters and formation.  Even more important differences show up when a script was imposed either by invasion or simulation on a phonetic script, on a language which has completely different phonemes and different structure.  
              That, again, creates some really interesting issues that need to be sorted out in a language by language, and sometimes local environment by local environment basis.  
              As far as the social media stuff is concerned, it's a dandy solution for social media, but, first of all, the people who are building those applications are building them for languages with large user populations, and it does absolutely nothing to help the minority languages about which those people often don't care or there aren't enough people using the application to justify building the application, and it becomes one of those things which we call in English chicken/egg problem.  
              So I think it's very interesting in the social media applications to become adapted to a larger and larger group of languages.  I think the relative total number of languages in the world is still almost nothing and almost irrelevant.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you, John.  Yes.  
I think it's interesting that you point out that the social media is being more for the base, so it's the market forces at work and not the development we speak about.  
              Maria, your thoughts on this, please.  
     >> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA:  Okay.  So I thought it was ‑‑ it will be ‑‑ okay.  So what can I say about social media and video platforms and so on?  I want to mention that this these platforms are user‑generated platforms, and all the content that is the driver of using these platforms are made by and created by users.
              So by this reason if you are using any native language, you're usually searching and looking at that content in your native Lange R language.  Of course, if you want you can choose local ‑‑ you can choose a Connecticut ‑‑ content on any other native language if you're interested in it.  There's lots of popular memes or videos or ads on the Internet, and if we are talking about the minority languages, they're probably users of these languages need to create such content, interesting content, and provide much more content on their native language on such platforms.  
              It's because, once again, so these platforms offer users and the content and the main part of the platforms are made by users.  So we don't need to forget about this.  
              As an aside I want to mention again from our registry perspective that for example, Facebook, does not suspect the main names as well.  People in Russia who want to use Facebook to advertise their brands, their products and so on and so forth, they just can't put it in posts and comments because they will be displayed as unreadable symbols.  It looks like a bad link.  
              By this reason such persons ‑‑ Facebook is one of the popular social media in Russia.  So they just need to create pictures or videos and put it in this way their idea and domain names to show them to the audience.  So this is quite a problem now, and I don't know why Facebook doesn't want to decide on this.  
              Maybe there are some opinions ‑‑ I'm maybe just imagining, but still, websites and ID domain names, they are owned by users themselves.  They're not owned by the platforms.  
              So they are separated, and in this way they're more defense from different types of technical mistakes or they pose the decisions made by the owners of such platforms.  This is maybe a more secure way to keep your information and your resources here on the Internet.  
              Maybe they just don't want to make the very good connection besides the social media advertising tools to, let's say, leave people from their platform and something somewhere else.  So they just want to make their platforms bigger, bigger and bigger.  But so this is the intention, and maybe that's why they prevent us to provide users some competitive services in the Internet.  
              And also, I want to say that ID and domain names was research made by a center association of European companies that ID names address the content on the native, local language.  
              So this is also the connection that is important to remember.  And what I want to say also is that maybe we should think, because this is the historical fact, I think, that there always was some lingual framework.  Some common language that was used by a group or community or even worldwide to communicate like a bridge language.  
              So now we see that English provides this role of lingual framework, but of course, John correctly mentioned that for some regions there are different lingual fronts like in Russia and our commonwealth region in Eastern Europe, for example.  In other regions they are only lingual frameworks.  
              So you need to understand it.  Maybe this can also explain the problem of why some languages are well supported on the Internet and some languages are not.  But still, if you want to support your native language, provide for content on ‑‑ more content on it.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you, Maria.  I think that's a well‑rounded response.  Yeah, platforms like Facebook will take a note of this, I guess mostly the regions that have the market decisions.  So I guess, yes, someone listening in from Facebook would be ‑‑ should be happy to take your suggestion on developing this.  
              Can I come to you on this now for a short answer keeping in mind the time?  
     >> GALILA ABDALMONEM:  I think Arabic is bigger.  He knows a lot of issues that I skipped by the way.  
              We missed the variances for our scripts, and we have a lot of variances.  Maybe you have 1 million or 1,000 variances of this.  Maybe this will be a big problem.  
              There is a big problem related to ‑‑ ready to make evidence.  You know that we have two main domains for the main domain.  If you mix between different scripts and for example, for the domain name it's Arabic and if it's English, you could as an end user or application, you could identify which part of them is a domain name and which part is a local mix.  
              This is another problem.  These are other problems when you are Arabic and you want to so a Cyrillic go to wait for the address, you couldn't take the domain name.  There's no policy.  
Maybe this will be kind of a solution.  This is the image testing.  Is it Cyrillic?  
              Yes, I will use it, but it will be kind of there.  So all of these issues is shared by Satish for the concentrations.  
              As youth ambassadors we need that.  We need to serve all the issues related to acceptance that have consent with our scripts.  We still have problems with mixing between (?) for the domain name.  It's a big problem for the URL, it is a big problem if you have a domain in Arabic and the folder in English.  If it's in an ASCII, there's another problem.  
              There's no tool to monitor the Zoom files and it displays the Zoom name in actual unicode.  The tools that manage this understand this and it will be difficulty for that administrator.  
Another big issue for me is (?) And if you look at the environment and try to publish it inside your IT, your security value ‑‑ this agent doesn't ‑‑ this is kind of the things.  
              This is kind of e‑mail addresses.  This is a big problem.  
              It should be solved.  You have an entity.  One of the entities even hearing in my room, if I'm trying to open it, I couldn't open it.  So I will raise the issue to our supervisor.  Please enable it.  It is works.  That's a problem that's all it is at this point.  Thank you.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you.  That brings me to the third part of the question session, and the question raised about awareness and what different stakeholders can doing.  So my question is, you know, actually about the role of different stakeholders.  We're talking about a lot of development and technological barriers and cultural issues and how development takes place based on business or development concentrations.  
              I see that we probably have a lot more to ask these stakeholders such as the government or the private sector of the public sector and the various device manufacturers and the application providers and the Civil Society and the academic.  They all will probably a role in ensures that multilingualism needs to grow on the Internet and they play their parts.  
              So John, you have some ideas on what exactly governments do or the private sector operators could do to enhance the usability and interoperability and the usefulness of the Internet of people that depend on local languages are to be used.  
     >> JOHN KLENSIN:  As I said earlier, I don't know if I have any good answers.  One of the things we discovered 30‑odd years ago is there were two ways to get Internet technology even at the e‑mail level into developing countries or countries that didn't have those connections.  
              One of those ways involved large central government or Internet organization foreign aid project where a typical pattern was to drop in a lot of technology and be very impressed by about the technology dropped in.  And then leap and what we know in many areas of international aid is capital money is easy and maintenance money is hard.  We also learn that had training people at the grassroots level and then letting things evolve bottom‑up produced slower results far more sustainable and far more sustained.  
              I think there's an analogy to that ‑‑ between that and this problem.  I think there's a role for governments, but it's going to be understood that the tool building and sustainable environment building and working with those local populations rather than doing the 30 year ago experience we used to joke ended with a computer on the desk of the communications minister holding up a flowerpot.  Everybody was happy because people can come in.  
              We need to be careful about that latter plan talking about governments and organizations being involved.  At the same time, we know how to do these things at a grassroots level and we've done it before with the technology.  I think the language issues are harder, because all language issues are harder.  I think it's the same answer.  It's not an easy one.  
              The Facebook example is interesting, too.  There's another set of economics there that work against you, which is customer support, if an organization supports that, they want to provide customer support in that language, and we don't want to touch that.  Very experience.  That's another piece of the pushback story.  Much easier to understand if the script of the language is so script in India, which no one outside India knows about, than it is with Cyrillic.  Still, it's that piece of economics as well.  
              It's about development and let them come along and notice when they do that.  Don't expect that to happen there.  
     >> MODERATOR:  So your thoughts on the role of the stakeholders?  What do you think the governments and citizens can do?  
     >> GALILA ABDALMONEM:  For the government now if ‑‑ now I sent you ‑‑ you'll receive your bill for the (?) and you'll receive the electricity bill.  So the new trend is all citizens should be connected online using e‑mail address whatever the language is.  That's what India did for every use that's true received the international ID to have an e‑mail address.  
              I'm not responsible for doing this, by the way, for anything.  It started for academia.  The new trend of engineers should be aware that there's a typical in AI, and there is a that as a rule or IETF.  
              If you go to any university, what is it?  What do you mean by that?  I don't know.  I know nothing.  There's nothing.  If you go to anyone inside this country and ask about that, we need that and we need to teach this about what IDNE is and the usability is for the domain name for the private sector.  
              If we could have some policies to restrict new and to have education for the English am cage and have a domain nation for making our awareness for this news for this stuff, for this engineer towards this company, it will be good.  
              You would be convinced to use that because you're that kind of person.  You will increase the number of (?) And you will have some propaganda that this application supports it.  You can go to the application of course, not all services accept IDEN.  You don't need to have IDNE.  I think that's it for me at the moment.  Thank you.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you.  Just to correct on the international ID, e‑mail ID you talked about pertaining to India, it was a state government which they provides every voter an e‑mail ID.  They developed the ID, but I'm not sure if people are using it.  I don't have much idea about that.  
     >> GALILA ABDALMONEM:  You have 10 million e‑mail addresses.  
     >> MODERATOR:  How are they used?  I have no idea at this point in time.  Maybe somebody can fill us in later.  
     >> GALILA ABDALMONEM:  It's good to start it.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Those are the government initiatives in terms of policy for nonfiscal incense I haves that promote the developments, so that's what we can look at.  
              Maria, I think John is trying to get into the conversation here.  We have very limited time.  So a few minutes left.  I'll try and get John in.  Let's let Maria have a say on this.  
     >> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA:  There's some things he already said.  Make we can Mike IDETS for everyone to support multilingualism.  This is a really big experiment I must say.  
              For example, Cyrillic in the main name, I can report it was launches by the great support from the government, and we can say it was a multi-stakeholder approach to the launch of this.  This is a great example of how the industry and the government communicates and in partner they made a really good project.  So why not?  
              That's why, of course, government has a really unique role today, and they can support the side, of course, because they can show the example a really big end user who want to make his system and make his E government services supported in the native language.  
              So this is how government can take their part in the processes, for example.  From the other side I wouldn't recommend strong or restrictions or permissions from the government side.  
              This is usually not really good supported from the industry from business community and then user community.  They don't want somebody ‑‑ they want freedom as I already said.  They just want freedom.  We need to support this.  More goes to the private sector in academy ma and other stakeholders, Civil Society who maybe ask to provide their platforms for end users as well.  
              Ask for these services, and users themselves can ask to support their needs in the Internet from different stakeholders.  They want to show they need it, and we're talking about this decision.  What end users think about this really.  We have only one study to that was made two years ago by USG, and that's it.  
              What is the demand in the market?  Are users wanting to use it?  In India study how they use it.  This is very interesting information.  
              In general if they talk about multilingual on the Internet, I would recommend to support such user generated platforms actually and what we all need to do, we need to learn Toews people and users that go online, how to behave there.  For example, teachers can provide very good content for there, and university professors, they can provide such content in their native language.  Some of them don't know how to use Internet.  
              They have no knowledge how it's viewed and how they can provide this content and other Internet tools.  The statement of the government maybe or other stakeholders can teach them how to do it and then they provide this content.  One more thing I mentioned at the beginning that we need to think about psychological and features of languages.  
              It's very important.  Maybe some academia game can provide the research and more research in connection with these features in the Internet, how it works on the Internet.  
              Any language is live.  It's leaving and changing, and we see how for example Russian language is changing because of these influences of Internet things, you know, because localities of ‑‑ lots of new roads and lots of things that change the Internet dramatically.  So we need to understand how Internet influences English languages from its side as well.  
              So I think there are a lot to do, but what we can do now, so we need to continue to discuss these questions at least with this.  We can do it and provide more information on the issues for broader stakeholders.  
              I think the platforms are quite good places to do it.  
     >> MODERATOR:  All right.  I think, Maria, what you said is important because a lot of decisions given can be part of many digital policies that most countries and states development.  They leave them out that you have talked about.  
              We're going to talk about the big picture and the big numbers, but then we cannot look at this part of the issue we're discussing.  So it's good to have that as part of the digital policies of governments and affects how it behaves.  You see a market developing.  
              Having said that, let me quickly come to Ilona.  We'll announce the results, and then we have a few minutes left and I'll sum up the discussions.  Ilona, please.  
     >> SPEAKER:  Just a second.  Actually, we finished with the two polls, right?  You just want to see the results back again, right?  
     >> MODERATOR:  Right.  
     >> SPEAKER:  Give me half of a minute.  
     >> MODERATOR:  While you're doing, Roberto, you're the rapporteur of this session and I'm sure you have interesting comments that you've got.  Would you like to share that?  
     >> ROBERT GAETANO:  Yes.  I hope you can hear me.  So that basically what I got from John's presentation is a general idea of all the major issues that we have with languages and script besides the ones that maybe we know best that are the domain names and other things, other technical things.  
              But it's also astonishing how much complicated this whole matter is.  Some of the things seems the same one on were able to show us some of the most interesting complexities, even in matters that we think are simple.  
              Abdalmonem has begun us a good survey, panoramic view of where we are with the Universal Acceptance in particular of internationalized domains and with internationalized e‑mail addresses and the challenging and the way forward.  
A             nd Maria has given us what I would say is a more user‑related perspective touching also on what happens on social media and also her last comment on E‑learning or how we can use the quieter they're rhetoric discussion about the difficulties and the technicalities then translates into practice interfacing with the users.  
              I have given a couple of ideas about what happened in terms of the promotion of the languages on the Internet and the importance of doing this work.  
That's it.  
              Back to you.  Thank you.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you, Roberto.  I think you have summarized well and we'll be putting out a report back to the IGF on these session proceedings later.  
              Just a couple more points.  I think we don't have any questions from the audience.  Last chance maybe for one question quickly if anyone has it.  Otherwise, I'll move on to the closing part, which is about the panelists having to make a voluntary commitment as a requirement to be speaker of this session.  
              From the audience, please, anyone wants to ask a last minute question?  No?  So I take it that I think our panel has done a fantastic job covering the issues so there are no questions raised.  
So I think there is a requirement for a voluntary commitment by the panelists that they choose to commit themselves to carry on with the work and partner with some of the others to ‑‑ some things with Europe carrying on with the mission we're part of it.  
              How do we do that?  Any idea on this?  Do we just confirm we're committed and name the partners that we work with?  
     >> ROBERT GAETANO:  If any speaker has something in the next year.  Maybe focusing for the next global IGF, but also for the regional and national IGFs to which I participate in being together the voices of the minorities that have language risk of being forgotten or that cannot appropriately produce fruition of local content on the Internet.  
              That's because of the lack of language and support.  That's it.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you, Roberto.  John.  
     >> SPEAKER:  It's an interesting coincidence that this IGF meeting and the meeting are happening in the same week.  So I guess I'm committed to keep going back and forth and I'm working actively in the IGF is my creature and I do a lot of design.  
              I'm committed to keeping pushing on that.  I'm committed to work with or without internationalization and keeping IDM working and making them better if there are technical issues.  There are some, and I'm pushing that rock uphill with the IGTF and much of the consternation I commit to do it.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you.  
     >> GALILA ABDALMONEM:  I would not speak a lot.  I commit to work for any left for us.  Thank you.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Maria.  
     >> MARIA KOLESNIKOVA:  I don't know how IGT is structured.  I know it now, so I want to know it better.  I think so that multilingualism is a universality of Internet may be easier because we're now putting in the topic of inclusion and reducing inequalities, but, yes, it's maybe more general.  But still for the Internet.  We should think about it.  Thank you.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Great.  As far as I'm concerned, yes, if something develops as a structure on Maria so carry on the work many multilingualism I'll be happy to partner and share whatever I can.  I also am someone that provides interventions to the communities.  
I will now take up the issue of multilingualism and helping to provide the ideas that are already delegated.     
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-12-%E2%80%93-ws340-checks-and-balances-of-data-privacy-within-mass-surveillance-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> Hello, everyone, and thank you for having me and for hosting this panel.  I am from an indigenous location located on Long Island, New York.  I'm happy to be joining you.
>> Thank you.
>> My name is Amy Luers, I'm the global lead for sustainability science at Microsoft where we're working to bring science, data and technology together to advance global sustainability. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Amy and finally rose, Mwebaza,.
>> ROSE MWEBAZA: Good evening from the city of Copenhagen, Denmark.  It's part of the operation mecnfl of the technology mechanism of the United States nations.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you all.  And now I'll ask each one of you to name the single most important issue or question concerning environmental governance, beginning in the same order, so starting with you Joyce,.
>> JOYCE MSUYA: I wanted to say how inspiring it has been to witness the emergence of environment in this IGF.  I want to thank the hundreds of stakeholders that pushed for this and made this possible.
What is one key issue from our perspective is data fragmentation.  Let me just cite some numbers.  There are approximately 700 different environmental data platforms in operation by a combination of public and private sector actors with a new platform launched every week.  More than 7,000 organizations provide earth observation data and there are more than 450 million resources discoverable and accessible.  We need a basic sets of principles, standards, and safeguards for these platforms.
This is something we here at UNEP are working very hard on and we have been asked by our member states, governments to develop a global environmental data strategy.
We also need an international repository to aggregate and validate the best available environmental data that can be used to monitor global progress.  For example, the SDGs and multilateral environmental agreements.  We are building such a platform to achieve this, which is called the world environment situation room.
Let me stop here, but that's one data fragmentation is a key issue.  Over to you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Now moving to Joyce Murray.
>> JOYCE MURRAY: Data ownership, I almost hate to use that term, because I think what we are looking for is data stewardship.  I think it's very important to identify what are the rules around the data and who is overseeing those rules.  Because it will be generated, collected and used by both public and private organizations.  So there are various interests in using the data.
So the idea that we are collectively stewards of data for the common good, I think is very important.  And then accompanying that is the principle around compliance and enforcement.  I mean, you can have all the rules that make sense but if there are not clear mechanisms for compliance and enforcement, then there will be those who are going to exploit the situation and utilize that data for ends for which it was not intended.
I think there is ‑‑ there are underlying those principles are then a number of others.  One I would say is continuous improvements.  We have to recognize how quickly things are moving in the digital universe, and so we have to make sure that any structures or designs from the outset that they can be updated and respond to the situation.  So continuous improvement and digital principles built in by design so that is things like user experience being very much at the heart of how this is structured because we can do everything that makes sense from a technical perspective, a design perspective, but if those who are using the data are not finding it easy and effective to use it, then it will not have its intended benefit in terms of managing and improving the human impact on our ecosystems.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Joyce.  And now if we could move to Celina, please.
>> CELINA LEE: I have one that's specific to our experience.  I think that immediately the issues that came to mind for me about data governance was transparency, as a data science competition platform we come across all types of data, especially granular detailed data, the types of data sets we're working with.  We've seen many instances where data sets are out and available.  But if they aren't companied by proper documentation and transparency about where the data came from what do they represent, how was the data actually collected, and therefore, what are the limitations of the conclusions you can derive from these data sets ‑‑ so this transparency for me is one of the fundamental issues.
Second is a clear data standard, this is very much related to the transparency, but it means that if we adopt certain data sets and accept certain data sets they have to come along with a standard set of quality standards, interoppability of the data sets so people will know how to use them safely.  And on the point of responsibility, safeguarding data privacy and ensuring that individuals who are the source of the data are properly and appropriately recognized, properly and appropriately benefited by the outputs of the products of the data.
I think those three go together, and then the final one I wanted to mention from a data science perspective and the work that we do is finding the right balance between a robust default privacy standard, which, you know, a lot of times implies aggregating data and balancing that with creativeativity that can be unlocked by solution and by the data scientists that are able to unlock new products, concepts and insights from granular data.  Finding balance between the granular data and the aggregated data that protects privacy.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Celina.  Now we move to Kelsey.
>> KELSEY LEONARD: Thank you so much.  I really would second so much of what my other panelists have said in terms of data safeguarding and protections.  One of the things I noticed in my own science and research related to environmental data governance in the Great Lakes and related to the oceans is the absence of indigenous people.  Our governments are often excluded from the infrastructure and that's something we really have to remedy to ensure that we're not promulgating more colonialism in digital spaces.  What some scholars have called digital colonialism.
I'm seeing that the in the environmental data space and the way in which environmental data is governed.  There are amazing alliances who just put forward principles of indigenous data sovereignly which I think is a path forward for how we need to be thinking about environmental data governance.  What we're seeing is data is being mined from indigenous peoples and our lands, and it's said that 80% of the world's biodiversity, so scientists are eager and keen to learn from our lands and territories about that richness and about the way in which we have stewarded the lands for thousands of years and we're not then a part of the ownership and control of the data that's extracted from our territories and communities.
Then even further, how that data is used and manipulated to inform decision making going forward.  And so I think that that's a real challenge for us moving forward, how do we ensure indigenous rights are protected in the environmental data governance space.  I think that means that indigenous peoples have ownership and control over our data and the way in which it's used and there are prescriptions and principles outlined.  So thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Kelsey, that was great, thank you so much.  Now moving to Amy, please. 
>> Amy: It's wonderful to hear these perspectives from different and importantly nuanced angles.
To me the overarching governance challenge related to the digital world and environmental sustainability is embedded in the fact that today humanity is interconnected to each other through both the digital and natural worlds.
As a result we fundamentally need to grasp, recognize that to achieve a trusted and inclusive internet is intertwined with a safe and sustainable world.  From this perspective, a key governance issue is building a trusted and secure internet.  So in trust, of course, these are rich worlds that have many dimensions.
Trust is being challenged in the context of environmental issues around misinformation.  Having trust in the information about the trends and nals is critical.  There are a number of open data platforms that are gathering this data together and being able to have a trusted source of what those ‑‑ of the data that is available is critical.
The second point is inclusivity.  And it's critical not just in terms of what data is available to whom and who has the capacity to turn that data into knowledge.  Finally security.  We need to make sure tha data is secure, but again not just data security but security that everybody from different regions of the world feel safe and empowered to participate in the digital data for sustainability activities.
These pieces together both from a data and the community that's using though datas is critical for achieving sustainability goals.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Amy.  And now, finally moving to Rose, please.
>> ROSE MWEBAZA: Thank you very much.  I think I want to focus on something that is related to the mandate of the climate technology center network, which is the facilitation of environmentally sound technologies.  One of the key issues that we find to be on critical importance in relation to this is the soundness of how this environment data itself is generated and stored and managed.  We all must agree that in fact the technologies that will enable us to access and to store this data and use it for environmental decision making are not necessarily sustainable.  I'll give you an example.
If you look at the amount of electronic waste that would come out of some of the tools that are used for data storage or access points, lap taps and computers.  We're told we put 7 million tons of electronic waste out.  This is expected to grow because we have greater efficiency in production systems that makes these electronic devices cheap, it means more numbers of people have access to these resources.
So this is what we traditionally call the rebound effects, almost an unintended consequence of the development we attain as humans.  And so within the mandate of the climate technology center, which is to enable environmentalists sound transfer between nations this is of paramount importance.  Also because of a mandate is to support developing countries.  It's clear in the countries I work in, at least we have products in around 100 countries.  Actually there's a huge global digital divide across the regions in the world that's in the countries in the regions.
I'll give you an example, I come from Africa so it's probably easier for me to do that.  The IFC has told me that 40% of all the people have access to digital technologies.  The number of women is even less.  So to go to the question one of the panelists met, data for who?  If we're going to support environmental decision making at all levels from the policy to the community level, who are accessers of this data?  Who has access to this data to make the decisions they need to make that becomes absolutely important.  I think those are the interconnected issues I want to talk about.  The sustainability of this environment but also the digital divide that means that actually contrary to what we think not everybody would be able to access the data and therefore the issue whose data and what decisions are made with it.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, would anybody like to reflect on any of the points that the panelists made?  Please unmute yourself if you would like to add anything.
>> JOYCE MURRAY: I've been so impressed by the ideas that have come up so far and I would say that inclusion and justice and indigenous perspectives is super important, as is diversity, women, and we're thinking inclusively as to who is going to be using and benefiting from this data.  I wanted to mention on the environmental sustainability decision.  There's a group of nations, it's ten countries that work together on advancing our digital transformation.  And the candidates put forward an initiative around environmental sustainability for the digital nations to be working on.
The opportunities for thinking about the equipment and the processes and operations and the waste management, green procurement and so on I think have to be woven into everything we do.  I was very glad to hear you talk, Rose, about environmental sustainability.  Canada's going to be pushing ‑‑ not pushing but leading the charge on that as part of the digital nation's agenda over the coming year.  So thanks for raising it.
>> MODERATOR: Amy?
>> AMY: I wanted to touch on the last point about the sustainability of the data generation and analysis that was raised.  I think that is a really critical issue.  And at Microsoft we're taking that very seriously.  Weave committed to ‑‑ we're already carbon neutral and we're committed to becoming net negative by the end of the decade.  As well as zero waste, net positive on water and land.
So integrating the use of how we integrate science and data for solving problems, as well as making sure that we clean up our own corporate footprint and help others is a key part of our efforts.  I think we need to think of those as a continuum, not separate issues.  But as an integrated piece.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Now moving on, what are the two ‑‑ one or two key principles or safeguards you would like to propose as part of a global governance framework?
>> JOYCE MSUYA: Thank you.  First, it's important to recognize that environmental data exists in a digital ecosystem and that we need to structure data and analytics to achieve specific outcomes and support specific decisions.  A number of panelists in the previous section talked about it.
Thinking about environmental data for a purpose.  In our case within the united nations for example, we would encourage looking at the structure of a digital ecosystem of environmental data to be able to monitor global commitments.  For example, the STGs, but also the multilateral environmental targets.  But equally if not more important, use the data to inform and shape policy options to inform markets, supply chains and consumer behaviors.
If you look at things like sustainability production and consumption, unless we have the data the consumer's behavior would not shift.  Second is standards, international standards are needed to ensure that environmental data can be aggregated at the global level and can be interoperable with other environmental data such as the socio economic data through the use of standardized application programming interfaces.
So we need an API for the framework.  Lastly, environmental data sets should be as open as possible looking at data as global public good.  I think Minister Joyce from Canada alluded to this.  And as agile as possible because context for the data matters.  So depending on specific use cases and potential risks, the environmental data governance should adopt an agile approach that favors experimentation, iteration, differentiation and adaptation as needed, thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Joyce.  Can I just ask our audience if they have any questions then please do write them in the chat on the right‑hand side of your screen.  Hopefully we'll have time to take a few questions later.
Now if I could ask Joyce Murray to add to the safeguarding debate.
>> JOYCE MURRAY: That's a pretty critical element to be thinking in advance and I think it's not ‑‑ I mean, right from the beginning those kinds of principles need to be factors into the design.  It seems very complicated to me after just coming out of a briefing on the government of Canada's plans to improve our data manage and multifactor authentication so we can have a single sign in for various government of Canada programs.  I see the complexities of that just in one country.  I think it's critical that the kind of access the authentication, multifactor authentication for people utilizing this data having access to it because there may be personal data, there certainly is commercially valuable data.  And there also will be data that as was mentioned ‑‑ I think it was Celina talking about ‑‑ sorry, it was Kelsey talking about indigenous owned data.
As we have the theme of data stewardship, we also need to understand the indigenous perspective and ownership of their data.  So that's just ‑‑ I mean, that's a lot of stream of consciousness there.  I understand there is international human rights law and U.N. guiding principles on business and human rights that talk about ‑‑ for example, artificial intelligence.  Let's not reinvent the wheel.  Let's find best practices in terms of the use of machine learning and the use of data access and authentication and make sure those things are built in from the very beginning of this project because it will be much harder to change it later on and adjust for that.
I think the other thing we have to think about is is there anything that could create national or regional security risks and how is that data treated separately or not.  How is that addressed.  We're going to need a range of formal and informal agreements that should be ‑‑ should lay out in a transparent way how this is being set up and how it's being governed and how it's being complied with.  Openness and transparency I know has already been mentioned by other panelists, but that is a core principle.
At the same time we have to think about confidentiality and authentication, we also need the realm of openness and transparency to be a founding principle of what we're doing here.  A few thoughts.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Joyce, and now moving to Celina, please.
>> CELINA LEE: Thank you.  I agree with all of the other panelists are saying.  I want to add a bit from our perspective at Zindi, working with data scientist and working with companies and governments that have very specific problems that they're solving.  One of the things I wanted to highlight is in order for data to live up to its promise ‑‑ we can talk about data in high‑level terms and big terms.  But in order for data to be translated into the impact that we want to see, we have to ensure that we are also understanding the entire value chain and the market that drives data and drives data from turning into just data into actual insights or products.
And so at Zindi we ran a competition recently where we used sentinel 5P data to extrapolate air quality across Africa.  A place where a continent where if you look at the data that's available on air quality, it is extremely sparse.  I think we found a couple of sensor data sets from South Africa and maybe Kenya, but the rest of the world was covered with air censors and constant real‑time data that was constantly being uploaded onto the internet and freely available to everybody.
One of the questions we asked was how can we feel in the data gap?  We used 5P data to develop machine learning models.  Our scientists build the models and now it's being hosted on the South African earth observation network.  To understand how the data is collected, who gets access to the data so they can analyze it and turn it into actual insight and then who ends up hosting the data product at the end are all questions we have to address and acknowledge as important.
What I want to point out here is underlying what everyone is saying about inclusivity and representation, this is where representation matters.  That we understand the entire value chain and representation has to insert itself in every single step of the way as we look at the data value chain.
So yeah, I wanted to highlight accessibility of the raw data itself.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Celina, now Kelsey, please.
>> KELSEY LEONARD: Wonderful.  Thank you.  Thank you again to the panelists for this robust conversation.  I would say that in terms of safeguards and principles, we need environmental data for justice and equitable outcomes.  And what does that mean in the space that I work in particularly for indigenous peoples is we need disaggregated data that actually measures environmental indicators for indigenous communities and our nations.  Right now you can go to any of the major environmental data sets and we're absent.  We can have aggregated data based on sometimes potentially race and ethnicity but mostly in at a national level or subnational level data.  And we are just sort of marginalized from the collection.  If we're not counted how can you matter in decision making.
Also, when we think about data accessibility how can our government and leaders use data accessibly to be informed decision makers.  That's a real big issue that we have to come to terms with and think through sustainability solutions for the environmental data ecosystem.
In particular because our communities, indigenous communities are on the front lines of the climate crisis.  What is the important of environmental data right now in our human history?  It's to hopefully tackling this emerging crisis that our world is facing.  For indigenous people being on the front lines, we need access to data that is meaningful and that counts our people.  That's a really big safeguard and principle that I hope we could build in to a future ecosystem.
In addition, one of the things I wanted to outline before I bring a path forward that other scholars have created is the way in which English, the English language is monopolizing our data infrastructure and ecosystem right now and how that disenfranchised indigenous languages.  We right now are seeing indigenous languages around the world ‑‑ 2019 was the U.N.'s year for indigenous languages.  We're seeing the loss of those languages, the languages go dormant because they're being forced out of operation, out of use, out of consideration and care.
I think when you think through data governance, because so much of our environmental knowledge is captured in our indigenous knowledge systems and languages, we need to create data ecosystems that uplift those languages in their structure and in their creation and design from the outset as others have said earlier.
So the global indigenous data alliance has put together the care principles for enacting indigenous data sovereignty for indigenous data.  Those stand for collective benefit, that data ecosystems should be functioned that support indigenous people's rights.  That we have the authority to control those data sets that are coming from our communities.  And also the responsibility of other data scientists, those working with data, about indigenous people and coming from our territories to share how that data is being used to support indigenous self‑determination.  Lastly, ethics, we have to be good human beings on this planet.  And part of that is also the way in which we use and design data systems.  Hopefully they'll respect indigenous rights in upholding those ethics, thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Kelsey.  Questions can be moved on either in the chat or in the Q&A function.  And you'll find that under the more button at the bottom of the screen.
Now if I could ask Amy her thoughts on safeguarding, please.
>> AMY: Great.  You know, I think some of the principles that ‑‑ the number of principles to think about, I guess one of the ones I wanted to highlight is the need to really recognize ‑‑ to focus in on essential sustainability data that needs to be available.  We're in the information age where we're flooded by data and that's been highlighted for sure.  But there are critical information that we don't have but that we could have if we focused on.  For example, in terms of our biodiversity there's a lot of information that isn't available but if we focus in on that we could make decisions in a much better way.
So recognizing that we need to agree what are those essential data for managing the systems?  These are one of the things we're doing here at Microsoft in the context of building a planetary computer.  Trying to identify those data sets so we can make them available to everyone who is working on conservation efforts around the world.  What are those key variables is taking a multistakeholder approach.  This is where these kinds of forums are valuable to bring together government and private sectors, civil society to identify what those are regionally and sectorrarily.
A piece of that is the essential variables aren't ‑‑ data sets aren't valuable unless they're accessible and open to the diversity of actors engaged in what is a multistakeholder, multisectorial participation in environmental governance.  And honing in together in deciding what are the key variables, making sure we actively go out and assure we have validated access to the data so we can make decisions I think is a core principle that we need to move forward with and ‑‑ if we're going to be able to know that we're managing this correctly and make decisions wisely.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, and now finally to Rose.
>> ROSE MWEBAZA: Thank you.  I think the panelists have raised really important information and just the last speaker highlighting the importance of, you know, what is the essential data we have from my point of view climate data is important to create resilience in the more vulnerable communities as well as other categories of data.  I think it's really important at this point in time where there's a whole range of data that is available.  The environmental data that we focus on that it is the kind of data that supports the decision making that is good for nature and for people ultimately.  So that's the way I would put it.
The whole issue of leaving no one behind, so if it's data that creates resilience or better livelihoods or protect people's information on air quality, that's data that's important.  It's good for nature and it's good for people.  So leaving no one behind and creating data we need.
Lastly, the one I think as a community that we could work with is the large body of work we already have an environment reviewing data and making sure it's aligned to this new huge digital agenda to make sure it's environmentally sustainable and that we do not have to deal with the unintended consequences of what it is that we're trying to do.  I think that system is at a point where it has to extend beyond the nontraditional areas where we've been looking at an important issue of environmental sustainability.  So really those are the two key issues that I would like to highlight at this point in terms safeguards.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Rose.  Now, moving to the questions from our audience, we have one from Monica Emmett.  She asks, there were several mentions of the need for standards for environmental data.  Who shall develop these standards?  The floor is open.  Would anyone like to comment on that? 
>> JOYCE MURRAY: I don't have a specific answer to that question, but what I was wanting to bring into the conversation to add to the idea of essential and critical data for the solutions add to the whole data chain idea which I think is so important and the disaggregated data for social justice purposes.
What is the role of governments?  I mean, maybe it was ‑‑ I'm not sure who mentioned that this is government civil society, indigenous peoples, it's business, it's stakeholders.  But government can play a very productive role if we're thinking about governments right from the beginning.  Because there is a tremendous capacity there to facilitate or to undermine I suppose.  So what occurs to me is that there are organizations that bring governments together, not that we want to have something big and cumbersome and hard to get agreements, but something like the open government partnership is a group of 78 countries.  It's been meeting for 11 years, represents over 2 billion people and it's all about the partnership between civil society and government in having really an open approach and principles to the use of data but also to the engagement of people with their governments.
So let's find some ways in which government can be built in without it slowing down or, you know, creating a lot of bureaucracy I suppose.  But bringing them on board to this initiative early on.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Amy, I believe you want to add to this conversation.
>> AMY: Thank you.  I wanted to stress again, as was said earlier, that, you know, the answer to who sets the standards does have to be a multistakeholder approach.  There is a critical role for government for sure, which it has a different character than the other players and thinking that through is certainly critical.
What I wanted to highlight there are standards in two different pieces.  One is what data is available ‑‑ you know, what are the essential variable and how do we decide that and that has to be multistakeholder.  How, you know, it's safeguarded and open and so forth and interoperable.  I think there's another component that's critical as well especially when we're talking about environmental data.  That's the verification, you know, what is the essential ‑‑ what is indata in which we make our decisions in terms of global environmental issues?
We have a process for this in terms of scientific information.  We have a peer review process to say these are the ‑‑ looking at the insights that are drawn for data.  I don't think we've tackled that in a way that is going to suffice that is going to really draw from the data that what we can ‑‑ if we don't tackle this issue of what is the trusted data in terms of the science?
There is an emergence of looking at large datas and looking at trends and making predictions which is a huge asset in terms of how we manage in near real time these challenges coming in front of us.  How do we connect that with the scientific community that understands natural and social systems from a process point of view?  That is a challenge in front of us that is also a huge opportunity, but is one that we haven't grappled with.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Amy, would anyone else like to answer Monica's question?  No?  Can I ask the panel for one voluntary commitment you'll undertake in 2021 to take forward the themes discussed in the panel today, starting, again, with Joyce Msuya, please.
>> JOYCE MSUYA: Thank you.  So I'm going to give you one external.  External because we have to be nimble.  We commit to engage and potentially colead with the IGF process.  Not just IGF but any other stakeholders that may be interested.
Internally we're committed to contributing to our Secretary General's road map and colead an action plan on digitalizing environmental sustainability.  That entails working with other U.N. entities that work in the environment space.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Joyce.  Now to Joyce Murray, please.
>> JOYCE MURRAY: Thanks.  I think my previous intervention may have ‑‑ when ‑‑ who should make the decisions.  I started talking about government.  I think clearly the multistakeholder approach is the right one so I just wanted to make sure that that didn't come across as I want government to take this over.
A commitment, one commitment I have made recently is as the outgoing chair of digital nations was to put it in front of the group and have it accepted that digital nations would have a environmental sustainability theme and so we'll continue over the coming year to promote and seek allies for this initiative in the lead up to the U.N. climate change conference and see if there is interest from other countries.  That's a digital nations initiative.
There's also ‑‑ I just talked about the open government partnership.  I think there's a possibility we could get commitment in the fifth national action plan on open government that we are working with civil society to produce that we could implement an open data, an open science specifically to help fight the climate change as one part of our Indonesia action plan.  This would, of course, include annual public open data reporting on the environmental footprint of federal operations which is being done through our center for green in government.
I can't commit to this national action plan element because we do it in partnership with civil society.  We're in those discussions and consultations now but that's something I'm personally very interested in doing and that would be then part of the broader open government partnership discussion and commitments.  As I mentioned, that's quite a number of countries that could then start to be connected in with this initiative that you've put on the table today.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Joyce, now Celina, please.
>> CELINA LEE: Thank you.  From Zindi's perspective we're driven by the mission to make AI and data science more accessible for everyone, to serve everyone regardless of race, gender, even geography.  So our goal is to create opportunities for young people to continue to upskill in the area of AI, machine learning and data science and through our platform also help make some of these valuable data sets more accessible and more public for real impact on the ground.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  And I'll invite Kelsey now.
>> KELSEY LEONARD: My commitment is a commitment I'd ask of my panelists is to familiarize yourself from the care principles I mentioned as well as united nations declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples.  If you've never read it I think it's a pivotal document for you to read and to use as a framing guidance for developing standards that should be guiding data moving forward.  It's my call of action to each of you to hopefully take these two principle documents and see what you can do with them in your own individual data ecosystem and hope thal that will move the needle forward.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Kelsey.  Now, Amy, please.
>> AMY: can you hear me?  Well, first I want to say sort of a personal commitment and I think coming from this panel it's been a great discussion.  I'll reflect on the various different angles this panel has brought.  I want to thank you for sharing those.
From a Microsoft perspective, there are two commitments.  One is to become a net positive for the environment in the context of our footprint and our role in the global economy.  More broadly, though, to work with partners to make sure that we can identify the essential variables, make those available in what we're developing in terms of the planetary computer, but within context of these discussions.
We want to engage in the dialogue and best practices that the forum is developing and integrate those and empower others, everyone to do more with sustainability data to achieve our sustainability goals.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Now finally to Rose, please.
>> ROSE MWEBAZA: Thank you very much.  The commitment I will make within our mandate, which is promoting environmentally sound technology.  Really, the commitment I can make is that in this context to focus on some of the two issues that would have the most significant environmental impacts which would be the amount of energy that required to drive this agenda and the digitization.  So the technologies that would promote deficiencies, reduce greenhouse gas emissions but also to work with the member states, you know, that give us this mandate and electronic waste which is growing and potentially becoming a global challenge.
This would include, you know, as we promote this in countries, creating awareness, the dialogues and conversations we need to have where the different stakeholders engage and make those decisions so that we are taking them with the agree of ethical understanding of what their consequences are and why it would need to make decisions that promote sustainability.  I think those are the commitments I would make.
Then, of course, the ‑‑ dealing with the digital divide we have, promoting this to developing countries.  Celina was talking about the actual data gaps we need for sound decision making, thank you very much.
>> MODERATOR: Right, thank you for completing that section.  And we've had a fascinating and thought provoking exchange of ideas.  I want to thank the panelists for what they're developing on this topic.  The IGF and U.N. have pushed this issue to the top of the agenda, and now the U.N. is considering making digitalization of environmental sustainability a four‑year priority.  The media, too, needs to report more on the environmental data and the implication of using it sensibly.  Please do contact me at Digital Planet about this.
As we have heard on the panel today, every scientific assessment is giving us ten years left to solve climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution.  Living as we have been living, and doing business as usually is clearly not working.  And we need to find ways to make exponential progress in these three areas.  Digital transformation is going to play a massive role if it can be harnessed for environmental sustainability.
The stakeholders need to establish together how environmental data and metrics can be hard code into application platforms, filters and algorithms to fundamentally change the incentive structures for sustainability.  If we are to see any benefit to our environment.  Working together with environmental data could decarbinallize and detoxify the global supply chain.  Together we can take collective action on environmental digital cooperation and commit to concrete action with the support of the IGF and UNEP.  Thank you to everyone on the panel today and those behind the scenes, translators and scribes as well who have made all of this happen.  I hope to come back next year to hear about the tangible progress that has been made.  Thank you.
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-12-%E2%80%93-ws350-attributing-attacks-political-technical-legal-dimensions-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
 
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Hello!  Officially, welcome, everybody!  We heard that the stream may have already been on for a while.  You may have seen some informal preplanning.  Now we are very happy to kickoff this IGF session on attributing attacks ‑‑ Attributing attacks: political, technical & legal dimensions.
It is exactly the dimensions that have to come together to get to credible places of attribution and that's up for discussion this session.
In the next hour and a half we have a great set of speakers highlighting different attributions of cyber attack, by, for whom, by whom, and when.
After we hear from these experts, we will make sure to allow for as many questions from participants as possible so feel possible to raise questions with us as well and I'll try to bring cross as many as possible.
First, why do attribution really matters.  Clearly, unfortunately, cyber attacks, in frequency, scale, intensity, they're escalating, we see criminal activity, state actors attacking vaccine labs just to name one example and hospitals and engaging in the ongoing activities of inintrusion for corporate espionage, geopolitical strife, crimes with economic objectives and even when many of us imagine that during a pandemic there should be a shared focus to end the suffering to allow for healthcare workers to do their job and also there are those that are cynically exploiting the fact that there are more people online, creating a Lash larger attack surface and working in less protected environments than if they were to log on in their offices with cybersecurity experts close by.
I think it is really important when we think about cyber attacks and the technical terms that come into the discussion when we try to understand what is happening and your privacy the technologies are evolving and the methods are evolving to always keep in mind that the digital is human and that we're not talking about an abstract problem.  When a hospital is attacked, for example, patients suffer or can't even enter the hospital because they can't be registered, because the machines are down, how can we even appreciate that they were to recover?  An IT system can be rebuilt, reset, can be bought new if necessary and the human cost is often final and irreparable and I think that's important to keep in mind, especially because technology is no longer a sector and has become a layer of all sectors and more and more aspects of people's lives, it really is a vast problem that has links to so many aspects of the way people live, work and enter into their daily activities.
On top of that, the growing uptick of artificial intelligence, the Internet of Things, other new technologies, again, it allows for new ways to attack.  As I mentioned, it is a growing problem.  The cyber attacks and I think it is urgent to see that we have a better grasp of what's happening so more fact‑based discussion and that we can walk the path towards attribution and accountability and hopefully leading to more responsible behavior in the digital world.  I think oftentimes attackers exploit the lack of legal protections, legal clarity in the digital world to very deliberately avoid accountability.  There may be a reference to one attack or another in the news, but hardly ever to we hear about the following accountability, it's hard to see a public debate about attacks because people, citizens, many politicians too remain in the dark about what's actually happening and without such a well‑informed public debate, it is impossible to get the kind of political priority, kind of political pressure on leaders to act and therefore too often accountability and justice are delayed or never served and I think this gives attacker, criminal, geopolitical actors a double effect, one, the effect of their immediate activities, but secondarily or as a broader effect, the erosion of trust in the ability of a rules‑based order to deliver upon the promise of protecting people' quality of life and values.
In order to get to a better place, it is important to bring together the various aspects of understanding attribution, the technical, the political, the legal, the policy aspects and these sort of societal impacts.  That's what we'll do today, bringing these different aspects together towards a credible, enforceable mechanism within the international order online.
We have agreed speakers will highlight whatever they think is important about themselves, that he research and their bios but briefly we're very happy to welcome the following speakers today, firstly, Johanna Weaver, a special advisor to the Ambassador for cyber affairs in the Australian Department of Foreign affairs and trade, Camille Francois, chief innovations officer at graphica and Serge Droz, incident response and security teams first, and then Jens Monrad, director of Mandiad threat intelligence at Fire Eye.
Sorry to be long to get us all started.  This gives a bit of a scene setter of what we aim to do today.
Now opening up the panel discussion I wanted to start by asking, anyone can raise their hands to answer, what does attribution really mean?  It is taken from the context of traditional military concepts like deterrence, how must we understand attribution and the importance of it in the cyber context.
Johanna Weaver, maybe you can start.
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: Sure.  Thank you.
It is a great question.
Being the nerd that I am, I Googled it and had a look at what the Oxford English dictionary says for the word attribution, and that sounds a little bit blase, but actually it is a common ‑‑ there are so many different understandings on what attributions actually means and interestingly, in some languages, the word attribution doesn't even exist, we can come back to that.  The Oxford English language definition of attribution, it is that it is the act of regarding something as being caused by a person or a thing and interestingly, the examples that it give, it is not the defense‑based examples that we probably are going to, but it is looking at the works of particular artists or authors, for example, so when we look at it in the context of cyber attribution, there are four things that stand out to me and as introductory framing points, the first, it is attribution is not new, we have attributed things to people or organizations for a long time.  It is new perhaps in the cyber context.  It is not new full stop.  Second of all, attribution, it is not all public.
It may be that governments, companies, individuals, attribute behavior, they say that I know that X is responsible for Y but we may or may not say that publicly.
I think that's often lost in the debate.
The third point, it is that attribution, it is very rarely an end.  It is actually a means to an end and I'm sure that we'll discuss throughout this panel what that ‑‑ what those ends might be.
The fourth point that I would make, it is that we often talk about attribution in the context of we need to attribute malicious activity by countries, but we also can attribute to individuals, for example, cyber criminals and attribute to groups, for example, terrorist organizations who might be using the internet to insight violence or recruit, we can also use attribution to draw attention to responsibility for companies as well, so the international reports, looking at the export practices of companies to authoritarian regimes is a good example there.
I suspect our conversation will be more focused on states but, you know, the fact that attribution can also extend to other actors, it is an important point.
Thank you.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Thank you so much.
Before going on, I'm happy to add to the introductions of our panelist who just managed to join us, John Scott‑Railton, I didn't want to introduce you not knowing whether you would make it.  We're super happy to have you, also because you and the team at the citizen lab at the University of Toronto have been so important in focusing on the private sector on hacking as a service, the surveillance industry.  It is great to have you so that we can also talk about attribution of private entities and the roll that they play in the broader ecosystem of being instrumentalized, providing instruments for attack, whatnot.
Welcome.  Catch your breath.  Good to have you.
I'll now be happy to turn to Camille Francois for reflections and we'll just see whoever wants to join after that of the panelist, just raise your hand and I hope to see you.
>> CAMILLE FRANCOIS: I think John's background is introducing the idea of the flag there and how it plays in the attribution definition, let's get the definitions out of the way and welcome to the complexities of attribution and how gains are made by actors.
Let me ‑‑ allow me to be the resident boring nerd here too and refer to a fantastic scholarly Article by Ben McCann none and Benjamin on cyber attack, it is a fundamental piece on attributing cyber attack.  It presents the model for attribution which has nothing do with this, it predates all of that, but it is essentially making a point that various ‑‑ that it is worth repeating, attribution is not a set of technical hops to go through.  It is an art, it is not just a set of technical consideration.  It is also a series of strategic, political consideration.
That is sort of the main thing that I would put forth in the definition and related to your question on what is attribution, I think, you know, it boils down to the eternal very simple question of when you look at an incident, attribution is there to answer who is behind it, whose done it.  I think it is interesting because we often think about the importance of attribution for deterrents and we'll talk about that, but there is much more to that, there is transparency, the understanding of everybody, the sophistication or the lack of sophistication of the actors behind the specific incidents, it is fundamental for security we expect organizations to protect themselves against threat and it is important to understand who is behind the threats and, of course, there is enablement, once you have shared more of this information and we see that, citizen lab, for instance, when you share this forensics, when you share more of this information, you enable others to continue building on the work that you have done.  Just a series of attributions, not just a technical concept, attribution, it is not just a deterrents problem, and I think that's a good set of starter points for us to continue to build on.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Thank you.
Serge indicated he wants to jump in next.  Feel free to raise your digital hand as panelists and I'll make sure it is somewhat coordinated.
>> SERGE DROZ: I'm Serge Droz, I'm the Chair of First as already said.  I represent the incident response team, so we often talk to or call ourselves the firefighters of the internet, we're the first ones on the scene of an incident happening and we have used the term attribution a lot but differently from the way it is phrased and framed in here.  I feel it is very, very important that we're extremely clear and I'm grateful to Johanna Weaver that she brought forward a good definition.
For the technical community, often attribution just means figuring out more what was it that happened and has it happened before in a similar way.  That allows us to tie together different types of groups without actually knowing who really is behind it.  We'll say, this is the this one group, a fancy group here, an APT5, whatever, they say that without knowing who the persona is behind them.  In social media, you have huge discussions who it really is, but I feel it is very important that as incident responders, for us, for the technical community, attribution means something different there and some would argue we should not call it attribution but maybe fact‑finding because what we do, we find facts and it is this computer connected to that computer, this and that happened.
By the way, why I feel it is important, incident response teams, security people, they do not step into this, because we have heard that attribution, it usually has a purpose, and that's a purpose that's usually telling someone, hey, you did something wrong and this is very important that we do this.  It is also something that kind of kills trust.  If you start to point the finger, people will stay away from you.  As the firefighters, you're not going to be the person that people are afraid of.  You want to be the people that earns trust regardless of the where the fire burps and it takes both and it is very, very important to protect both of the roles and that's why I also feel it is very, very important that certain parts in the attribution process are really clearly assigned to different roles.
I find it very, very important that we're absolutely clear on what attribution means for whom.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: It is also important to put it in the context of on the one hand, having more evidence‑based information about cyber attacks so that there can be a better informed policymaking, understanding, whatnot, attribution and then the question of accountability, not even just who should be held responsible but then what should be proper sanction and clearly that's a political question under any circumstances.  The credibility, the trustworthiness of the process, it is essential in making sure that the accountability process has meaning.
I agree.  I think it is very helpful to separate those out.
>> JENS MONRAD: I want to echo what was being said, I can say that from the company I come from, we're on execution, so certainly attribution, it is not just who it is from that perspective, because from a technical, an operational standpoint, it is really also how and what they're using, so we use attribution in many different phases where we're able to not necessarily attribute to a specific response but to a specific cluster of activity, what tools are they using, how are they using it.  Something that's very, very critical for the network that doesn't necessarily care too much about who it is, although I would say when we talk to senior leadership both in governments and in the private sector, the first question we always get asked, it is who are doing it and whereas we talk about the operational era, it is about how we're doing it and what are the user rights.  We use attribution in many aspects of our public, private reporting to help the different layers.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Yeah, you want to jump in, John, perhaps add about wet on are their standards, Best Practices, mechanisms for attribution that's relied on by technical experts like yourself?
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: Thank you.
I think Serge's point makes sense figuratively to a lot of people, it is important to have a cannon of technical standards and approaches.  It is certainly the case that right now the cybersecurity industry and the intelligence communities in many countries that have fed into that industry have developed a series of practices and language around attribution.  I think the elephants in the room for the entire conversation is the radical disconnect between those languages and the precision and meaning that they contain and the political realities of public conversations and policy conversations around attribution and I can't help but think there is an analogy to climate science, the science is chugging along, getting better and better at certain aspects but at the same time, there is no general justificationtied relationship between even quite good attribution work and any kind of consequence or even sort of public consensus of who may be responsible.  I think that that is as much the kind of problem that we grapple with and I would love to hear from other panelists about the political realities of this challenge.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: That's helpful.
You want to jump in.
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: Sure.
Just so much good stuff there.  I don't know which part to pick up on.
I think on the point that was made by do we call it attribution when it is the technical communities, what certs, et cetera, the fact‑finding as opposed to attribution.  That is quite interesting because when we ‑‑ when we look at attribution, the process of making a decision as to whether or not the Australian government will make a public attribution we have two attribution assessments and then a decision that's made.  The first attribution, assessment, it is a factual assessment, that factual assessment includes the technical indicators of compromises and the technical information and it includes other factual information so for example what's going on in the world environment, GeoPolitics, are we in negotiations with particular countries, et cetera, et cetera.
It is that factual assessment encompassing all of the elements.  Then we do a legal assessment.  The legal assessment, it is looking at the things like the law of responsibility, if you're looking at the perspective of attributed to a state and if it is different assessments if you're looking at criminal actors or non‑state actors.  Those two attribution assessments, they're absolutely key.
There is a decision that's made, usually at the highest levels of government, as to whether or not we will then make a public attribution statement.  Often people will early on in the discussion, we would refer to that as political attribution, and we have now stopped referring to it as political attribution because it implies that it is politically motivated where it is not.  What we're saying there, it is that you have the two attribution assessments which are essentially factual assessments based on an impartial assessment of the information and then there is a decision about whether or not we publicly or privately make an attribution disclosure.
I think that's ‑‑ I think it is quite interesting in terms of the crossover of points that were being made there.
I think the political point that John was making, it is also really very relevant.  I think we have been getting quicker at attributions and we're in the attributing everybody and maybe it is not real list tock expect governments to attribute everything.  The speed, it is increasing, the precision of the public attributions are increase, we have gone from 2017 when the government says we don't comment to public attribution, and now we're attributing to specific agencies in specific government, we're making progress, the question, of course, how to make that faster and to be precise as we go forward.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Thank you.
I think that Camille wanted to build on that.  I wanted to ask a follow‑up question that hopefully can be addressed and others may too, it is the incentives for different stakeholders to participate.  For example, companies with concerns for their reputation, Civil Society, with vulnerabilities for their constituents, et cetera, et cetera.
Camille Francois, please share your thoughts and then maybe we can open it up to why certain stakeholders would actually even want to be part of the attribution process or participate if they think that's the outcome.
>> CAMILLE FRANCOIS: A great question.  Building on what what was being said, they're now ‑‑ there are loads of people, types of institutions that participate in the attribution conversations.  We see research institutions attributing, that's new and that's remarkable.  They tend to follow specific sets of guidelines, they tend to have a higher bar for showing their forensics and they toned qualify, that's a good Best Practice, the attribution with the confidence level that they have, so they may say we attribute this campaign to that actor with a moderate degree of confidence.  We look at the private sector attributing, both independent researcher, large corporations, of course, we now see governments participate in the attribution conversation as pointed out by Johanna Weaver in a more transparent way and sometimes with remarkable speed.  On the U.S. side, we just wrapped a really interesting election cycle where we saw the U.S. government publicly attribute a campaign focused on the election where the Iranian entity was posing as a domestic group to create intimidation and it took something like about 24 hours for the government to come out publicly with attribution and here to demonstrate and to show that attribution and public attribution, also sometimes in a heated cycle, they can have the benefit of restoring calm in the face of an attack.  Particularly when you talk about perception attacks and IO, having a government come out, say, well, actually there is nothing to worry about there, because with analyzing, we have understood where it is coming from and also sometimes can participate in restoring public confidence in the face of attacks that are designed to undermine public confidence.  To the point, which attribution matters for accountability, it is an important question.  The private industry does a lot of these attributions and we see them increasingly do that.
Microsoft has been doing a lot of attributions throughout this election cycle.  We have seen Facebook, Twitter to some extent, Google, also participating in publicly attributing campaigns.  When they do that, I think it does create a sense of accountability from the private sector, more often than not they're saying we see you, we won't let this activity happen on our services but it is different from having a government attribution that can sometimes go hand in hand with a process that's a dissin sentence active for continuing this activity.  For the Marriott of people that participate in this contribution, I was going to say circus, whatever is the more up lifting attribution ballet, not all carry the same weight for accountability and it is interesting to see government with different policies on attribution.  The French for instance, they have a longstanding policy that they would not publicly attribute cyber attacks.  This would not be the key to their digital strategy.  Of course, it doesn't mean that the french don't care about cyberspace but it is not what they were anchoring their cyberspace deterrent strategy on.  It is interesting as we see those evolutions to observe governments who are engaging in this debate for radically different perspectives.
>> SERGE DROZ: A thing that's pointed out, in the current attribution game, we have a biased view I would obtain, we have governments that are looking at what others are doing, the big cybercrime groups are doing, then we have commercial cybersecurity tech community mostly looking at what are criminals doing against customers, and we completely are leaving out Civil Society and it turns out that they're under more pressure than we think.  This is really bad for two reasons.  Obviously it is bad because Civil Society doesn't have the means to do proper evolution, and there is a lot of information, we don't have the means and these people, they just ‑‑ they get lost in that.  It is also bad because the states, the threat models are based on the available attributions and if you miss half of this stuff, then you get rescued or biased models and pictures.  There was a great talk in the beginning of the year by Leonard mashmyer from citizen lab comparing the commercially available intel, he knew from Civil Society and there was not overlap.  We tried to bring together at list in this private industry, with Civil Society, trying to work on this problem, finding out how we can can solve this.  Interestingly enough, private industry really was very open to that, supportive, and Civil Society, they were afraid of doing so.  Again, this is something that we should keep in mind, why is Civil Society so afraid of actually participating in these attributions?  I don't think I have a ready answer, maybe someonen else on the panel does.
We found this a challenge to invite these people to start talking to the established tech community about these types of things.
You point to the very important question of trust.  Right.  What incentives there are to trust and what risks there are to share information.  I think that's probably explaining a lot of the lack of better coordination and cooperation.
I see John is nodding his head, I promised to come to Jens first, maybe John will jump in later on what he sees as a phenomena in Civil Society and the paper that I would strongly recommend that was produced by your colleague Leonard was mentioned.
Please, go ahead.
From your point of view, what you're seeing here.
>> JENS MONRAD: I think also because there was a question on it's actual value of attribution beside pointing fingers, shaming.  I think what we see from the professional community, from the cyberspace.  It is that it carries an important weight because when we do, for example, when we ‑‑ when our company does public attribution, and we have released this to the greater public and we have done interview, blocks, all of that, we also see that we're making it more expensive for the cyber attackers.  We're not necessarily pointing fingers at the specific nation but the way that they're working towards a compromise, we're trying to make that more expensive, we're forcing them to go back and to redesign their attack model, redesign the way that they're using the tools and certainly especially when talking about state‑sponsored campaigns it is important to recognize that it is a relatively time‑consuming operation so it is much less agile than it is when we talk about cyber criminal attacks.  Whenever we're contributing to making it more expensive for private enterprise, governments, NGOs, the Civil Society being attacked, I think we're contributing to that part, but obviously we are still a private company and we don't do government work.
  We can only layout the way we see it.  I agree with Serge, it is a degree of bias we recollects layout our evidence and then obviously people can question it, it will be from our point of view, what we see, what information we have available.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Thank you.  John. 
>> JOHN SCOTT-RAILTON: I think you're right to Serge's point.    Civil Society cares about attribution and what you're picking up on, the last decade or so there is efforts by private industry players to play with targeted civil organizations, organizations that face threat, but unfortunately, many of the corporate security players that have done that, they go in, look, we'll help with security, name and shame attack viruses and they put an intrusion detection box on a network and writing a fancy report that does not highlight the issues of Civil Society, thank you for the threat intelligence on the Chinese attackers going after you..  As said, it is about trust, it is also the case, something that we see day in and day out, for most of the attacks that we work at at the citizen lab, it is our targeted attacks against Civil Society and most are coming from nation state players and we don't get to any other player doing serious attribution.  It is very rare.  Very rare that there is this degree of clarity coming from the governments and coming from the private sector on the cases that we work with and as a result some of the cases that have the most impact.  A case like stock net, for example, we had the community of folks that are talking about the importance of building attribution mechanisms because you have the presences of the stakeholders.  A lot of cases we work on, huge human impact, Civil Society groups ripped apart by surveillance, hack and leak and taint operations, these things, they never get to convincing attribution.  If they're mentioned by industry groups, they're mentioned only in passing without naming individuals or individual organizations or really laying out the harm, which is that there is a largely under motivated set of cases.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: That's very helpful.
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: Thank you.  I want to go back just briefly to a comment that was made by Camille Francois on attribution, quick attribution restoring confidence.  I think that's absolutely the case, but we also have front of mind whenever we're making an attribution as a development that quick attribution, that subsequently proves to be wrong, it will destroy confidence and destroy all future confidence in attribution.  There is really a role there for the private sector in terms of being able to move quickly and there is something to be said for the gravity of one government saying you are responsible for this malicious activity and that is not the same as when a private sector organization says that and I understand that private sector organizations have commercial imperatives and they don't seem to be wrong, but also there is ways that that can be balanced and that cooperation between the private sector and government cans actually be quite useful in closing the gap in terms of how long it is taking to do attributions.
Then to come to the points that was made by Serge on who attributes and John as well in terms of which attributions matter, I think these are really key points.  From a government perspective, when we're attributing something, we will be attributing those issues that are most central to national security or that go to the core of what we believe in.  That means that many of those things that John was talking about, that have huge human impact may not necessarily be prioritized and not because they're not atrocious, but because they don't fit within that attribution paradigm.  There's a really important role there for other actors to be stepping up in that.  Also, for governments where the harm is that atrocious to also be recognizing that harm as a harm that's got the potential to impinge upon national security, for example.
I think in terms of the value of attribution, that goes to the last point I made there, there are three real reasons, three primary reasons of why we would join this attribution, and the first, it is because we want to be indicating that behavior is unacceptable and that it violates agreed rules or norms and believe it or not, despite common misperceptions, a lot apply in cyberspace.  I'm the head of Australia's delegation to some Working Groups, the two groups at the UN discussing those rules, and so the first, it is to highlight that the behavior, it is unacceptable.  The second, to draw attention to the fact that the behavior is ongoing.  For example, Australia has made a number of attributions where we have named a government to bring attention to industry, to say that you need to fix this because this is this actor.  For example, we attributed a campaign of router scanning to the Russian government and we had previously advised and put out alerts saying that industry needed to be aware of it, no one paid any attention, so the attribution helps draw attention to it.
The third reason we join in an attribution, this is where it really links to some of the points that John was making, it is to support international partners or to support values that we hold dear.  Here I'm thinking about international rules‑based order, Human Rights, democracy, free and open economy, these are motivations and reasons and in particular that we may join with partners to attribute a particular malicious activity that maybe didn't have an impact in Australia.
I'll stop there.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: John, then a question to the panel and the Q&A are piling on.
I want to make sure we're getting people's questions answered.
>> JOHN SCOTT-RAILTON: Briefly, Johanna Weaver, your way of going through this is helpful for us as a set of categories to think about this, because I care a lot about Civil Society, I want to highlight I think one of the areas where there is the most room for innovation by governments, it is finding that sweet spot where governments sit on tremendous amount, especially fly‑byes, tremendous amount of information that leads in the direction of attribution and could do meaningful social good by making that available, including in cases that may be less costly in terms of sources and methods because the actors are sloppy but where the actors are creating real harm.  I want to highlight that as a tremendous area for potential.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: I want to ask you all if you mention one thing that you would like to change, to have better situation for yourself, towards attribution, what would it be?
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: John, to respond to your point, on the sweet spot, I couldn't agree with you more.  If I can sort of shuttle it, citizen lab does great work on, this there is an onus on Civil Society to be really in the face of government and making it clear that this is something that you should pay attention to.  That helps me get the attention of others.
The more we can be vocal as a community about the fact that this behavior is unacceptable, that type of behavior has that human impact, the more that we can push that message through government as well.
I'll hand over the challenge, I'm not sure if that analogy carries across the entire IGF audience.
In terms of the answer to the question, if I could add one thing, I would add better coordination on responses.  Call it responses, accountability, consequences, whatever your word is and attribution is just a means to an end.  It provides the responsiveness to the malicious activity and some actors for whom attribution in and of itself may be a deterrent but very few.  We feed to make sure that we're matching an attribution with responses be they law enforcement, diplomatic, legal, economic, at the high end, even military responses but they must be proportionate and comply with more ‑‑ if all of our responses.
To move beyond seeing attribution as an end, attribution as a means to an end would be my dream scape.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: I agree completely.  Towards accountability. 
>> CAMILLE FRANCOIS: Just a provocative thought.  Sometimes we talk about the role of Civil Society, the need to empower Civil Society as, yes, this is good for our value, this is good for Human Rights.
There is also a very strong case to be made that often Civil Society is looking at places that are gigantic blind spots for people who work in national security.  I think about those most rooted in right now, IO, it is really a good illustration of that.  IO information operation, I think of it sometimes as the little center of cyber and this is here a really good illustration of how much Civil Society has been leading the game, attribution, it is difficult, yes, in IO, you have had amazing investigative reporters who went and found threats and attributed them way before governments started to consider it.  If you think about the internet research agency, the major troll farm behind some of the IO against U.S. election in 2016, it was first exposed by Russian investigative journalist going undercover working with, this detailing the threat, writing about it, sharing all of the FORENSIC, they're also times of threats and areas of concerns in which Civil Society is simply leading and everybody deserves that more of that acknowledgment.  I look forward to seeing IO reshuffle the cards a bit on how we think about attribution, yes, of course, that leads to many people thinking that everybody is a Russian troll on the internet, that's too bad, we have been through this cycle with cyber too, slobby attribution is a fact of what happens when more people join the field.  Creating better standards, better practices for sharing FORENSICs between Civil Society, industry, government, and for publishing about it, it is something that can change security for the better.  That's my two cents.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Thank you. 
>> SERGE DROZ: A friend of mine working with the FBI recently told me about, you know, security is a team sport, I think we really have to go a long way of becoming a much better team.  Right now we do a lot of this individual and that's not just states, we have had a couple of states that work together, and incident responders should work together on a global scale.  Again, in the industry, in private industry, we are still too much in secrecy, and this is our ‑‑ we're not going to share any of this and the data sharing, we never really live it.  I think we have a lot better, much better in creating an environment in where we have agreed on goals of what we want and responsible behavior, it is by states, but also by private industry and other players, actually working together towards that means.
For me, this is something that we have a lot of room for improvement.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Thank you.
>> JENS MONRAD: I think I agree, especially with Camille Francois on the IO part.  That's definitely something that we are seeing a lot of.  One thing that I would say, that I hoped for, it is with attribution regardless of whose producing it, we could change the rules of engagement with how we're operating and living in cyberspace.  That certainly is my naive hope.  A personal concern that I have seen, it is that I have seen far more nations that are trying to mature their offensive capabilities but don't necessarily have that operational security, they may use local software, may use stolen tools, tools that are able to obtain by leak, by other offensive operations, and that's really my big concern without any rules of engagement, not necessarily talking about survey lapse, stricter internet usage and we need countries to come together and to form some sort of agreement and you have to factor in that cyber is still a relatively new domain when talking about even warfare, right.  So that's my biggest concern.  I see a lot of aspiring nations today trying to become the next cyber super power and that is really effecting citizens and obviously private organizations and governments all over.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Thank you.  Besides changing the dynamics of war, it changes the dynamics of peace.  One of the great challenges facing let mings is the blurring lines between so many previously more clear notions, like civilian and military, war and peace, private and commercial.
These blurred line, I think they create a whole different landscape, ecosystem that we all have to navigate.
I want to go to question, please participants put them in the Q&A function.  I saw one foundational question that was put in the chat.
How should states distinguish between attribution and criminal investigations and indictments?  Is there a risk that political attributions circumvents the individual Rights of suspects?  The presumption of innocence is my interpretation of what was being asked there in the chat.  It is an important question. 
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: It is a good question and why attributions statements by governments are so complex.  A common question that comes up, critiques that come up with attributions that have been done by government, they are not specific enough, not saying what law was breached, what norm was breached, et cetera, and part of that reason, there is a consideration on how that impacts on future prosecutions, there is that dimension that's there.  The process of a criminal indictment is different than a process to make a public attribution that a government is responsible for and action or an activity and the indictments, of course, they're usually sealed which makes coordination quite complex as well because the information, by their nature, it is not made available until it is public so it is a factor that is very front of mind when we are preparing attribution centers.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: We know Civil Society and academia are interested in attributions but efforts to prioritize it is often stopped, what's a way out of this?
>> We're all struggling with this, I can't even count them on both hands (John Scott‑Railton) meetings on the importance of attribution in Civil Society, I think it comes down to something simple, which is capacity, we're in the early days of organizations that are in Civil Society being in a position where they're technologically empowered to do their own work and to be technical partners with other stakeholders, coming from a couple of different polls, building out capacity, a help now, citizen lab, around a minute, with the University, we're moving there, but this is an example of why we need many more Civil Society players with resources and ability to tap into expertise.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Is it time to create principles of attribution, technical, legal, even political level corks this be developed by an independent community, academia with company, for example, then responsible states may embrace it to make attribution to be more trustworthy and transparent and it is built on by saying I know that the cyber piece institute, several threat intelligence firms and other academics, including the internet governance project have been involved in an effort to create a transnational attribution Working Group to be independent and neutral attributions.  Do panelists support these efforts?  Who wants to reply? 
Maybe that's an answer in and of itself! 
>> SOFIE MADDENS: Since I was named, and there is considerations of how we can make attribution more trustworthy, it is one of the problems we have, attribution, it is that one political block attributes, the other one, typically say this is our ‑‑ this is fake, you made it up, in fact, it is really hard in the internet to actually come up with conclusive proof unless you kind of show the incapacities and capabilities that you have.
This is a problem that intelligence services had ever since they existed.
A proposal, it was that maybe it needs to be an independent body or a network of bodies similar to what's happening in the area of biological, chemical Patent, you have different labs that assess or make analysis and peer review these to lend this more credibility and I think that we are going back to what John just said, it is a capacity thing, if done by volunteers, done in particular by Civil Society, why should Civil Society who has very few resources anyway, they start doing, checking attributions things, of cases that you're not really concerned with.  There is a bit of a bootstrapping problem, I maintain that the idea of having independent organizations be they states, private companies actually saying, hey, this is an analysis that was done properly and it has merit and this is really good work, this is something that can lend trust to this but it only goes so far and I would argue it only goes to the fact finding part and we have heard Johanna Weaver say it is the technical part, the technical communities, not doing a legal assessment, but we're pretty good in saying technically this is really solid and making the next step, it is something that typically only states can do, they have only access to signal intelligence.
It sounds like a really cool idea and I kind of still like it.  I think we have work to do.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Thank you.
We will fold in another question that was related, would it be possible for Ccer ts to assist in delivering the proof to the governments so others can attribute to it?
>> JENS MONRAD: I like the idea.
I have seen that very early discussion about a cyber Geneva, you know, convention agreement.
The only challenge I have with it, to this date, it is that it would only be effective if every country agrees to abide by whatever is agreed in such a convention.  We still don't have trials of engagement, not every country agrees what is a state sponsored, you know, campaign, some ads are delegitimatized, it is a duel use organization, it is spying, we're expecting intelligence operations and agencies to conduct these against each other.  Because we don't have common sense agreement on what are states allowed to do, when they should not do it and how can we sanction or pull out whenever they're doing something that's not abiding to the agreement, then I don't believe that we are where we are supposed to be unfortunately.
>> CAMILLE FRANCOIS: Yes a few things come to mind.
We have sometimes a tendency to talk about attribution and all cyber attacks like in the same type of remedy and I think it is untrue to generalize that point, sometimes it takes a long time to attribute and that time is important to take and you don't want to rush.  Sometimes it is for instance a hack in the middle of an election cycle and speed is of the essence.  Not all of these attacks warrant the same type of treatment from an attribution perspective.
The sec thing is, from my perspective, it is important to recognize the small ways in which Civil Society here to has been leading by when some of the organizations do attribution, providing an extraordinary amount of detail and providing the forensics for how they come to their conclusion.  That's because the bar is higher for them.  When an institution like signal lab comes out with a paper and they're attributing a way of saying you can look at this work, draw others in, attribution as a dialogue, that's something that we see emerging, we see others do the same to the extent that we can on IO, we try to do the same, it is okay for people to have different attribution practices and to the point that I was making, attribution is not just a set of technical oops you run through and there are different standard for attribution specifically on new and emerging types of threats.  In the world of IO, we see institutions have different standards for different degrees of confidence and I think it is okay to maintain those different standards as long as everybody who participated in the conversation does the work of showing where they're coming from and the statements saying that this is why we say what we say, this is how we do what we do and these are the types of indicators and what type of weight we assign to them..
So we can go in many details, but for instance, one of the sour points of IO, it is some some people would consider the total match of content between campaigns to be sufficient for attributing to clusters and the same actor, many others would consider that no, this is too low of a bar and to some extent, that's a very healthy, important discussion.  It is important for a different institutions to participate together in creating more robust collective security practices, some of that, it is important to have in public.  In much of the debate, I think we see Civil Society really leading on the transparency and on creating the bar for sharing forensics.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Helpful.
Going to the next question, directed at Johanna Weaver.
She asks ‑‑ I think she, hopefully, that last year and this year, multiple cyber attacks took place against the Australian parliament, would there have been value in Australia publicly attributing the attacks or are you building on building the cyber offensive capabilities to deter the attacks. 
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: That's a good question.  I didn't see it in the chat.  I had no forewarning.  That's great.
Australia made public statements about the attacks on our parliament and the Prime Minister spoke about it on the floor of parliament not long after we became aware of it that it had happened.
We have been very open and transparent about our approach to that and also the steps we have taken for mitigation.
We haven't publicly attributed to a country and as I said, we weren't always publicly attributing to a company, but we may still be publicly signaling that we are aware that that activity is going on and that that activity is unacceptable.  That is a strong message in the context.
I forgot the second part of the question.
Are we focusing our efforts on ‑‑
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: You know, would it have been useful to attribute or is Australia focused on developing offensive capabilities?  I put it to the answer session.  This is off the top my head.
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: That's great.
I think again, this is sort of tying in to some of the comments that other people have been making about the focus of countries who are wanting to gain offensive cyber capabilities instead of focusing on cybersecurity.  Australia is very transparent about the fact that we have offensive cyber capabilities and we use the offensive cyber capabilities, and we're one of the few countries that is on the public record about this.  We're also on the public record that we use our capabilities in accordance with the agreed rules of engagement and on that point, I think to Jens' comment, there are rules that have been agreed by countries about what countries should and shouldn't do in cyberspace and obviously we have not done a good job of ensuring that those rules are disseminated and that we are aware that countries have agreed to this, every country in the world has agreed that international ‑‑ that brings with it an entire body of rights and obligations that come with the engagement in the international system.  We have a great 11 norms of responsible set behavior, the problem in my view, it is not that we don't have rules and not that countries haven't agreed to those rules, we have ‑‑ it is that we're ‑‑ that there is not enough adherence to the rules and we come back to accountability and I think to go to milt ton's point, about are we having the same conversation, the conversation has moved on, because we're now talking about accountability and I think that's a very important step forward and quite remarkable progress in the period of time.  We need more and we need it faster and we have moved on.
I'm happy to talk more about Australia's approach to either offensive capability or the work ongoing at the UN because that is the two forums which we are agreeing on those rules of the road and we welcome suggestions in terms of how we can better have ‑‑ how we can ‑‑ how we have developed better understandaling that there are these agreed rules, that they do exist, how do we get the information out stronger and better.  Excuse my poor language, it is 3:00 in the morning!
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: It is an important point, there are laws entirely, it is not a Lawless realm.  I think it is a Spectrum of clear application of existing rules and ambiguity about the application of existing rules and the lack of rules because technologies are so new, because there are new questions on jurisdiction, for example, and so my humble suggestion would be that it is creating that clarity and applying the rules, you know, in action, not just in a theoretical discussion is something that could help create de facto clarity and not just academic clarity.
Any question that was asked that I would like to move on to now?  It is interesting to better understand also how rights apply in modern technology and how it changes, is different evidence required for technical attribution and legal attribution?  How should we deal this?  John, I see you nodding.  Coming to you for this one.
>> JOHN SCOTT-RAILTON: I'll say, you know, I think we had a great early conversation about attribution and ultimately, different communities have different radical standards and the way that certain actors are going to be able to do attribution will only go to a certain place, legal things, different standards, so the short answer to that question, yes, there are many different kinds of attribution and there are norms within each community whether it is legal or cybersecurity research or government about how to state conclusions and how to make directions.
In practice, many of the things that look like legal attribution is really hard for Civil Society actors to get to, because what we see, what we don't, they can be challenging for companies, deciding on their ability to get to it as well, the big problem we have, many of the most toys for attribution in a full some way, meeting people's intuitive standards, fingers on the keyboard, they live really only within states and if they're lucky, with big corporations.  We need to be able to have a conversation that acknowledging that and at the same time accepts that we can have conversations about evidence that don't always have to reach that standard.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: That's very helpful.  Also in terms of the question of how do you bring the two together, it is where many of you started.  We need a more public debate on what we know about attack, methods, and then about actors that maybe even capable to deploy them and if you want to use attribution towards accountability, then the challenges, for example, of such attribution and possibly sanctions, they could coming before a court.
You probably need technical attribution to maintain the violation of the legal threshold and vice versa.
I would like to go to the next question just to be sure that we keep them going.
There is a question asking it seems to be missing in the dialogue, small states, developing economies in Africa, Asia‑Pacific which form perhaps the weakest links, any advice or guidance for such and then there is a word that I didn't know, so for such nations possibly.  Any thoughts on that?  How do we make sure that there is capacity, engagement of smaller countries. 
>> JOHN SCOTT-RAILTON: Briefly, it is absolutely the case that these smaller countries are often racked both with cyber criminal problems and in some cases with nation state driven activity and ultimately the challenge of getting those countries capacity, it is a really big one and I think fundamentally under addressed.  What's interesting, one area where they do seem to be getting capacity faster than protection, it is in surveillance.  We see the industry reaching out to the smallest of countries like togo, selling them sophisticated nation state grade surveillance kits, detroit toe countries in East Africa even with no ability to protect themselves.  Just an interesting point there.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: I'll come to Serge next, after years of negotiation, there is political agreement on stricter rules for exports of survey systems out of the E.U. to any buyer that may use it to violate Human Rights and I think that the question is how will countries and international entities like the E.U. or others, make sure that they bring together for example development which involves capacity building and these higher standards when it comes to capacity building and also safeguarding people's rights and safety in the countries.  Oftentimes it looks like even within governments there can be complete divorce between the stated goals, for example, Human Rights protection and activities, for example, licensing the export of those systems that John observes on the daily basis that will actually actively harm Human Rights.
I guess sometimes simply aligning stated goals with practices would had do miracles in the right direction ‑‑ would do miracles ‑‑
>> SERGE DROZ: Yes n is more with what you were saying, there is ‑‑ you always talk about this digital divide, the digital gap and it is just a fact that a small nation doesn't have the means to do a full attribution program and in fact, actually operating the infrastructure it takes to bring this.  I think that the idea, the very idea that every nation has it own independent attribution capacity, it is just ‑‑ it would be nice.  It is a bit of a dream.  It is naive.  It is is willing that's ‑‑ it is the attack community, they have to take responsibility, to start to understand and understand what are the cultural differences or the different cultural habits in these, and the values of the countries.
About a year ago I was in the Pacific, on the Pacific islands and it may sound strange, traveling to the Pacific islands from Europe these days, but I was astonished and talking to all of these Pacific island nations on the challenges that they have, it is tech coming from the west, and these big tech companies kind of just having no idea of what it is that they're doing there.  Not only an attribution generally in bringing, exporting our Western technology to these places and we have to become a lot better of anticipating that the world is a global village and it is a village with many different neighborhoods and I think this is a big challenge.  I don't think there is a way that a small, not very well seen state can match up technologically to the big super powers or the big tech companies and that's something that brings a lot of responsibility for those that have the power.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: Thank you.  It points to the need to have an international rules‑based order that puts a minimum standard in place and would also help towards accountability.
>> JENS MONRAD: Yes.  I think also to the point that John made earlier, at least from what we're seeing from the threat perspective, it is that there is less focus on defensive capabilities and much more focus on offensive capabilities.  Because we're still talking small states, they might be as John mentioned, they may be purchasing commercially available surveillance software.  They may have a different codex and who they're using it against and they may have a different structure, system, we don't necessarily agree with.  We could be better talking about that.
Also maybe to say why attribution also matters, talking about these activities, regardless of who are doing them, eventually when I look at, you know, all of the offensive operations that I'm aware of, from all over the world, historically, states are doing a terrible job protecting their offensive tools, cyber super weapons if you like, and eventually they'll fall in the hands of, you know, cyber criminal, other adversarials that we'll use them against Civil Society, critical journalists, private organizations and so on.  That whole race to be the next cyber super power, it is where attribution is really important as well.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: I couldn't agree more.
This question of proliferation, technology in one context ending up in another context and sprawling out of control often, it deserves more attention.
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: I think also to link on the question very much related, I think that this idea of militarization, the continuing spiraling of the development of offensive cyber capabilities, it is really important and it is ‑‑ the point that we need to focus on here, it is that if countries are developing offensive cyber capabilities that must go hand in hand with the commitment that they will use them in accordance with international law and the agreed norms.  If countries are not willing to publicly disclose that they have the capabilities and that they will use the capabilities in accordance with the frameworks, then that is concerning.  To go to the point on well, isn't then developing the cyber tools against the purpose of the United Nations, no, because countries develop and have weapons of many different types and we commit to becoming ‑‑ by becoming members of the U.N. to use them in accordance with the agreed rules.  It is no different in cyberspace.  The problem is, there is ‑‑ you can count on your hands the number of countries that have publicly disclosed they have the capabilities.  Transparency in the capabilities must also be a priority as well as with respect to accountability.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: That's great.
One more question, if deterrence in the future or ‑‑ is, the future, the future goal or in the future, one of the goals of attribution, are there analysis on how it fairs with regard to technical attribution or techniques used in an attack and then designing defense mechanisms..
Countries do not agree on norms and terms, does this apply to democracies and less democratic countries or also between the two groups?  The latter would make cooperation even harder.  It is more of a statement also.
Is this a division line that you see, is it a little bit of a simplification?
>> JOHN SCOTT-RAILTON: I was going to say something to the earlier question.  Sorry about that.
One thing.
It is I think we're still learning about what the disruptive power is and isn't of naming and sharing for example.  An area that's promising, it is tracking how threat actor DOS and don't adapt and change their behavior when they're named publicly.  You know, I can think of some examples of certain state actors who largely sort of said damn attention, full speed ahead, other, later on, they have been much more weary of attention.
I think we're still in a very promising place for understanding some of the different directions but it is very much in its infancy and that gets to the question of deterrents and I think, you know, it is evoked here before, that there are questions of increasing the cost to attack and I think one of the things that we just don't know right now, it is how much public exposure does in and of itself, when say that, I think take a look at the cases of companies that have threat actor, when not associated with any government engagement.  What you typically see is, changes in behavior, so costs incurred to the attacker, but also the attackers don't just shut shop usually, they come back in different ways and I think this is a very interesting area for more investigation and I want to pivot to that next question if others have it.
>> MARIETJE SCHAAKE: I appreciate that.  With that, I'll do a subtle hand‑over to John Hering, I have to jump on to another session.  I miscalculated time zones.  For the conclusion of the session, the last couple of question, John is your moderator and for me to ‑‑ just a small word of thank you.
>> JOHN HERING: Thank you.  I appreciate having you here for this time and good luck in the next session you're in.
I think I have probably seen most of you in various sessions across IGF, I'm a government affair manager at Microsoft on our digital diplomacy team.  I don't want to interrupt too much.  Johanna Weaver, you had the next answer to the question posed.  Over to you.
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: I'm distracted, I'm simultaneously streaming to meetings at the moment, one of which is the UN meetings that are discussing the rules of the road and my delegation is currently speaking.  I'm trying not to be distracted by that.
I think on the question of is there agreement and is there division, the answer is that there is both.  Countries in 2015 ‑‑ actually 2013 and again in 2015 agreed to these seminal points that existing international law applies in cyberspace and they agreed to 11 norms.  Those norms, they're things like don't attack critical infrastructure using ICTs, they're very high‑level.  There is universal agreement on those.  We're having extensive discussions at the moment and in a group which has 193 countries and another with 25 countries and we're looking to put meat on the bones of what does it mean it say that international law applies in cyberspace.  That's a wonderful high‑level statement but how does it apply?  How does sovereignty apply in cyberspace?  What's it mean when we say cause damage to critical infrastructure.
There is so much that you need to drill down on and to provide more detail on.
The fundamental principle, there is the agreement and even in the fairly robust discussions that we're having, no country is disputing those fundamental agreements.
There is a robust discussion on the how and that's what we're hoping is the outcome of the two sets of negotiations, one which is due to wrap up in March and another which is due to wrap up in May. 
Obviously, there have been interruptions by COVID, if you can imagine the pleasurer of a wet Webex call with 193 countries on it, welcome to my life!.
>> JOHN HERING: Anything to add there?
>> SERGE DROZ: Yes.
Essentially what Johanna Weaver told us, this is really hard.  We have to take international law that was designed to norms exploding in the back of our minds which is now cyberspace which is something clean, clinical, there is no bombs going off and maybe it is not true but the other thing that makes it really hard, it is not states that operate this infrastructure, it is not states that design the technology behind it.  When we want to implement the norms on how behave, you have to get the tech companies in there, it is totally different from states, there is a lot of cultural understanding, I think that we need to build up, how you can actually take these decisions from international laws in cyberspace down to what it actually means in the every day life of an engineer.  Just to give you an example, this is not just theoretical blah, blah, Facebook was named for the first time in history as a private company guilty of helping in genocide in the Myanmar debacle.
Everybody agrees that international law is valid, as everybody thinks security is good and what it actually means on the different levels, it is a really, really big challenge and it goes beyond what states need to do, but it is also up to what big companies need to do and companies do different types of things as we see, the answer to these questions from Facebook, Microsoft, Google, they're all very different and we're in a learning phase.  It is really cool to be part of that.
I feel a certain sense of urgency..
>> JOHN HERING: I want to circle back to one question that I think pulse together a couple of different threads from the open questions that we still have in the Q&A, and also one that I wanted to Mick sure that the Pam had a chance to speak to.  A fairly political one and similarly rooted in the times that we're in, which are increasingly polarized, on the other side of the fairly contention election here in the U.S. in which there is a deep, deep mistrust across various political divides and we exist in a time of such mistrust, of such polarization, does this undermine the potential of these attribution efforts which rely on people trusting that the work being produced is something that they can have confidence in if there is action taken on, especially.
I guess my question, do you see that as being a necessary challenge to address it and how might we go about addressing it.
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: So I think if you want to look for politicalization around attribution, look at the drama and the challenges that were faced when information is put out.  That case is instructive, it shows us what happens when good work, that is complicated, relies on, you know, work shown, but analytical steps, it meets political realities.
I think that the same exact thing is truth attribution, we shoo it challenged when we attribute to certain nation states that are responsible for attacks, we think that ‑‑ the thing I can say, the particular problem, it doesn't get solved just in the attribution case, you do the world's best attribution and still get met by that.  It points to the larger issue of politicalization, where I think that we're still in the infancy, wondering ‑‑ understanding what happens when like Western and NATO states decide they want to challenge attributions they don't like.  I think that's a giant X factor and we don't know what that looks like or what it will do to the space.  I'm watching out for that. 
>> JOHN HERING: Over to you.
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: I wasn't actually requesting the floor believe it or not for once!.
>> CAMILLE FRANCOIS: Also looking at what's been holding in parallel, it is an interesting case that I want to bring here.  As you know, in the U.S., there's a conversation involving around accountability for tech companies and specifically questions asked about decisionings that major platforms have done to reduce the sharing of the New York post Article containing material who's origin, people ignored.
It seems that a handful of minutes ago, Twitter said on the record we made a fast decision and we thought that the material could have been hacked and that this could have been a foreign actor campaign, we therefore reduce it had and we were wrong and we were reversing of that decision..  You know, it made me think about the conversation that you and I had earlier about how some of these incidents do require industry to move at a pace that governments will not keep up with, it makes me think back to when my team exposed information operation operating the U.K. government in November of 2019 and the U.K. government, they came out with an attribution confirming this 8 month later, it is great, I'm glad they did, 8 months later, it is not the timeframe that at times industry needs to operate in to do mitigation and enforcement..  I was reflecting on the different constraints here and the reality is that our attribution conversation needs to acknowledge that many different actors need attribution for different purposes, including industry whose often, you know, more often seen as a producer of attribution and who sometimes also is a consumer of attribution for not only security purposes but for enforcement purposes.  I'm inviting us to draw on our thinking on the many different institutions that do see the attribution statements and for the different purposes, and therefore what you need on which timeline.
That's what I had in mind, you caught me thinking.
>> JOHN HERING: I'm so glad you were nominated.  That was a rich contribution and highlights an important, delicate balance we have touched on a couple of times throughout the conversation which is between speed, making sure that you can address things quickly and also confidence in the accuracy.
Any other final thoughts to that polarizing question at the moment?
>> JOHANNA WEAVER: Just to cycle back again on one of the comments that was made in terms of the role of Civil Society and being able to fill that blind spot of the national security community and that really builds off of what you just said, there really is a balance here.  On the one hand, government, yes, we have ‑‑ some of us, they have great signals of intelligence and amazing resources and in many instances, the works of ‑‑ the work of Civil Society, of the ability to focus, to drive attention, it is really important and it does help us to be able to draw attention to those blind spots through the national security apparatus.
I think to come back to the comment by Serge, it is a team sport, it is something that we need to be doing together and it is something that governments need to be cooperating more with Civil Society and more within industry and this is something that we're prioritizing in Australia and something that we pride our self on and I hope to see more doing the same..
>> JENS MONRAD: A quick comment here.  I think it is important especially when talking about the role of social media and the future of social media, we also need to look at the younger generation, how ‑‑ where are they getting the news today?  Do they actually ‑‑ by nature, do they trust government attribution?  Are they picking up news items on social media, other places?  That's also where attribution will also become a very important question to raise and where we need to look into it.  It is not just on the government side, but it is also how do we present attribution, what sort of communication path are we actually creating to ensure that others are also getting unbiased information and relevant data so that they can form their own opinions. 
>> JOHN HERING: Thank you.  I did not expect the virtual IGF to make us feel as close as it has over the last few days.  Thank you. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-12-%E2%80%93-ws352-digital-human-rights-digital-integrity-of-the-human-person-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> GREGORY ENGELS: It's 12:50.  The official start time.  Should we start? 
>> BAILEY LAMON: I guess we're going to have to.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: Okay.  Welcome, everyone.
Are we ready to go?  Question to IGF.  All right.
Welcome to the IGF 2020 session 352, Digital Human Rights: Digital integrity of the human person.  This workshop will introduce this new legal concept, the possible implications of data protection, how the concept could be introduced into the current legal framework.  The right to digital integrity is to be understood as the general justification for human digital rights, including the rights to data protection.  Every human evolves in a multidimensional physical and digital environment, if each individual is to keep their individuality and autonomy in daily choices, they must be protected and given effective tools to depend on autonomy.  Recognizing that the life has been digitally extended means questioning ourselves on what makes us human today, should personal data be considered as much of a component of a person rather than object that's owned by whoever collected it?  Should our digital integrity be protected?  If each human person already has the right to physical and mental integrity, for example, in the constitution, fundamental of rights, should they also have the right to digital integrity.
We have analaysists here today that are going deep in discussion and ‑‑ I forgot to introduce myself.  I'm Gregory Engels.  I'm with Pirate Parties International, an NGO with a consultant status and I'm glad to be able to host this session today.
So the question, the question asked from the auditorium, everybody not speaking mute yourself, after that, I'll give the floor over to Alexis Roussel and after that we'll promote everybody to panelist and we'll have a group discussion.
Thank you very much.
>> ALEXIS ROUSSEL: Hello.
I'm Alexis Roussel, I used to work for the UN long time a ago, I was an eGovernment specialist for the international court of justice and then for the United Nations trainaling and research and then I left the UN and went to the private sector, I'm very active in the crypto currency and crypto adoption in Switzerland and also since I left the UN an advocate of data protection within mostly Switzerland and I have been working a lot lot on digital rights in Switzerland.
What I'll present to you, it is the summary of this work and how we are pushing digital rights within the Swiss framework and also externally within the European Union.  I'm going to share my screen with my presentation with you.
Like Gregory said, I will present a concept of the digital integrity to the human person and we see this as a fundamental new right that's going to be ‑‑ I hope, this is my hope, of course ‑‑ going to be integrated into most of the legal frameworks that we see which are adapted to this vision.  Of course, it pushes a specific vision and we're going to see there are different types of vision about the digital representation of the human person.
To give a context, we're really here in a generational gap and there was a key moment that happened in a trial, just to give you a taste of what is this generational gap Peter Sunde, he's a person that was managing the Pirate Bay, it was one of those big websites where you can share music, movies, content, it was seen as a copyright infringement and actually a lot of people in the newer generation were seeing this as a way to exchange culture.  There was a big clash between creating a new type of culture and respecting the ‑‑ respecting the copyrights.  We saw this during the trial when the judge said to Peter Sunde, that's ‑‑ he was meeting the other people in IRL, in real life, and Peter Sunde said no, we're not using this expression if real life, we're using this expression away from keyboard, AFK, for us, the internet is real.  There was a big clash between ‑‑ during this conversation between the judge and Peter Sunde.
The judge was representing the old system, old rules and was applying those old rules but the clash was still there.
Another big clash is a lot of people, at very high‑level, governments, companies, we're using this expression that personal data is a new oil.  Why are they using this?  Because they're trying to make sense, of course, of what is personal data and they see that when the business models around personal data allows a lot of creation of value, so once you make this consultation, once you make this remark, a lot of countries are trying to mimic what's happening in the Silicon Valley and say, okay, we also want to have a striving business which is building around computer science in our country and so we need some guidelines to build that industry and to have this ‑‑ these key elements in place for our industry to grow.  They're basing this on the fact that they believe personal data is like oil, it is the new oil of the 21st Century.  That's a wrong feeling A wrong taste for a lot of people.  Basically people say yeah, but we're not oil.
This is also pushing a lot of regulation right now, being pushed by this.
What we can see first, there is in the world three main approaches and we're going to talk a bit further of the approaches later in the discussion panel, but we can start to see there are different approaches on personal data and I'm going to link it with regions but this not very clear yet, some regions are mixed, it is not just about region, we can say, for example, that the first one, it is more like European African, the second one, more American and the last one, more Asian.
The first approach, it is that personal data are linked to inalienable rights, linked to the human person.  That's like the European or the African arch.
Then a second approach, it is that personal data are available to the market.  It is a free market.  This is the U.S., this is what's driving Silicon Valley and what we call the Gafa and they're actually using data as a commodity so that they can take, it acquire it, they can create it, enhance it, they can summit or they can feed it back to the person who actually will manipulate the person for their own good, for setting the products.
It is a very libertarian view.  It is completely free and it is up to the responsibility of the individual.
There is a third vision, it is what we could say more Asian in general, we see it also that personal data are part of the common good, meaning that the personal data that everyone is producing is actually a set of data that is shared by everyone.  It is up to the state and institutions and any of the institutions to actually take care of the data and managed this data for the good or the greater ‑‑ for the greater happiness of the whole society and we can see that.
We see those three different approaches and it is important to understand that these approaches, they're going to be ‑‑ they'll be the new lines of frictions.  We see already in the world, these lines of ‑‑ these lines of frictions appearing in the international multilateral system and you see countries moving from one group to another.
Here I'll propose the vision of the first one, how the humanist ‑‑ the markets, the humanist regimes, they can make it to the individual.  There's currently, and since 20 years, there is a search for a core digital Human Rights.  The search is very hard, and there is a ‑‑ there's a vision of saying that this cordoning tall right has to be understood by all and enforceable also by all.  Until now, the best answer we had, it is the right to digital self‑determination, the right to digital self autonomy.  This is terms that are not understandable and don't relate to things that exist already in the existing frame, digital legal framework so these rights about digital self‑determination exists in Germany, exists also in Switzerland.  There's been some law cases which are presenting them, but it is still very hard to express them.  There are many reasons for this.
But to give you a historical perspective in the world, Europe, Human Rights mostly, they have been shaped through a history which starts with this long history between printing press innovation until the 18th century, and then we have the industrial revolution where the fact that there is a technological innovation which allows the information to be shared differently in society allows more people to have access to information and then the rights of the people are transformed by this innovation.  The old regime, based on the oral ultra dirks a lot of oral tradition and institutionalization, it changes into a new form that we see in Europe as being democracies.
In the same way, the fact that there is an internet innovation which changes how the information is produced and shared between the society is shaping ‑‑ is shaping a new ‑‑ anding a different world where there are questions about the Rights of the individuals and those are the ways that these rights will shape in the future, they will then shape the new institutions that we have in the future because our institution will evolve.
How does ‑‑ when using the ‑‑ this comparison between the two big movements that happened in the history, they can use this as a way to understand how those ‑‑ how those rights are integrated in our legal system and one of the rights that showed up, one of the most fundamental, it is the Right‑to‑life.  The Right‑to‑life is appearing in most constitution, most declarations without Human Rights, in all of them basically.  Normally it appears in almost all constitutions.  Why?  This is the first step for a state or institution to recognize the person on which you have jurisdiction and once you give the Right‑to‑life, usually the Right‑to‑life is necessary to allow the person to be autonomous and to allow this person to be free and in the decision process.  We saw in some cases, even if written in the constitution N a charter of rights, it doesn't mean it is enough for people to understand it and to say that there is a Right‑to‑life means that you can remove the death penalty, that's already a good step, but it doesn't mean that we guarantee the full autonomy of the person.  We usually subsist on more specific rights appear, just to give a shape on this, on how this autonomy is going to be preserved and what we see most, it is that we see the Right‑to‑life combined with the right to have physical and mental integrity preserved.  We see this in the constitution, we see it in the European charter of fundamental rights.  What it means, it means that if the state is not respecting the physical integrity of the individual then it doesn't allow the person to be autonomous.  I'll give you a very blunt example, if I'm entering a voting ‑‑ if I'm going to an election, entering the voting and I'm being beat up by an official, I will not vote the same way as if I'm not beaten up.
That's an aggression against my physical integrity.  The same way with mental integrity, if I'm being ‑‑ if I'm being submitted to some kind of a propaganda which is subliminal, for example, I don't even see the images that I'm being shown, it changes my mental state, I can vote differently and now the same way, and we saw this in the U.S., in Europe, you can actually manipulate digital ‑‑ eliminate the digital space of the person and by manually predicting this, you can change the vote of the person, you can change the way that the person is choosing their inaction, you're infringing on this autonomy, we have to recognize this, we have to say yes, indeed, our life, our life has been digitally extended and our Right‑to‑life should also be extended and that means next to my physical and mental integrity I also have a right to digital integrity.  By respecting this digital ‑‑ the whole integrity, also digital, this is how we keep the individual autonomous and free.  This is really where the example ‑‑ where the example of Cambridge analytics comes in, some people would say, yes, but the fact that this data was available on public Facebook, it is sometimes considered a public forum, it was not an infringement on pry serve and it was not always seen as this and it is actually still an infringement on your personal integrity which which actually created a distortion in your own autonomy.
What are the consequences of taking such an important step.
The first consequences, it is that we can actually define what are ‑‑ what is personal data and until recently, even still today, there is very little definition of personal data, it is in the sense of how do you categorize them.  Some say it is a commodity that we saw on the market side and in the U.S., Silicon Valley dogma with say this, it is a pure commodity, we can just make what we want with it and sell it.
In Europe, in Europe and Africa mostly, the data protection of institutions, which are together and especially the French‑speaking data protection agencies, authorities which are together in an association, they have made the declaration in 2018 saying that personal data are elements of the human person, actually that means that they are exactly treated the same way as body parts and because they're part of the person, they have inalienable rights that are attached to them and they cannot be sold.  That's the critical thing.  As soon as you consider that data is part of yourself, then the data cannot be sold, it can be transferred in certain conditions, there can be exchanges of data, but the relationship you have, it is based on the data, and then it is based on informed consent, that's the krill critical thing, you can't take data because it is available, a commodity, but it is part of the common good and you just take it, and there has to be an informed consent to actually provide this data.
We can argue, for example, that harvesting data by nature is something which is infringing the ‑‑ it is harming the digital integrity of the person.  Another point, data is not something that which should be acceptable.
One other consequence of this, it is that there is a dogma in Europe and in most of the places where they consider that data is a commodity or if you want to have a responsible approach where they say, well, if you want to protect yourself, you can, you just have to claim ‑‑ you are the one that is supposed to defend yourself and know where your data is.  That's a very bad assumption.  It is assuming that you know exactly where all of your data is.  You can hear it in discussion when people are saying, oh, but if you don't want to have problems about privacy, rights, don't publish on Facebook.  That's a very common thing.  It is not because I'm not publishing on Facebook that actually Facebook doesn't have data, that's two different things.  People have no conscience of how much data is actually harvested and stored everywhere.  The rights that we have on our data should take into consideration that it is impossible for someone to know where the data is so we need to have a blanket protection, not a protection that can only apply when we discover where the data is and then you tie that to the specific institution.
No law should assume that we know where our data is.  Actually in reality, no law assumes that we understand where are our body parts, we're protected even if someone is in a coma and has no mental ‑‑ has no mental capacity to understand where it's body is, the bad of the person is still protected by law.  You're not allowed to chop it off in the hospital, for example.
I'm taking very blunt examples, but that allows us to understand sometimes.
Sometimes people will say okay, how does it go with GDPR, GDPR, it is a standard in the world right now.  Would it go with it?  Basically, I would say that most of it would go with it.  The right to digital integrity, it is a fundamental Human Rights.  It is at high‑level within the Right‑to‑life.  GDPR is a law that applies in detail how data can be treated and what is allowed, what's not allowed.
That's the case.
In many way, we have a fundamental right, then we have specific laws that applies that.
A thing which allows the digital right, it allows us to to do, you start to go out of the simple fact of trying to protect the right to privacy and it is not just a right to privacy actually that we're protecting, it is the right of the life and the digital part, digital life of the human person.
The GDPR, it is not ‑‑ it is not incompatible, there is one part that's rather incompatible, it is the material scope of the GDPR and it is GDPR, it has a very broad exclusion Article for the states, not for private companies but the states, basically as soon as the state, as an institution can claim that there is a security reason behind, even for just perspective manner, even just talking about security, it is enough to exclude the application of GDPR.  That would be an infringement against the digital right ‑‑ the right for digital integrity because a law, any regulation cannot ‑‑ if you make the infringement on the right, it has to be much more precise, just a blanket exclusion like it is done here.
Why do we need it?  I think there's a few elements that we can say.  Basically, if we need the right to digital integrity, this applies into the relationship between a state who has added this in its own constitution and citizens.
It forces the states to have a discussion, to have the interaction with its own citizen when they're not harming their digital self.  For example, they have to be careful in how they manage databases, they shouldn't allow things like Cambridge to promote things, they shouldn't like the French, for example, are doing right now, the French government, they're allowing the tax department to go in social network, to analyze the data the person to see if tax wise they're doing good or not.
I think that goes ‑‑ these are the kinds of things that are infringing on the digital integrity.  In Switzerland, we have examples of ‑‑ we have laws that are touching on digital rights but deet bait, it is not being held.  We have had censorship tools like the maincensorship related to online gaming, online money gyming that was set in place.  While we assume that we can say, yes, it is reasonable to protect the industry, to block external companies ‑‑ external countries to compete with regulated casino business, that's maybe a reason, the debate did not touch on the base that it could be infringement on digital rights, a censorship rule that was set up in Switzerland.  That allows the discussion we didn't have before.  When you have it on the state level, the state and the citizen, it forces the state to impose this to the rest of society, think about the digital Right‑to‑life, the state will say, okay, we're not allowing death penalty, but then it also make as sure that there is a criminal code to avoid murder because a murder is not between the individual and the government, but just the individual, the two individuals, it is not in the interest of society to allow the murder.  The same way, the state is respecting digital integrity and then it must put in place laws where individuals between themselves are also respecting their own digital integrity.
I really see that the right to digital integrity, we said it in the introduction, it could be a general justification to the right to data protection but it is actually a bit higher.  The right to digital integrity, it is really about protecting the autonomy of the person and the right to data protection, it is actually how we're going to in practical implement that.  Yeah.  This is the link to the autonomy, to the digital self‑determination that we're looking for.
One of the boss possible implication, I'm working on two, these are the ones that I would point to.  The first one, the charter of fundamental Rights of the European Union in Article 3CNIL3‑1, everyone has right to their physical and digital integrity.  We have a similar Article in the Swiss constitution, every person has a right to physical liberty and to the physical and mental integrity and to freedom of movement and even the personal liberty and freedom of movements, they're rights that arelinged to the autonomy and the capacity as a person to be a part of, to be a citizen who can vote in a free, and good way.
What I'm aiming at, it is adding the digital part here.  Everyone has a right to respect who is in their digital, physical, mental integrity.  We have three current implementations that are ongoing.  Luckily in Switzerland we have a system that's a federal system and as each federal state, each local state, they have their own constitutions and there are Constitutional processes and there is three places that the work has started, the Canton of Valais, they're creating a new constitution, they have an assembly working on renewing completely their own constitutions and there is one Committee which is specialized in the fundamental rights that has accepted the proposal and has unanimously approved and it will be presented during the whole assembly and hopefully be voted in the next ‑‑ by the people of that state.
In Geneva, they had started a local initiative, a political party had started an initiative to make a referendum, a public referendum because of COVID they changed the strategy and now they're making a law to change a fundamental law in Geneva.
In N euc hatel, the work, it is just starting right now in the political sphere.  These countries are pretty small, open to these kinds of ideas and we're pushing that.
In each of the places, there is a constitution with the same Article that we showed you before, the right to physical and mental integrity are showing in those constitutions so we can actually update easily the constitution.
I'll leave it here.  That was the main presentation of this theme.  I leave it to Gregory.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: Thank you.
You can stop sharing now.  We're going to go over to Alexander Isavnin from the technical community and will speak about the technical aspect, about this and then we'll open the floor and promote everybody to panelist and we'll ask those questions in person.  We have some questions in the Q&A and we'll answer that later.  Thank you.
>> ALEXANDER ISAVNIN: Gregory, thank you very much.
I want to augment Alexis a bit, from 2013, in 2013 there was a chance to be away from the keyboards, and now with modern smartphone, smart watches, digital assistance, you are always at the keyboard, it is really, really difficult to get out of it.
I want to remind you about a little joke, about a person new to internet, okay, I downloaded the file from the internet, how to plod it back, internet put us into a State of if uploaded something to the internet you can download it back, you can have it forever, even these legislations of data removal, rights to be forgotten, it will not work.  If it gets to the internet, it is usually there forever.
I wanted to originally tell you about digital integrity and personal data, it is a common rule and, yes, in Russian Federation, our government tries to declare our personal data belongs of the state and our personal data regulation is written the same way.  In parallel, they always tried to propose a legislation that will allow the government to sell it to corporations.  Luckily for U such legislation cannot pass yet but such combination of eastern common good approach of personal data, of persons' digital footprint, complained with Western U.S. and everything is good, it leads us to really bad results.  As an example, COVID‑19, when personal data of Russians are used as common good for for COVID or something like protecting from the movement, for example, children, senior persons, they have to state at who use as digital footprint and it is free usage of public transport so the part of the ‑‑ it is the digital, it has been used to restrict rights.
I don't feel it is a major problem yet.  As a problem, there is a serious part of our integrity, it belongs not to just us but to our corporations.  I'm old enough, I lived in the pre‑internet era, when I look at my childhood, data, it is just boy scout badges, nothing more exists from me from that time.  Nowadays, we use services held by corporations as a part of our digital life.  For example, I think we all use some email providers, somebody uses gmail, others use local mails and the serious part of our life are actually linked to this digital aspect of our life because this interaction, it is interaction between us and corporation, it is usually not considered at part of rights which need to be protected by the government.  Imagine if suddenly you loose access to all of your email, how difficult it would be, you would need to recreate a lot of not just creating a new mail account, you have to recreate a lot of links and relations that are set up in your digital era.  You need to recreate your internet governance also.  That's really, really difficult.
Talking in‑kind legislation, for example, I'm not sure that Google will do it, or they can suspend your account instantly or if you publish your photos and consider Facebook not just for communication but as your diary, you put up photos and achievements of your children, your travel reports, and suddenly Facebook can invoke user rights if they decided that you do not belong or justify false claiming against you.  I think a regulated protection of data ownership needs to be set up in laws.
Google, one of the few corporations from the times when they declared the corporation of good, it was download all your data, that's reasonable, I'm not sure that's ‑‑ that Facebook allows that, others do, somebody else.
In addition, or in discussion with Alexis, it is part of our digital intelligence that needs to be just not protected versus government, but also versus those digital services that were not existing in the times of creation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights or setting up legislation as it exists now.  We need something in addition to governing data, not just governing, but distribution of our data, but big corporations and also our right of power and ownership of the data.  Again, with Facebook, remember, folks have the service agreement, it declares everything that's published on Facebook, it is the property of Facebook itself.  It is really dangerous, if we talk about Human Rights.
Back to you, Gregory.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: Thank you.
We had additional panelist that was preparing for the session, Jesselyn Radack, who is apparently not here I think due to technical problems.  But Bailey Lamon had prepared the session with her and had taken notes and can takeover delivering some insights from her point of view.
Bailey.
>> BAILEY LAMON: Hello, everyone.  My name is Bailey Lamon.  I'm a long‑time activist and a Pirate, I'm the Chair of Pirate Parties International.  You're not actually to be hearing from me so much on this topic today as Gregory said, Jesselyn Radack, going to be our panelist and unfortunately last minute she was not able to attend.
It is unfortunate, Jesselyn Radack, if you don't know who she is, she is from the U.S., a whistleblower attorney and she has spent her entire career, she's a whistleblower herself actually and she spent her entire career working on supporting whistleblowers, defending whistleblower, including Thomas drake, Edward Snowden is also a client of hers so she would have given you a perspective on all of this as a lawyer, as somebody who actually deals with these issues in a legal sense every single day.
Apology, because I myself am not a lawyer.  I'm an activist like I said.
I'm coming at you with this from more of an activist perspective and I can start with kind of touching on Jess' work and how it relates to all of this.  When we think about digital integrity, this is something that for years has been part of the discourse when talking about whistleblowers and the transparency movement and the fight for transparency and defending those who bring us the truth.  Sometimes that involves breaking the laws that are in place, but the information that comes forward is ‑‑ I mean, I can't think of a time when it wasn't in the public interest.  Right.
Directly related to issues of Human Rights.
If we look at wikileaks for example, with their releases, we can look at the Afghan war diary, the Iraq war logs that revealed the collateral murder video which revealed Human Rights abuses from the part of the U.S. government or military that none of us would know about if Chelsea man hadding not sent that information to whichky leaks and it was released to the public.
So that's ‑‑ you know, that's one thing that comes with the digital age and with the internet, it is this ability to freely share information, and in some cases, information that we really need to know about.  We wouldn't have access to it if it was just revealed to us outside of government, outside of the institutions, legal institutions, outside of the legal system.  
Another thing on top of that with the digital age, we see grassroots social movements around the world being strengthened by this ability to freely share information and to connect with people around the world, activists able to get their message out there and we can look at the Arab Spring, we can look at occupy, Black Lives Matter today, save your internet, we see just like the capabilities that come with online organizing and having a free, open internet where people can come together and work on common causes and common goals.  
Human Rights, digital rights, when these things come up in conversation I notice that they tend to get talked about as if they're separate things.  It's like we're looking for ways to connect them but the truth of the matter is that they're already inherently connected.  You can't in this day and age, you simply cannot have one without the other.  You don't have Human Rights or at least full Human Rights if your digital rights are not in place.  Your digital rights, those are part of the basic Human Rights nowadays.  That's one thing, I feel we need to stop separating these things and we need to start talking about them as if they're the same thing because they are.  They're inherently connected. 
We live in a time where just like the overall system that we live in, obviously, you know, we come from different parts of the world, it may look different, a little different depending where you are from, but I think most of us understand that the over recall system, society, the political system, it is becoming more and more driven by inequality.
At the same time, we see the digital world becoming more in a lot of ways unequal in its governments and at the same time, social issues kind of get brought into the digital sphere.  We have a small percentage of the ruling class owning most of the world's wealth and resources and at the same time, we have tech giants like Google and Facebook which are actually very small portions of the internet itself.  That's the thing that a lot of people don't realize either.  The social media aspect, the big tech giants, the websites, the majority of people are using nowadays, that's not the internet.  Facebook is not the internet.  The interrupt is a very big place.  These big‑tech owned website, the social media giants that we use all the time, they're tip of the iceberg when we think about the whole internet.  Just like we have a small portion of the rich owning so much of the world's wealth and resources we have these big companies, small portions that take up small portions of the internet owning more and more of our personal data and trying to control more and more of our internet.
You see that play out, you see how it benefits powerful people and institutions in lots of different ways.  For example, if you're on these websites, you see posts, discussions about certain topics censored on the websites.  You seepages of activists and activist groups being taken down and you see people getting censored if they criticize political figures or if they criticize political decisions.  Information on Human Rights violations by let's say law enforcement will get censored, domains locked so that you can't even share links on these websites.  Just, you know, prohibiting the sharing of documents that contain information that these companies, the people behind them don't want you to have access to, sometimes at the request of law enforcement directly.
We have an issue of big tech deciding what information is legit and what isn't?  Right.  Big tech, it encompasses a lot, who actually makes the decisions, right?  It is a few people sitting at a board room table.  Those of us that are trying to share information, well, you know, that's just ‑‑ that's what we're doing, right?  We're being treated as if the information we're trying to share often in the public interest, you know, isn't legit and these companies just have that control.
At the same time, they collect so much information about us, you know, our name, our mail addresses, our social media connections and a lot of cases, like our home addresses, and very personal information about where we live, what we do, it gets collected by these companies.  What websites we visit, which tells them so much about us as individuals, including things that maybe we consider very personal.  Right.  In some cases, secret to us.
Big tech knows about it.  That information is shared across the board.  That completely contradicts with our digital rights, it takes away our digital integrity and a violation of our Human Rights, right to privacy.  We know intelligence agencies and law enforcement uses big tech to spy on us.  If you're involved in Human Rights work, grassroots social movements in anyway, you know that the police and the spy agencies are probably monitoring your Facebook page, Twitter account, any online accounts that you have they're problem hi ‑‑ not even probably, they're watching what you're doing, saying making a profile on you.  It contradicts so much when we look at our basic Human Rights, what they are, our rights to assembly, our rights to protest, our rights to free speech, this results in self‑censorship and what Human Rights do you actually have if you can't even speak your mind because you're afraid of what might happen to you if you speak your mind.  Human Rights Watch, I've good quote from them just about how, you know, on one hand technology and the digital age can be very liberating, at the same time can be oppressive to us so digital technology transformed the means through which Human Rights are both exercised and violated around the globe.  The internet has become an indispensable tool for the realization of a range of Human Rights and for accelerating economic development, yet every day, there are new examples of how digital technologies play a role in undermining Human Rights whether through a Prime Minister banning Twitter in Turkey, a death sentence for posting on Facebook in Iran, bulk electronic surveillance of American citizens by the NSA, a court ruling on the right to be forgotten and Google searches in Europe or a requirement that internet users supply real names to service providers in China.  This duel‑edged aspect of technology was conveyed well by a tibiten Human Rights activist to citizen lab in Toronto, technology is this funny thing where it is a lifeline and then maybe it is your ticket to jail.
As much as we ‑‑ I think a lot of us here probably agree, we love the internet, we love technology, we think that the digital age is the same thing at the same time we're dealing with some serious issues with that, political and legal systems everywhere are still trying to catch up with this new age of technology and its implications of human beings.
I think Alexander touched on it briefly, no matter where you live, you have a constitution that is supposed to guarantee your basic Human Rights.  These constitutions I think this most, if not all cases were written before the digital age.  They're outdated in that sense and we're still figuring out how these rights that we're supposed to be guaranteed translate to the digital sphere and what needs to happen to uphold those rights.  You know, we talk about privacy, and that's a word that gets thrown around a lot as a Human Rights and it often as we see in lots of places doesn't actually get treated as a Human Rights.  The government will, you know, these companies, like Facebook, Google, whatnot, they'll say that they care about your privacy, but they're still collecting everything that they can about you.  They say they won't share your information, do anything harmful with it, and you want to believe that, to make yourself feel better about it, but then you see the personalized ads on Facebook that are directly related to your last Google search.  They say one thing but how is our privacy actually being protected.  That's something else.    That's a big thing here.  Privacy actually has to mean something.  It can't just be this word that gets thrown around by those who want us to believe that they're taking it seriously when in a lot of cases they're probably not.
We need to update our legal frameworks around this matter and ensure that digital rights and Human Rights are treated as one thing, not separate things.
You know, a lot of ways, our data is an extension of us.  We need to treat it like that.
I work in the social work field and, you know, at a woman's shelter and we deal with data all the time.  We have our online program, we take our case notes, we have our files on our clients, we take their privacy, their confidentiality very seriously.  They're allowed to have files destroyed at the end of their stay with us if they want to.
There is always that concern about the software company where, you know that made the program where we make our case notes and stuff, you know, so it is ‑‑ we can take all of the precautions that we want, we can do whatever we want on our end to try to ensure the privacy of our clients but there's another aspect there that whatever we do, they still have their own terms of service, they still have their own policies and stuff of how they're going to deal with that data.  How do we know that it is actually being taken care of.
I live in Canada.  The Canadian government, they have invested millions actually in digital literacy to help people understand the digital world a little better, how to engage with it safely, how to identify the risks that kind of come with using the internet.  This is an important thing.  Especially if you're new, right.  If you're new to it.  If you think about elderly folks who didn't grow up with the internet, you know, just starting to use it for the first time to keep in touch with their families, especially during COVID time, it is a theme.
You know, people really need to be taught what the risks are, how to protect your privacy the best that you can as an individual and what to be careful of, things like that n Canada, we actually, the government is actually investing quite a bit in that digital literacy for that reason.
The Canadian government is also working on a digital charter to protect privacy and there's some principles here, universal access, that's one.  So all Canadians have an equal opportunity to participate in the digital world and that's, you know, a big part of digital Human Rights, the Right‑to‑life, you know, we all have the right to exist and to participate in the world.  Well, we also need that right protected to participate in the digital world and to have the tools that we need to have proper access and, you know, proper literacy around it and stuff.  Safety and security, it is another thing.
Being able to trust the services that you use, that they're going to keep you safe and they're not going to misuse your data and violate you in the ways that we see happening and that we worry about happening.
Consent, another thing, control and consent.  Having control over what data you are sharing and whose using it, what are they using it for?  Knowing that your privacy is protected, at the same time, transparency is an important thing and making sure that the companies are being transparent about the practice with the data, making sure that we have access to it and that we're free to share or not share as much as we feel is appropriate.
Another thing, you know, with everything kind of moving online as opposed to offline now it is important that people can access the digital services that come from governments nowadays so a lot of the services for Canadians, that's online now.  A big part of ‑‑
>> GREGORY ENGELS: Excuse me, maybe finish the sentence, but then we have 20 minutes so, I would ‑‑ we have some excellent questions from attend why is and I would like to spend some time addressing those.  Finish the sentence and then we would like to move on a little.
>> BAILEY LAMON: I'll stop there.
I was just going through the Canadian digital charter and the principles of that, you can look that up pretty easily.  I apologize for talking too much!.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: No.  You're on time.  We have 20 minutes.  That was it.  That's good.  Just a little concerned, we have a lot of good questions.
>> BAILEY LAMON: Absolutely.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: If you open the Q&A panel, you see the questions coming in and we have been busy trying to answer them..
I would suggest that we promote everybody to panelist.  It will take some time probably.  If somebody could maybe help me.
There's a button to promote everybody.  Great.
There have been some very good remarks, one had said that there's been court sentences in the past that had barred using computer, digital tools and in light of the declining digital integrity, as part of the human life, sentencing to somebody to stay away from the internet, it is kind of like a sentence to digital death which is ‑‑ when these issues were issued in the United States, in the year 2000, they were held by the Supreme Court and in 2003 they already grewed that it was too far fetching.  Being able to ‑‑ it was already in 2003, they need to be on the internet, to find the job without it, it was already unthinkable back then but probably possible.  If you talk about today, I don't think the actual current sentences toes to sentence somebody to bar the internet, maybe in other countries, I'm not aware.
This is what's very interesting.
>> ALEXIS ROUSSEL: There are some cases that we have, they're more privately, and think of instead of a state, think of someone who has a profile which is very public on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and then suddenly it is cutoff by the social network because for some reason, it can be a good reason, a bad reason, but we had cases and it is anecdotal, of course, we saw this young lady who was having a million followers on Instagram and when she was cut from her profile she went on YouTube and made a video and she was crying.  She called, she said she called the police, that she has been ‑‑ that she‑been murdered digitally and she said that to the police, she was crying for help.  People were making fun of her.  The police couldn't do anything.  I think maybe the reaction, it was a bit much, maybe, but her reaction, you think it is natural and you see more and more and you will see it is not acceptable that people are cutoff and if they relate to their social network as really part of their life, being cut like this, it is like a murder.
That's the closest we have in the private sector.
>> That brings us to the importance of state protection power.  There was a question on whether we need to oppose Human Rights or upgrade it (Alexander Isavnin) I think either one or the other.  The only rights which is a new right that was ‑‑ which appeared after moving from supreme case, it was created, something material and now aday, we can share information much, much faster and it could be ‑‑ it could be a little expensive and still, there could be regulations coming from a print press times and actually as part of trying to work on changing the situation.
What do we need?  We need to force our states to look at the frameworks and methods of protecting the rights.  In many cases, our states prefer to take the position of hostage in a sense ignoring the digital concisest on digital acts of huge cooperation.  There was a lot of money spent on Facebook, to something like pressurized the parliamentarians to create a new legislation against them, it is already happening so, in this case, the United States government should pressurize the corporation and protect the Europeans and the European state members from their own corporations..
It was mentioned in questions, the privacy regulations, personal data regulations, the state security, they're extensions everywhere and that is extensions for the GDPR, extensions for the Russian ‑‑ of personal data regulation, and we really don't know what could help, even in fair Western countries like the United States, a program can appear for phishing where we create surveillance against their own citizens.
We need to increase our literacy and using this literacy to improve our control over what governments do.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: We have around 50 people here and we have 25 minutes left ‑‑ 23 minutes left.  We have plenty of time to take some questions and if not, somebody raising their hands, I'll just read out some of the Q&A.  They're actually very good. 
>> ALEXANDER ISAVNIN: We have had a great discussion in chat while no one was panelists and no ability to voice their thoughts.  Now don't be shy, please.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: Yes.
The connection and sale of the personal data, the model for many corporation, some have compensations for the removable of the income sources or in order to achieve the goals of digital Human Rights and it was answered something about that he will answer again and there is the remark, she hates to be so negative but the social media companies set their own rules and there is a difference in jurisdiction terms between legality and accessibility.
Definitely, it is not about making a social network, a ‑‑ nationalizing the social network, no, absolutely not.
It is I think important that the economy, the business, everyone who is making a business is doing this in a way which is respecting the individuals and respecting the autonomy of the free will of the person for engaging in the business relationship with them.
This is how our economy in general is made.  In the case of those service right now, they're based on acquiring data and processing data and pushing back the data in a way to change behavior without you noticing that you're changing your behavior and pushing you to buy something.
The amount, the impact on the autonomy, it is actually larger than what people expect, and if you talk to people who are on social network, most of them, they'll say that they're fine, they are still free and they decide what they want to do.  Cambridge analatica is a good example of this.  There is a disconnect between what most people think and the reality.
Also, we start to see tools appearing that allows or models, they allow to create the same services without this data part, which is unnecessary, serving a video stream, you don't have to have a full analysis of the person to be able to serve the data stream and before until now, there is the only model, it is the way to monetize and there is a different way to monetize.
I hope this answers the question.
Just to go a bit further, to some kind of analogy we can make, think about ‑‑ it is a bit harsh and I'll still do it, think about slavery, slavery was like you take people to work and you take possession of people to have the workforce, to do something else and here you take data, you use it as force to actually create revenues.
There is, for example, a model which exists and which is being researched in France and at University, I can put the link, if you're interested, where people, okay, because data is part of the person, well, we can maybe see that the relationship between the data, if the data, if it is working for a company, then maybe it is more like labor relationship than actually ownership relationship and then you have other types ‑‑ you can still pay for the price of labor without having a more respectful communication between the two.
>> ALEXANDER ISAVNIN: I can also answer that question.
Collecting and using personal data, by internet corporation, it is not the main source of profits.  They started to use personal data as ability to monopol say.
E markets and to get advantage over the services they don't connect to with personal data.  I don't believe that I'm saying this.  If this will be regulated out by the states, this corporation, it could be ‑‑ they just ‑‑ there will be search engines as founded and there are extra multibillion profits that goes I don't think for common good, they'll just decrease but nothing disappears.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: We're discussing here now that people do not see the Q&A content because since they have been promoted to panelists, they do not see the older Q&A questions which is strange.  I'm busy copying them back into the chat.
Go ahead, please.
>> ALEXANDER ISAVNIN: Yes.  An interesting question that's regulation of data protection may vary from countries, some countries may not have much awareness on this issue and the citizens where the data is leaked, shared, used by third parties, having rights obtained, how do we promote sound legal framework and implement it worldwide?  First of all, the internet governance forum is an excellent place for promoting ideas of such framework.  So we're exactly in place.
As members of local community, we should not just promote digital literacy but the knowledge of what you're doing and maybe make more studies.
For example, my personal ‑‑ the internet, it is on since 1996 I think, when I first time registered a domain name and database for public.  Now it is open and trying not share additional data and really caring for where I share my data.
In general, you see if you put your fingers into an electric plug on the wall that would be bad, I think additional education needs to be done from the child times on which data can be spread, how you can use internet for communications and that's a way that we should really promote by all of us. 
>> GREGORY ENGELS: Yes.  Thank you very much.
>> ALEXIS ROUSSEL: I would like to add, you talked about literacy and I think that's very actually very important, the digital literacy.  What I see, it is at least in Switzerland, the education right now, it is on digital, it is on digital education, I see with my own kids, it is made first by people who are not born with this, it is normal, adults are not always born, they don't have the digital literacy themselves, it as bit hard, it is something that takes time. 
Most of the digital literacy, the digital education right now has a purpose of knowing how ‑‑ the tools you're going to use in business, you know, knowing how to use Word, Excel, such tools.  It is not yet ‑‑ it has to be evolved to how to manage your tools for your life, how to manage your social network, how to manage interaction, how to manage cryptography, cryptography, it will be important in terms of signing, proving, contracts.  All of these elements of how to to live a digital life is not taught at school and that's critical.  It will take time, of course, these changes, they'll take time. 
>> AUDIENCE: I had a question, you mentioned that when it comes to data regulations, in Europe, France has some adoptions in terms of property law regulation and they are adopting the regulation to data regulation and there are ‑‑ there are so many issues on the patients, the data regulations, when you try to adapt property law into data regulations there can be a way to look at the localization because this time, when you try to adapt with the proper tools it can be a very core, nationalization of the data and actually it is another example of the data regulations, because when data localization, it is activated, it is impacting the science development and investments and any other kinds of science‑based initiatives.  I wondered what you really think about when you think about what laws should we adopt for the data regulation.
Thank you so much.
>> ALEXIS ROUSSEL: Thank you.  Thank you.
So there are many aspects, and it was also ‑‑ someone else, the question of other, it was also linked to that, there is several things.
First, the issue about using property law for personal data.  I think that I view it as a bad idea.  Some people, they see it as a way to define a value on data so that people can realize that personal data has value, but I think that this is more like going into the approach of value as a commodity and if you give a value and you put property rights, you can sell it, if you sell yourself to someone else, usually it always ends bad.
I wouldn't go into that direction.
The second thing you say, it is about a phenomenon we see as documentarization of the internet.  That happens in different aspects and it is not only permanent data, and personal data will push further sadly on this but we saw it with moral concept, I shared with someone, I shared a very old jurisprudence of law in the year 2000 I think, Yahoo, it was, between France and the U.S., there was a clash because everything ‑‑ the objects, they were nazi‑related in France was prohibited N the U.S., it was for free speech, for French people, the objects, they're available on the internet and the internet has no border.  So here we see a clash of jurisdiction and we saw this between Middle East and Europe and China and the U.S. and all of these clashes of jurisdictions and then with the approach on personal data that I described, we will see this internet growing further I think.  The approach of, like, protecting the personal data the way I hope is going to happen and very was limiting, personal data, we will see happening, what we have seen happening, it is that you will have states organizing data collection of other states, trying to understand how the whole individuals, the whole Society of Other states are happening and they're saying the U.S. is trying to listen to everyone, we just discovered that they were ‑‑ that the U.S. was asking Denmark to spy on the social networks in Holland and they were hording data.
All of this, it will indeed lead to reducing the digital footprint of an individual with such an approach and hopefully if we do this, we won't have to ‑‑ it is a real debate.  I see the fragmentation moving on. 
>> ALEXANDER ISAVNIN: In Q&A, you had a question, you directed it to bailey, Civil Society, other entities like academia and others work for some distance and equally sharing the digital materials and the data, it will be successful, first of all, it is successful because as we know from multistakeholder approach, which was actually not legalized or settled by the United States but just written as observation, so currently the internet is approached from academia, technical community Civil Societies and NGOs and as we started, we have achieved from a free‑press society, even in academia, you know that old style print pressing, publishers, they're trying to hide scientific research behind the corporates.  The situation is changing, so academia is fighting towards this part and as far as I remember, they were successful.
The same thing, the force against the Big Data evolution.  No, it is not.
Actually, if you're not doing it for us, well, keeping in mind, you could not cooperate during this forum, there will be an illusion.  As we see, after pressurizing on Facebook, very famous Cambridge analytic saying they're starting to work, they're just not one kind, but there was a company set up by Russian teenagers that were harnessing data from social network, including Facebook, and also selling it to the Russian government.  Facebook started measures which they had been expelled from the social network also.  We have to do something, otherwise it will be an illusion.  We should not be shy ongoing against this and governments in a legal and peaceful way.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: Yeah.  I just want to quickly ‑‑ so ‑‑ sorry, I use the word marketization rather ‑‑ I used both, fragmentation also, I'm sorry.
It is indeed a word that's been used from the beginning (Alexis Roussel) and for a long time and I'm trying to go away from this.
Thank you for pointing this out that we should go away from using that word which has a very strong meaning and when I was ‑‑ I lived with this situation very close to my heart.  Thank you for this.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: A short last one?
>> Thank you for your answer, Alexander Isavnin, Alexis Roussel.  Another different example, a new application called Upti, and actually the application, it allows to the end users to sell their individual data to social media companies and other entities.  It is an application, UBCI, in the United States, United Kingdom, elsewhere, I think that the education, it can be ‑‑ it can be often seen in the future but there's also an open door for the clashes against the national law regulations.  Some of the national law regulations will be selling the individual data and other countries cannot allow persons thousand handle their individual data.  It is a complicated issue as we all see from the start and thank you for encouraging us about not being so shy to the government and other strong entities and as I am a resident of Turkey, we have so many cases of censorships and actually I am actually afraid of any kind of targeting and we don't have very much space for free speech, but I hope that sometime in the future my people in the Middle East and Africa, in the southerner parts of the world, they can achieve some achievements for Human Rights, et cetera.  Et cetera.  Thank you very much for sounding me, for making this available to me.
>> GREGORY ENGELS: Thank you.
We have 2 minutes until the end.  You want to answer that ‑‑ I also have two things to say.  We'll go a little bit over time.
>> ALEXIS ROUSSEL: Two things:  First, I don't like the distinction, but definitely there is a gap between countries which have power in the industrial technical measure side and countries which don't.  I think if the countries which are weaker, let's say, in that sense, they're ‑‑ they have control on the personal ‑‑ they have the population that has control on the personal data, there is so much power in your own personal data that's now taken away by Facebook, Google, other institutions, that if you make sure that this stays closer to people, you get the most value locally, I think that's one thing.
The other thing, it is about the companies allowing you to sell data, I think this is a very hard debate for sure to happen.  While I don't want to see happen, it is that those companies are selling this to another third company which you don't know.  That should not be allowed.
Usually this is where you lose control.
Are you allowed to sell data to one specific company for a specific service?  This is a moral ‑‑ you ‑‑ this is an equal balance that will be found in each society and it will have different use, you know, within France and Switzerland already, we have different views on some specific laws. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-nri-future-of-jobswork-in-the-digital-age^^

>> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Hi, everyone. Allow me to express my gratitude to the different national regional IGF representatives as well as the organizers of this version of the IGF to moderate this session on the IGF 2020 NRI's Collaborative Session: Future of Jobs/Work in the Digital Age. 
    Among the distinguished members of this panel, the parents are already named here. We will just share some brief words to introduce the panel. 
    This is a topic of special importance in a moment when the pandemic has caused sanitary emergency decisions by governments such as lockdown periods, social distancing, and other related measures affecting national productivity, schooling, our daily and social life in general. 
    The crisis has accelerated the need for business, government, and people to continue their productivity adopting digital strategies. Not only on the offers of services and products by organization via web or eCommerce but also implementing digital platforms to enable remote work, demanding from employees, employers, and people in general the use of digital tools which require new digital skills. 
    A recent survey from McKenzie and company reveals findings about the rise in the demand of digital channels from clients from 36% by December 2019 to 80% in July. 
    Another finding related to our discussion is how please have adopted digital platforms 25 times faster than they ever thought by December 2019, producing migration to this platform 40 times faster before the pandemic. 
    In the experience of Dominican Republic, for instance, a study from Pew Research center analysis of 2019 data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that only 7% of workers in the United States had access to telecommuting. Those who were participating in those platforms were managers and highly paid salaries. 
    A report from Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research says that today 30% of the U.S. labor force is working from home. 
    In the Dominican Republic, for instance, a local story from the ICT committee of the Dominican Republic chapter of American Chamber showed a rise from 7 to 33% from small‑medium enterprise. Also, a reduction of physical work from 20 to 60% by last August. Findings show that 85% reported being satisfied by increase in productivity by 47%. 
    I would like to introduce now some of the policy questions that are based on our discussion panel, on our collaborative session. 
    First, I would like to introduce the question about how do environmental issues such as natural disasters, pandemics, affect the job market? 
    I would like to introduce from South Sudan IGF, Ms. Kennedy Bullen; from Panama IGF, Mr. Abdias Zambrano, to discuss on specific cases that have affected environmental issues in their countries. 
    Please join me to the discussion. 
    
   >> ANJA GENGO: He is about to connect. He's having some issues. Maybe you can move to Mattias ‑‑ 
   >> ABDIAS ZAMBRANO: Can you hear me? 
    Responding to your question, it just affects in many ways. I will speak about the pandemic because I think it's the main subject of every single ‑‑ of every single session here in the IGF this year. In Panama, during the pandemic, some 150,000 to 250,000 jobs were suspended according to media estimates. However, it's believed it could reach up to half a million workers. That is a huge amount here in Panama because we only have two or 3 million people in the workforce. 
    Because of this and massive job terminations, the demand for employment has increased but not the offer of employment opportunities, costing the workforce to dedicate itself to employment. The worst part of this situation, I think, being a young man, is by recent college graduates that don't have experience that many companies are looking for. This causes many people to offer their workforce for less income than legally established, creating unfair competition. 
    Now, it is important to note at the time of suffering from the pandemic, Panama had approved a teleworking or remote working law. However, but it had not published the regulations to apply that in March. 
    So in the beginning of the pandemic, working from home was unclear because we don't have the clear rules of the game to say so, and there were no clear rules. And even though with the regulation of this law, the application has not shifted in each company. It's led to higher Internet and electricity costs for families because not all companies have applied the law well that obligates companies to pay the Internet a little bit amount every single month and the electricity bill ‑‑ 
      (Audio interference) 
   >> ABDIAS ZAMBRANO: ‑‑ although, they are not situations caused by humans that are environmental situations ‑‑ sorry for the noise. Of the impact affects the short, medium, and long‑term. 
    Thank you. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you, Abdias, for sharing your thoughts about the situation. 
    I see, obviously, there are common issues here with the telecommuting or remote work that has affected everybody, especially the remote workers need to adopt the energy, the bill of the Internet, and the laws do not regulate that. It's important to mention that in the past, some digital platforms has arised, so these laws ‑‑ the need from regulator to improve the law is important because we have been accustomed to platforms such as Uber where people do have a job, but they are usually known as an (?) From their services or companies so it not always applies to the regulations on the local countries, but, in this subject, many of the companies that work traditionally providing services physically in their installations are now have adopted new platforms to do these digital remote work from people. 
    So they are not so accustomed. They only implement in the technology but not the policies related to that. 
    I think we have an experience from South Sudan, but ‑‑ Kennedy, please join us and share with us your experience in South Sudan about the environmental issues such as natural disaster, pandemics, affecting the jobs in your country. 
    Please? 
   >> ANJA GENGO: Kennedy, I see you're unmuted, but we cannot hear you. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Kennedy, are you available? 
    
    I'm sorry for this issue with Kennedy. It will be nice to hear from her, but let's move on with the next subject in order to value the moment we are on. Maybe she can join us in a moment ago. 
    Because we cannot hear you, Ms. Kennedy. I don't know if you're experiencing ‑‑ 
      (Overlapping speakers) 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: I was having some issues there. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Please, Mr. Kennedy. 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: This is Kennedy Bullen representing South Sudan. 
    From the day when we're preparing because of the pandemic. 
    I have a point that I have prepared, per se, like in our conversation with ‑‑ 
      (Audio interference) 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: ‑‑ if I talk in terms of (?) And also how do environmental issues such as much (?) Affected the job market. A unique contribution from this presentation is to shed light on the differential effect across the countries and regions around the world and more especially in Africa and particularly in Africa. It's not different, but what we know is we have a couple of challenges that actually affect our environment. 
    Like right now, we're on a digital age that completely depends on the technology that ‑‑ 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Sorry, Mr. Kennedy. I lost you. 
    Okay. There is some instability on your communication ‑‑ on your audio. 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: Okay. Am I clear now? 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Yes. 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: On the wide range of international expert, contributors to (?) And examine a range of challenges arising from the transformation of work in the digital age. You know n South Sudan, when we look at the digital age, it's a little bit complex. As, for instance, you know, as the pandemic came in by March, you know, everything was shut down. 
    We tried to encourage the digital ways of communication, but most of the country were not accessible. There was not access to communication simply because of lack of knowledge of the ways we can hear them and (?) However, as we're discussing the effect of labor destruction (?) Pandemic, raises level of wealth inequality, low social mobility and increase of (?) We need strongly to consider how to unlock the vast potential and the implications of policies of innovation at the different levels (?). 
    So as today, our contribution here and share across the range of industrial countries and share our output with developmental ‑‑ 
      (Audio interference) 
      (Poor audio quality) 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: So as some of you might notice about the history of South Sudan, it's independent, and, later on, technology is something that newly introduces the (?) And many people don't know the value of technology, but, of course, you look at it at this perspective that we need to unlock and train and teach them the value of technology. 
    Our contribution, as I can say here ‑‑ 
      (Audio interference) 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: They're developing because of the technology. It's also upon the commission of ‑‑ the ongoing policies about the future of work in the modern economy and, also, its regard the opportunity and (?) Economic and social challenges in our time. 
    So what I'm trying to put here is, South Sudan is completely down in terms of (?) And if we need to put up like a South Sudan IGF to enhance this digital (?) For people in the community to understand and see how beneficial that they can get and make it a viable tool to develop. We need to cascade our work policy (?) So we can enjoy this technology that they're talking about in the digital age. Like a natural disaster, around the world, you hear (?) Like in our countries where people have been displaced, what do we do as we discuss the technology? What is the solution? 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Sorry, Kennedy. We will have a special timing for you to share a recommendation. 
    Please let me continue the issues. Thanks for sharing your initial thoughts about the situation in South Sudan, and we have ‑‑ I have to remind you all that we have three minutes to speak about the different issues so we can have the timing for complete all the prospective questions. 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: Okay. You're most welcome. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: The next subject is about to try to answer about employers and employees. Do they have the conditions and skills to adjust to this new circumstances caused by emergency? What are the existing good practices? 
    We would like to ask the representative from Colombia IGF and Italy and Cameroon to share with us these experiences and how do they see the good practices. 
    Please, three minutes each, share with us your thoughts. Let's begin with Julio Cesar Gaitan Bohorquez with Colombia IGF. 
    We can't hear you, please. 
   >> JULIUS CESAR GAITAN BOHORQUEZ: Sorry. Thank you, Osvaldo. 
    I'm pleased to represent the (?) Forum at IGF. (?) Right to this connection is an issue that became (?) In Colombia within the framework of the policy of the quarantine. During this preventative isolation, we saw the growth (?) ‑‑ the law of disconnection from the work was introduced to change the norms that regulate the telework in Colombia. 
    This draft law states that the employer does not (?) The limits that should exist between the working day and the periods, licenses permits or holidays nor those of the personal the family privacy of the work of a family servant. 
    The rights of related rights such as privacy, work‑personal life balance and work itself. 
    In the Colombia context, characterized by a low rate of union membership and environment of labor instability, structure and the freedom of (?) Is as important as we must acknowledge that it is very difficult for workers to exercise the right to oppose like linked to the contract. 
    Secondly, another challenge derives from the working space and times in the distant work models. In Colombia, the public agency in charge of the public service provided a concept on the obligation of public servants to belong to the groups of the WhatsApp as a part of their workers' responsibilities while the lockdown is taking place. 
    The concept maintains that the workers cannot oppose to be included in the WhatsApp group if this is the channel chosen to be connected to the office within working hours. However, this concept is against the previous judicial decisions that in the grounds of privacy protection, consider it the message sent via WhatsApp groups is a semiprivate nature and is therefore established that the worker must agree to be part of the WhatsApp group in the work environment. 
    Without this, it is (?) To impose to the workers their inclusion in the WhatsApp group in which their personal information will circulate to third parties. 
    The discussion is still open.    
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you, Doctor, for sharing with us your Colombia experience about these opportunities with the regulations that may create a good environment for the people that are working or remote working. 
    Let's invite Mr. Mattia Fantinati, member of the Italian Parliament to share with us their experiences there in Italy. 
    Please. 
   >> MATTIA FANTINATI: Hi, everybody. 
    Ciao, Osvaldo. 
    Thank you, everybody.
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Ciao. 
   >> MATTIA FANTINATI: In Italy, it's one of the first countries were the virus, COVID, was spread. It changed our way of work maybe forever. Without Internet, the country could not survive. 
    We built a platform to meet the offer among the young people and business initiative. So in activating this digital platforms, we share the (?) This is sort of a partnership between private and public institution. It was presented during IGF Italy 2009 organized by one of the companies. (?) Is here. I would like to thank her for that job. 
    During the 2019, during the pandemic, we have a significant lack of company for respirators. So the company created using the 3‑D printer using an Open Source method with logic, of course, and it creates a universal production of longer respirators for breathe. This was very important and saved a lot of lives. 
    Let me focus on one concept very, very quickly, just to conclude because remember, I'm in Parliament. I'm a politician. Many people demand of me the future of jobs. What will happen after the COVID crisis? We don't know. We don't know yet about the future. 
    In the U.S., one primary school out of three will do a job that we don't know yet. It needs to be admitted that most of our job will be replaced by the robots. Of course, it's true, but it's also true that in some kind of countries like South Korea, the number of robots is increasing as well as the number of new employed people is increasing. So don't be afraid about disruptive revolution of technology. 
    What are the priorities of Italy, and I'm going to conclude. 
    Prepare as a whole means helping all the citizens to develop basic digital skill as well as the skills that are complimentary, management skills, critical thinking that cannot be replaced by any robots. 
    Second, we need to focus on the effort to have the workers in jobs which are likely to be most transformative. We don't have to protect the jobs. We have to protect people. So it means we have to create a sort of protection, new legislation, new laws. 
    Third, and finally, we have to train more and more specialists in a new technology, in a new ICT, in artificial intelligence, in machine learning. So we have to attract as many talents as we can. 
    That's it. Thank you very much. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you, Mr. Mattias for sharing with us your experience in Italy. It looks very innovative using open source 3‑D printing. 
    Now let's invite Mr. Eric Stephane to share with us from Cameroon IGF his experiences with the issues related to the best practices affecting his country. 
    Please, Mr. Stephane. 
   >> ERIC STEPHANE: Thank you for the opportunity to share Cameroon practice. I want Cameroon IGF. 
    What I can say about the pandemic and the global pandemic affecting the world, especially in Cameroon, what I will say is it's a blessing in disguise. It's a blessing in disguise because we're developing countries, and we are lagging behind, but this is an opportunity for us to embrace the digital revolution. It's a means to improve the lives of the country and to improve the economy. 
    What we have been doing in Cameroon, first of all, I need to say that the young people, the public, in general, in Cameroon, the job environment is mostly informal. People were already using digital means (?). They were using social networks to do their daily activates. 
    So with the current pandemic, the Cameroon government, in order to promote social distancing, they instructed more people, almost everyone, to use remote conferences for meetings and electronic machines as much as possible. So that's why I'm saying it has been a blessing in disguise because, before the%, we were spending money to travel to go from one city to another just for a meeting of one hour or two hours. Everybody can be done using Zoom or using Microsoft Teams. 
    The other thing is we have some governmental agencies like (?) Which developed their own remote conference tool for the government and all the other administrations to use. 
    The other thing is, as I said before, the young people in Cameroon are very innovative. They know about the technology. They know the knowledge. Thanks to the Internet, the knowledge is very accessible to everyone. So we have young people here developing innovative solutions, promoting local content, and it's very good for the country because we have a very robust backbone structure. We're connected to four international submarine cables. So we have the data capacity in Cameroon. 
    Also, we have a very vibrant youth developing innovative services. 
    But the first setback is financing. Those young people, those young entrepreneurs, it's very difficult to get access to funding. So here in Cameroon, we need to look on ways to better help those young entrepreneurs because they're the ones creating the jobs. 
    We cannot just rely on the government to create jobs. We have to promote entrepreneurship improve our financing practices. 
    The other thing is we have an Internet Society in Cameroon. I think in two weeks or so, they have a meeting to promote the Internet usage to the public, to tell people ‑‑ all people, business owners, everyday people, how to use social services, how to use Zoom, how to use Microsoft Teams, but what I can say is everybody is already using technology such as WhatsApp. WhatsApp is very, very popular in Cameroon, even in rule regions. 
    What I can say at the end is the global pandemic, of course, it's a catastrophe on the human side. It's an opportunity for our government, or our leaders. We need to look at this digital revolution because that's the only thing that can push us forward. 
    Thank you. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you, Mr. Stephane, for sharing with us the experience in Cameroon. It seems they have innovation in their blood, and they have found ways to thrive in this moment when so much needs to be done for continued production. 
    Now I would like to open a discussion with a new subject. It's about the vulnerable groups and how to not leave them behind. This is a moment where we talk about the divides on gender. We talk about different barriers for groups to access and to work and use these tools. 
    Please join me to answer these questions, from Nigeria IGF, Ms. Onwuamaegbu‑Ugwu Edufun. She will share her thoughts about this issue. 
    Please? 
   >> ONWUAMAEGBU‑UGWU EDUFUN: Hello. Can everyone hear me? 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Hello. Yes, we can hear you. 
   >> ONWUAMAEGBU‑UGWU EDUFUN: Okay. Good evening from Nigeria. My name is Onwuamaegbu‑Ugwu Edufun. It's good to meet you all. I am very pleased to represent the Nigerian Internet Society. 
    Thank you to the panelists that we've heard from so far. 
    I work on the privileged committee and I'm from the private sector, and I collaborate with the public sector to do my work, so I have a little bit of experience with both private sector and public sector. 
    During the pandemic, we were very, very, very affected, the vulnerable communities, because nothing was happening, absolutely. Everybody was confused as to what to do because ‑‑ I'm being asked to share my video, so I'm going to ask to upload this because I just had a baby two days ago, and I am still in the hospital, but I have to do this program. Please bear with me. I cannot share my video because I'm not in a very good environment. 
    Thank you for understanding. 
    So when the pandemic struck us, we were confused of what to do because the people in the rural environment had no idea of what to do. Either they don't have Internet or they don't have the material. They don't have a phone. They don't have laptops or computers to use. 
    And when I also worked with the open communities, they moved very quickly, and the parents were able to provide Internet. The youth were able to move on and pivot to other things. 
    Then I started advocating for the rural communities. What do we do to get those people on board, even after the pandemic? Because it seems that they will still be maybe 50 days behind. So what can happen? 
    We got Internet and laptops and other gadgets to rural communities for work, and we find out that there are a lot of things to be done. I mean, there are people that are totally out of work that cannot be able to reach to where we expect to be in the future. When you talk about the future of work, there are, they may not see the future of work. 
    Can you hear me? 
    So the vulnerable communities ‑‑ 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: It's unstable. 
   >> ONWUAMAEGBU‑UGWU EDUFUN: Is it better now? 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Yes. Yes. 
   >> ONWUAMAEGBU‑UGWU EDUFUN: Okay. So the vulnerable communities, the rural communities, we are left out, and they know, the governments know, but they started working on ‑‑ when we started advocating, they said that, you know, becoming faster with the work of laying Internet fibers, trying to get some access to these places, but there's a lot of work to be done. 
    So in the world we are today, we have two worlds. We have the world of the known and the unknown, and the unknown are those in the rural communities who have no idea what we say about the future of work. We are just existing. And there is so much work to be done to reach out to those intelligent, smart children, the youth, out there. 
    And then the world of the known, the people that are privileged enough to know what is happening. We are also able to work with them from our organization. As little as seven or eight years, we have started teaching robotics. We have started teaching artificial intelligence. And we have made a way for students to let them know what the future of work is and to get prepared right now because preparing for the future of work is not in the future. It is now. 
    If you're not prepared now, you cannot be able to get to the future. So getting them prepared now is the priority because we don't want to be cut off in the next 10 to 20 years. 
    However, on the other flip side, we work with other organizations like the U.S. Embassy that promotes and sponsors some of our programs to the rural community where we give them access to laptops and Internet and introduce even basic computer skills, not only the digital skills, but basic skills. The youth, we help them with entrepreneurships and entrepreneurial skills. We help them think about the solutions to the common problems in their environment. They come with up ideas, and they come up with how to solve their problem. 
    So we're on track to see that the vulnerable communities are remembered, and we give them access to resources, STEM resources, that can help them for the future. 
    Then on the other side, in the other area, we're also helping to promote the skills for the future, and we hope that, you know, in the future they will be able to balance true networking, true advocacy so that people in the vulnerable communities are not really left out. Because from our work, we have discovered that there are so many talents buried, so many talents are buried in the rural community because they don't have access. 
    We have proven that by taking some (?) To Silicon Valley ‑‑ two years ago, they attended a competition, and they won a gold medal from there. So from the village to Silicon Valley. It's not only Nigeria. If the world would look at giving access to children in vulnerable communities, giving them access to resources, we will have a huge difference in the world. It's not just in Nigeria. It's all over the place. There are so many disenfranchised children and youth. Yes, we're looking for youth to take over the next thing happening in the world, and we are not giving the world we have access. 
    So we're looking for work to break those barriers more and more, and I am happy that I had the opportunity to let you know what is happening here in our environment and the vulnerable communities. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you ‑‑ could you repeat your name? 
   >> ONWUAMAEGBU‑UGWU EDUFUN: It's okay. You can use Onwuamaegbu‑Ugwu Edufun.
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: We have to move on with Mr. Sindy Obed from Haiti who will share with us the experience in the country. 
    Mr. Sindy, could you join us? 
   >> SINDY OBED: Thank you. Thank you. Hello, everyone. Thank you for the question. I hope my English will be acceptable. I am a French‑speaking person. 
    I want to start by speaking about the situation. The person of Asian population, if they leave the poverty life, this gives an idea of the majority of the population is suffering and vulnerable. So unemployment is at 40%. We're still suffering the damage of the (?) 10 years ago, which caused damage estimated at more than seven (?). We have men, we have young people, we have people living in rural areas, and people we do seek mobility. So there are groups of people that are vulnerable to poverty, vulnerable to digital economy, vulnerable for (?) There are initiatives ‑‑ 
      (Audio interference) 
   >> Sindy Obed: We need vulnerable people to be in all political decisions, and they must be included in all debates. We have tran Asian women (?) Popular norms that exclude women. There are mentorship programming with women's organization that align women and promote their inclusion, so it's to step up and say what position they want in society. 
    (?) Job opportunities can provide life to the young people who make up the bulk of the Asian population. So the majority ‑‑ the majority of Asian population is young. 
    Social networks are used to create (?) Income, and some there is an initiative named IT Goes Global. It's a project to equip people with technical skills to help them get out of poverty. 
    For people in rural areas, they need the availability of jobs and (?) That will not require them to move to urban areas. There are projects, but they are far from sufficient to include the population. 
    It is up to each group of people to claim their place in Asian society, and this must be the inclusion of all citizens, skills, materials, access to Internet. It is necessary for all, and it is good news to learn that the (?) $60 million grant project for connectivity to access (?). So we want to seek (?) For development of the country. So we want to see all the people to enter to the digit economy. 
    Thank you so much, Mr. Osvaldo. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you for sharing with us. 
    We are almost out of time, so we would like you to share with us in a minute your concluding remarks, your recommendations in your actual state, to the policymakers to connective and align new opportunities to create conditions and a good environment for these challenges that you have mentioned. 
    So let's begin Mr. Sindy Obed. Share with us, in a minute, his recommendations in order to align these issues we just discussed. 
    Please? 
   >> Sindy Obed: Yes. We want to ‑‑ we must have more women in all sectors. We want to include ‑‑ we must include all voices in debates. If we need voice in public forms. We have, for example, some projects like smart ‑‑ we developed the training models on mobile money (?) In the town of Kabawi (phonetic) (?) To improve their living conditions. I think we can do something like that. We need skills. We need the infrastructure. We need the actions between all stakeholders. 
    That's all I can say for now. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you, Obed, for sharing with us. 
    Now, with Nigeria IGF, Ms. Edufun, please? 
   >> ONWUAMAEGBU‑UGWU EDUFUN: I think I should say (?). Edufun is a business name. We have been working with a lot of policymakers to improve the inaccuracies in the curriculum. It's working, actually. 
    For the private sectors, we've been able to encourage lots of schools to assess some programs in their schools, like the robotics and the AI we're teaching. Like we say, we don't know what the future is. We have a glimpse, but, yeah, we need to be ready and prepared. And this is what we are doing. 
    On the other hand, we pay very close attention to the (?) And not taking that very lightly. We take it seriously, so the girl (?) We take care of them and make sure the governments also look into that. The government is also complying by providing some access to so the (?) Gets the adequate STEM education that is needed for them to thrive. 
    So we hope to see the future where things get better and better for us, and we hope that (?) Continues over that time for us to share our ideas. 
    Thank you. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you for sharing with us your thoughts. 
    From Italy, I would like to invite Mattias to share with us his commitment required for surpassing ‑‑ or for creating the conditions and environment for the future of work. 
   >> MATTIA FANTINATI: I will give you numbers. Numbers are important. Nine out of 10 jobs will need digital skills. In Europe, at the moment, 44% of the population between 16 and 17, doesn't have them. There will be 1.6 million job vacancies in 2025. Digital skill. Everybody, the contract for the web, three important commitments. Rights and duties. Government. Government has rights and duties regarding privacy. Companies, rights and duties, because Internet is not for the government. You cannot just blame the government, because the Internet is everybody's thing. 
    Governments, companies, making the Internet accessible, respecting privacy, making technology that improves life for the companies and the citizens. Creators and collaborators, we have to fight for the Web. You can do this in a multistakeholder platform, like IGF. 
    Italy will be one of the first in the world that will have, in a few weeks, a multistakeholder platform with an open and (?) That will be our future. Thank you very much. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you, Mattias, for sharing with us your numbers and the commitment you oversee. 
   >> ERIC STEPHANE: It's important to improve the resources. The technical digital skills are needed in today's market and today's job environment. We also need to improve our educational system. The educational system needs to be disrupted. We need to add the new digital skills, artificial intelligence, blockchain. Blockchain is very good in this moment. IoT. We need to improve our technical system. Like I said, this is the digital age. We need to be ready. 
    The other thing is the increased use of ICT, we need to look at cybersecurity as well. We need to be better equipped for cybersecurity because threats are growing and causing damages more and more. 
    So we need to improve our cybersecurity tools, and we also need to ‑‑ like in Cameroon, we don't have a data protection policy. We need to work on putting in place a data protection policy. 
    The last thing, a part of our infrastructure we can improve or fix broadband penetration, because the most use here is mobile broadband. If we can improve our fixed broadband, it will be good for the whole country. 
    Like I said, lastly, we need to better help those young innovators provide financial aid or tax incentive for them to develop new applications and new services. 
    Thank you. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you, Eric, for sharing with us. 
    And now I will invite Julio to talk about his actions and recommendation in representation of Colombia IGF. 
   >> JULIUS CESAR GAITAN BOHORQUEZ: Thank you, Osvaldo. The result of (?) Most in our society were rapidly put into the future without any preparation. In this digital session, massive day‑to‑day challenges are proof of regulations and privacy concerns that only increase, but there are other topics that need to be discussed locally, such as the challenges of artificial intelligence, the new capacities that the people will need in more digital jobs, et cetera. 
    Thank you, Osvaldo. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you. 
    So let's go on with Panama, please. 
   >> ABDIAS ZAMBRANO: Yes. I will be fast due to the time. 
    Panama IGF and all its multistakeholder members wish to express their commitment is to promote that teleworking or remote working law in a human rights approach that ensures fair treatment with digital (?) For workers and employers. 
      (Audio interference) 
   >> ABDIAS ZAMBRANO: Many companies will continue to telework or using remote work after knowing the benefits that this modality has through the use of these digital devices. 
    Our recommendation is that the telework or remote work law should have a gender focus. Women who remote work who practice remote work are the most effective in terms of stress levels and the time to rest. They can't to do housework, take care of children. We promise we have this commitment to focus our efforts, especially on this topic. 
    We already have public policies. Now we have to put it into practice. 
    Thank you, Osvaldo. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you, Abdias. 
    Mr. Kennedy, from South Sudan, please. 
    Can you hear us? Kennedy? 
    Are you there? I don't see Mr. Kennedy . 
   >> Can you unmute your mic? 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: Okay. Can you hear me now? 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Yes, please. 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: Thank you so much. Though I have not spoken about the employee. 
    Our recommendation for South Sudan is that we need to look into policy regarding the development of this technology. It's very important, especially during the pandemic breakout. Most of our people did not have access. Maybe it is difficult for them to communicate, to express their view. 
    In this case, I recommend that in a policy development, seeing how African countries have been (?) ‑‑ 
      (Audio interference) 
   >> KENNEDY BULLEN: ‑‑ it has been a serious waves of not finding the voice from the community. 
    Secondly, the digital technology has not been (?). We are still behind (?) We see that it's very important to come together and see where that we can (?) Where they can be able to access the information. 
    However, I thank you for this time to express our (?) Now we are catching up. We are trying to give awareness to our people on the ground (?) 
    Thank you. 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: Thank you, Kennedy, for sharing with us. 
    We now are in the final moments. I would like to share some remarks with what I have taken from what you've shared. 
    First of all, we would like for people to create capacities in order to educate, adopt, digital skills, not from grown‑ups but from the beginning of their education. So it is important for all governments to adopt policies in order to develop those skills. 
    Another important issue is the way that people adopt these skills, they have opportunities to be creative, to be innovators, to be entrepreneurs, but the funding is usually oriented to people with finances and opportunities to reduce risk. 
    So they have to be some kind of celebration or companies that create opportunities for those people to employer their talents and have the opportunities to be productive with their proposals. 
    Another important issue is about the implication to adopt measures for gender inclusion. That's an important issue because all opportunities must be available for everyone. Nobody can stay behind. 
    In this way, we can make them part of this issue in order to make good opportunities because they are the mother of kids, and they are, obviously, multiplicators of this. 
    The common act assets in the Internet is good. We have seen experiences from Italy, for instance, or from Cameroon, that they can take from open‑source innovations and adapt them to their government situation. So these are digital skills that create these opportunities for everybody to share. 
    We have seen, also, three different axis or trends in this conversation. First of all, one related to the current, traditional organizations and their migration to digital platforms. This is important. We need regulation in order for people ‑‑ not for organizations to provide those platforms but for people to connect them with using their energy, using their Internet, using their resources in order to assess that. That is not a traditional way of working. 
    Usually enterprises provide all the means for their jobs, but this is an issue that is inherited from traditional digital platforms that allow the opportunity for people to join with their own resources, but the legislation must be worked out in order to create opportunities for everyone. 
    And the third part is the local platforms that allow people to find new jobs, but they need the skills in order to join these opportunities. These are different remarks I have taken notes from your different speeches, and I thank you for the opportunity to moderate this panel with these reaching points of view. 
    I now give the floor back to Federica Tortorella with her final notes related to the rapporteur process. 
   >> Federica Tortorella: Hello, everyone. I apologize for not using the camera, but I am still at the office. I really apologize in case you hear some sounds. There is a lot of people around me. 
    So I really thank you all for the valuable inputs you gave today. 
    Osvaldo, do you need a quick resume? I have 12 hours to post and share it. Perhaps it could be a good idea not to waste more time, in case you need to get more input, so I could send it to the email since I have a few notes, but I have to arrange it quite better. What do you think about it? 
   >> OSVALDO LARANCUENT: It's okay. Yes, we have time for you to share the final remarks in order to share the documents, and, also, Anja has shared with us a link where all of you can share your commitments related to these issues. No? 
    So please use that link in order to complete the information regarded to this panel. 
    I think we are done. 
    But, Anja, I don't know if you think we have a moment, one or two minutes for any find comment that may be provided for the panelists. 
   >> ANJA GENGO: Thank you. I really enjoyed listening to this session, and it's a good ending for the workday. 
    I would defer to the hosts. Maybe we could give two or three minutes to ask if colleagues or participants have any questions to ask. I think it's a pity not to allow for inputs. I'm sure that many were puzzled and it got the attention of many, the inputs that were shared by our colleagues. 
    So maybe two or three minutes, if the co‑hosts don't mind. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-dc-data-driven-health-technologies^^

 
>> MODERATOR: Everybody, a very warm welcome to our session.  We're a new Dynamic Coalition.  Data driven health technology, very new, just a few months.  Our group is excited to host you today and thank you for joining us.  
My name is Amali De Silva‑Mitchell and this session, just to give you a quick introduction, there will be two presentations and then there will be a bit of a time for impressions from some members of our Dynamic Coalition and we hope that some invited guests will be able to reach us.  At the moment, due to COVID, we have two of our members either very busy in hospital administration doing that or due to sudden lockdowns in the area there, they cannot reach us through technology to be with us.
We will have to play it by here and deal with that at that point in time.
Our group has a focus on issues, risk, benefits and opportunities to end users of the full value chain for healthcare and associated activities.  That's the focus of our work.
Okay.
That will come alive through our presentations and right at the end, in the discussion with all of you.  Okay.  We have broken this down into a couple of segments, sort of 30‑minutes each, that's kind of how we have planned this out and so I just want to say that all of this information, all of these discussions, we're going to bring this in to a paper which is going to be our very first paper on technology values for healthcare.  We're looking at services within the healthcare industry, looking at technologies, the manufacturing of drugs, the whole full sphere of healthcare services, product, so forth.
We'll start on this project and then we'll keep updating it each year as we get more information from all of you and that's how we're proposing to move forward with our DC.  Our DC also has two educational components on block chain and machine learning, that's two of four papers, presentations, that we have said that we will be producing for this Dynamic Coalition.  It should be very, very interesting.
We also are going to be having a survey in 2021 and also a poster competition in 2021.  The announcement of those activities will be posted to the announcement areas of the IGF website.  Okay.  Please, I would like to also invite all of you to participate with us in this new Dynamic Coalition and to sign up to our list, the email address is also found under Dynamic Coalitions and we're currently number 7 on that list there, you can find us there, please.
I'm just going to give a little bit about who I am and then we'll start this session.  I am Sri Lankan, I have worked in the technology industry, software, hardware, I was a President of an internet service provider in Canada, a non‑profit, a director of Freedom of Information and Privacy Association of British Colombia and I have worked in the government sector in hardware and software development.  I am an accountant and an economist but I also have background in computer science.  That's a little bit about myself.  Each speak, I will ask each speaker before they speak to tell where you say they're from and a little bit about themselves and then please start the conversation with us, either through representation, impressions, so forth.
Our very first speaker is a founding member of our group here, Galia Kondova.
Galia, you have the floor, please. 
>> GALIA KONDOVA: Thank you.  I'm very happy to take part in this exciting work.
I'm Bulgarian and I have an international background, exactly as you do.  I have a Bachelor's in economics, Master's in political science and a PhD in economics and I have had the privilege to live not only in Bulgaria but also in Germany, in the U.S., at the World Bank for eight years, and now I do research at the University here in Switzerland.  It is really exciting to talk about such an important topic and I'm really looking forward to the discussion today.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
You are our first speaker, Galia.
>> GALIA KONDOVA: Yes.
I have prepared some slides.  I would like now to share this with you..
The topic I would like to talk to you, the application of block chain in eHealth records and this is a very important topic because now we're looking in many countries for solutions of how the patient should have control over their own data and block chain seems to offer some acceptable technological solutions for providing the patient with control, so‑called sovereign control over their data and disclose it to the extent that is necessary.  I would like first of all to start with a very brief introduction on the most important characteristic of the technology of block chain.  What's so different when we talk about block chain as compared to other technologies, well first as you can see here we talk about decentralization which means that the patient, the institution does not need to have a central place so to store this data, but the storage of the data could take place in a decentralized manner, on ledger that's managed and to which there are different parties that have access to.  This is something that's quite new as a concept as compared to the data models where we have the data centered in one specific database.
We have the categories of the block chain technology, and mainly we have persistency, Anonymity and auditability, that has to do with the fact that all of the participants, in block chain, they have access to the stored data and the data that's stored there can also be tracked back and in this case we can say that the Auditability and the persistency of the data, that persistency of the data means that the information available on the different ledgers is the same, it cannot be changed by any more specific actor.
This has to do with the cryptography applied for storing the data on the block chain, here there are big challenges related to technology and all of the regulations that effect the data, in particular also the privacy, data privacy aspect, and in Europe we have the general data protection and that's why here this factor is very, very important to be analyzed when we talk about the application of block chain in eHealth.
I in this presentation have spent some more time, particular time on looking into the security aspects also of using the block chain for eHealth data because cybersecurity issues, that's of particularly importance, especially the last few months when we have read Articles on the leakage of data, this is a very important aspect related to the block chain technology.
Here is an overview of the different possible block chain applications and now we have many good use cases that provide examples of the applications.  Here you see there is a number of the block chain applications that now we have experienced.  It started with finance, of course, the crypto currency application use cases and then it also quickly went to Internet of Things and we have the possibility of block chain, this is the peer to peer block chain trading platforms, in Europe, there is a huge development in the European block chain and infrastructures, it is considering the demand of having cross‑border efficient forms of information and the data and here we have the HLC industry and this is exactly what our coalition is looking into, HLC and eHealth applications.
Let's move slowly to the health sector.  Here I would like to focus on the electronic health records.  As I said, there are legislations, I can just mention here, Switzerland, where I live, the project related to the introduction of an electronic patient record and this concept of electronic health records integrates an individual's medical health records generated by a health service provider such as a physician, a medical assistant, a pharmacist and private health records generated by the individual.  With this here, we talk about not only the private health records, but also any additional information that could be generated by health service providers.
What is the requirement about the electronic health records, they should allow the sharing of data between authorized providers and an individual but in a data‑protected manner.
Here, because of the sharing of the information block chain comes into the picture and provides some technological solutions, but as I said, it is a work in progress and there are many aspects that need to be looked at.  Here in detail is data in the health records, data types, we're talking in particular.  Here when we talk about health data and we talk about the different LDCs RGs and also the demographics like what is the patient age, where does this patient live, fetch files, photo, some others, other documentation, then we have the evolution, the progress in crate Cal healthcare for this patient and the history, what is, so general information, emergency contact, we have the information and any home monitoring data, collaborative ‑‑ lab active results, medications, prescriptions, prevention, so on.  Here as you could see, when we talk about electronic health records, basically this is a comprehensive set of all of the information associated with the patient and the track record of any treatments, et cetera.
Now, I would like to come to my last slide and then I have prepared a slide that provides an overview of the coverage of cybersecurity‑relevant requirements for these electronic health records by block chain if we would like to apply block chain, for example, I could take this here and there is an analysis, a preliminary analysis that's been conducted in the sense of what percentage does the block chain cover the cybersecurity relevant requirement for electronic health records.  Here you see on the dark blue bar, they're presenting these requirements or categories to which block chain accommodates best.  Here we could see availability, so this is the accessibility of the data and also integrity, the coverage, the integrity, the fact that the data cannot be amended or altered or changed once on the block chain.  As you see here, (poor audio quality).
Here you have the cybersecurity and also here I should say that the GDPR requirement, for the possibility to delete completely some of the information currently in discussion, so I wanted to provide an overview that block chain provides potential for the coverage and the cybersecurity requirements for eHealth records, however, there are aspects that are still open and I assume that the prevalent technologies will have a solution if you would like to think of a serious implementation of the technology.
So, at this stage, I would like to, of course, thank you for your attention and here you see also my contact data and most of all, I look forward to the discussion on these issues. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That's very informative.  Interesting to see all of the data lines and the integrity and so forth and, yes, we'll keep the questions right to the very end after all of the speakers have spoken.
Thank you.
Please now we're going to move on to this section called Mosaic.  I'm not sure who is actually with us.  I'm just going to call out names and hope that we have people we were expecting to have.
Okay.  We don't have Yao.  Yao was going to talk about language.  We're particularly interested in the access to eHealth and Yao was going to talk about the importance of translation and so forth so that we can increase access globally.  That was what he was talking about, an important value for us.
You know, hopefully, I'm not sure if he'll join us later, we'll come back to him.
Do we have Lakmini Shah?  We don't.  She was a guest, a counselor, from London, in the U.K., and she was going to talk a little bit about smart cities, but she did email me and say that she was not well so that's probably what that is.  We had also a retired Secretary‑General of family planning association, federation internationally and she is unfortunately, due to restrictions of lockdown suddenly unable to reach technology.
We have also Janna Belote, who was going to be speaking, senior hospital administrator in the U.S., and she just told me a few minutes ago she has to rush off to deal with some issues there for COVID, so forth, which she's covering.
I'm beginning to think ‑‑ Herman Ramos, are you available, please? 
>> HERMAN RAMOS: Hello.  
>> MODERATOR:  Herman Ramos, if you take the floor, that would be great.  You have full time because so many are delayed due to COVID and related.
>> HERMAN RAMOS: I'll just start to share my screen.  I have a background in physics and I have been working with technology globally and most recently here in Mozambique and I'm one of the 2020 Internet Society Youth Ambassadors.  I'll just start my presentation.
The development of internet information and technology has been contributing to the digitalization of many activities and sectors, and health is no exception.  The advancement in popular technology and digital computing improved the speed and efficiency which data can be processed and exchanged.  Due to the unprecedented spread of mobile technology, as well as advancing the normalcy application, tens of millions of citizens and people now use mobile device as they communicate and the data.  We have been addressing a high range of challenges in areas such as disease surveillance enhanced systems and health education.  Basically we define mobile health as mobile computing, a medical sensor, communication technology for health.
We have noticed the increase on mobile application solutions because they can address a high number of different health issues.  Also mobile health allows or offers the ability to remove individuals to participate in healthcare, basically individuals can be in communities, they don't need to go to healthcare facilities, at home they can have early diagnosis and can monitor any kind of diseases.
Basically, most common application of mobile healthcare is using mobile phones and communication devices to educate consumers on preventive healthcare services.  However, there is a range of applications with this.  You see here if you integrate the diagnosis and monetary systems, this can offer control measures to reduce the speed of any infections, we're talking about disease, et cetera.
Basically, this offers two types of benefits.  First of all, the increasing access to healthcare outside of healthcare settings.  This is what I was talking about earlier.  We don't need to go to a formal healthcare facility, you can do the self‑testing at home.  The second, after making the test, you can have diagnosed results and that's important for you and for the healthcare professionals that will elicit the rapid, appropriate clinical and appropriate health response to the issue.  In this way, we can see that the diagnosis and monitoring of disease are clear to clinical maturation.
Here we have a table basically that has all of the tests, the diagnosis, it gives the opportunity to give early detection, the automated results, capture, analysis.
Treatment and patient management, there is a linkage here between the results of when the patient has the results, there is a linkage here to the clinical care because the care has a connection with the mobile.  Also we have the disease control and elimination.  After we have the results of the diagnosis, we can apply the epidemic control, in this way, public health can implement control strategies to monitor and to control the diseases.
The application of mobile healthcare is not only for Developing Countries.  This is also applicable for Developing Countries and we know that the infrastructure in Developing Countries is much smaller than in Developing Countries and access to medication is limited especially rural, remote areas, we can look at the cheaper healthcare to provide and create an efficient, early diagnosis of most common diseases, including the wording for academics.
As many area are related to internet, the mobile healthcare also has some challenge, one of the challenges is regulation.  In this way, to address this challenge of regulation, it is important to develop a regulatory framework that is with medical apps, managing ‑‑ that are merging.  We can see that regulatory, they're not keeping the pace with the technological innovation.  Also the cost and clinical effectiveness, in order to guarantee a best integration of this kind of system, it is important to have or required to have evidence and is clinical effective and resulting in cost effectiveness.  
An important challenge, it is the digital divide, because we know in many countries, many people don't have access to internet and then if they don't have access to internet, there is no possibility of enjoying the mobile healthcare.  In this way, it is important to ensure that no one is left behind.
Conclusion, investigations in modern physics sparked the technological development of health systems which with the design of various equipment and the diagnostic techniques, now it is time for the internet, information and communication technologies to create a digital revolution in the health system.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.
Your contact information is there for people to contact you.
>> HERMAN RAMOS: Yes.  I'm open to any interaction and engagement.
>> MODERATOR: Excellent.
>> HERMAN RAMOS: Also we have our mailing list at the Dynamic Coalition.
>> MODERATOR: Yes.  Thank you.  Thank you for mentioning that as well.
That was very interesting presentation and again, audience, we'll keep our questions right to the very end.
I am just going to ask the Mosaic speakers, do we have any others, please, with us?  Is there anyone of the Mosaic speakers here with us, please.
Okay.  I don't think anyone made it.  We have a number of medical people with us, they are obviously very busy with COVID and so forth.
Would you be able to bring your presentation forward, please?
>> JORN ERBGUTH: Sure.  Just let me start it and share screen.
Please allow me to take a little bit of a larger angle and I would like to take a look at AI and while it is a promising technology, it is often misunderstood and I would like to focus a little bit on how it works.
I'm Jorn Erbguth, head of technology in Geneva Macro lab, my background is in law and technology.  I'm not a health expert.  I teach at the University of St. Gallen, Lucerne and the Geneva School of Diplomacy.  I would like to talk about I didn't AI works and why currently AI is overestimated and a better understanding is needed.
We start with some myths about AI?  You remember Brexit?  It is quite ‑‑ I'm not happy at all about Brexit happening.  I don't think it has been caused by any kind of bots or Cambridge and there has been an inquiry and the information commissioner said ‑‑ they have found no evidence so, of course, they have broken privacy law, it is not a good company, but they also lied about capabilities, they did not have the power to influence public opinion in that way.
We must not be too afraid about technology, we don't understand, it and often those powers and risks are overestimated.  Another example, maybe you heard about Twitter social bots that spread fake information about COVID‑19 and about any other topic as well.  The good message is they don't exist.  The bad message, it is people.  Actually, there are some publications that are cited, there are some papers that cite those people, but actually there has not been an evidence of a single social bot.  There are bots that automatically post cop tent, like from publishers, and there is a big ban of bots, they're posting all the time, but this exists, but a social bot that behaves like a human, that cannot be distinguished from a human and is actively pushing a specific agenda has not been identified at all.
People claiming that 50% of the accounts involved in certain discussion, bots, they should be able to at least identify a single one.  There has been a research within governments and he's asking every single publication about social bots, please name me the accounts, I will track them and he is checking them and he did not find any of those accounts that were not human.  Good news is there are no social bots, the bad message, it is humans that posed those. 
How we treat AI, it is a cropping of images by Twitter.  When you pose an image A tweet with an image on Twitter, you have to ‑‑ you can add any kind or size of image to the tweet and if the format, the ratio does not fit within Twitter, they crop it, meaning that they cut it and select the most probably interesting part of the image.  The most interesting part of an image is usually a face.  So they will select a face, which works pretty well and the trouble starts when there are two faces on the opposite ends of a face ‑‑ of a picture.  They have to then select which face to take.  Of course, then they can only take one face so there will be a decision and sometimes it is an easy decision if you have a big one in the foreground and a small one in the background, then it is obvious and if they're pretty similar, of course, we know one person is more important than the other one, with you the system doesn't know that and the system selects the same face regardless of where it is in this picture.
This is not proof that there is some general preference to skin color.  Actually there has been a test with 90 pictures, which is not too big, but reasonably large, which has shown that there has not been a specific preference for skin color.
Of course, those systems, they don't behave according to rules so we don't trust them and we expect the worse.  This kind of systematic, how we deal with this type of technology, because it is there, even in a context where it doesn't really matter.  Nothing of the image is lost.  It is a preview.  Imagine when these type of things happen to the use of AI and health and some group of people will be not treated equally and then we have a scandal, and it will happen, and it happens, because this technology, it does not go along with rules and we have to either accept it or use a dinner technology.  There is no way to stop AI from doing that.  It is a basic essence of deep learning.
Let's see what is AI.  When we look at computers playing chess, they can outperform even world champion, the world chess masters.  Is computers playing chess AI?  The calculate, they can outperform any human so it is obvious they outperform humans in a task that animals cannot do.  Are they AI?  No, we don't ‑‑ we don't name them AI because they are too trivial to do.
It is like AI is only the cutting edge technology.  When the technology comes into place, it is not AI any more.
The definition, it is more ‑‑ it is not a scientific definition, it is more like a common definition for some new technology.
AI is when a human cannot distinguish another human from computer.  Okay.
Sounds reasonable.
We have this in a little bit of a different way, when a computer wants to know whether you are a human or a robot, they ask you to fill in a capture where you have some writings that's distorted and you need to decipher it and computers are getting better than humans in deciphering it.  A little bit of an issue, are computers now capable of AI?  Well, actually Google replaced the captures with some softwares that are spying on us to determine if we are just a robot taking content or if we're really human.
How does deep learning work?  In my view, deep learning works like a dog.  You teach a dog, if the dog behaves well, they get a positive reward.  If not, they don't get it.
You present a lot of examples again and again and again and again and that's exactly what you do with deep learning.  Actually deep learning is using neuronal nets that are done similarly to the brain.  This is not a surprise, the behavior is a bit similar, and you have to take this into account because deep learning is really different from other type of computing.  You cannot expect that it behaves according to rules, that it is programmed and people know what they have created, no, that's not the way deep learning works.
How does it work?  First you get a neuronal net and the initial state of the neuronal net, it is random and it needs to be random, basically it is the random ingredient into deep learning.  That's the reason why deep learning is not statistic.  It uses a lot of data, it is similar to statistics, but it is not statistics. If you do a statistical analysis on data, you do with it twice, three times, four times, five times, you always arrive at the same results.  At deep learning, you always arrive at different systems.
Besides the neuronal net, you need training data, and you need the training algorithm.  The training algorithm is basically tuning the neuronal net so it fits the training data.  How does that work.
I just put three examples.  Usually you have thousands of millions of examples.  Of course, in random state of the system, it is quite different.  Now you have the differences calculated and you queue the system in the way that it is closer to the examples and do you it again and again and hopefully, finally the system goes through the examples and gives the right answers to those examples.  This is not really what you want to achieve because you have already stored your examples.  What you want to achieve, it is the generalization of the system.  You have examples like this, that the system has not seen before, and then you check whether the generalization is good enough for those as example, test data, validation data.
You split the training data into training, test, validation data.
To summarize, deep learning, the training is based on data and random.
The system, it is based on generalization which is the same as stereotyping.  It does not it meet any rules but does not obey any rules either, and it is imitating intelligence and you always have to be aware that if there are new inputs, that the system hasn't seen before, so as a result unpredictable.  Of course systems usually behave well and there is a high probability I would say that we'll do it correctly but even new inputs might behave quite differently, may produce unexpected result.
What can these kind of systems achieve?  Here we have a system that can distinguish criminals from non‑criminals.  Wow.  Well, when you look closer, you can do so too.  You will see those people with the white collar, nice, CV photo, they're not the criminals, and those people who don't look so happy, they just have been arrested and those photos from just being arrested, they look quite a little bit different than the photos on the CV.  The system can distinguish a photo of an arrest and a photo of a CV, but they cannot distinguish whether somebody is a criminal or not.  This is basically the issue.  We're not using the right criteria.  If the criteria met us, you shouldn't use them, it is a rule that uses the system that obeys by the rule, plays by the rule.
It can be hacked.  Here is a stop sign and a Google car.  You see the stop sign on the right‑hand side, on the left‑hand side, the stop sign has some patches on it.  Those patches are really big.  The system does not learn that a stop sign is this shape with stop in white letters and the system just picks some points where the stop sign is different, for example, than the speed limit sign.
If you analyze the system and find out which bots those are, you just have to put patches on those spots and you get a different result.
It gets even worse.  Here is a picture of a life boat that's recognized, if you add a little bit of noise to it, it becomes a scotch terrier with a high probability there.
Is research that shows it can be sufficient to even change one pixel of an image to get really substantially different results.  This is the kind of hacking you don't feed to invade the system, you just have to have the input in a little bit and then you have a completely different result without being detected because the system does what it does but produces completely different results.
There is discrimination, of course.  That's often in the headlines and sometimes it is due to gaps in training data.
If there is a case that has not been trained then there is a high probability that the system will not behave correctly.
If you only have white faces in the training data then the system might not correctly recognize people of color.  It is important to have a well‑balanced training set, and even more than well‑balanced, because minorities need to have an equal stake here.  If you have a minority that's 1% or .1% of the population, and the system should work for them as well, it is not sufficient to just have one example out of 1,000 of this minority.
You have to balance the training data, but unfortunately, this is not enough.  Even if you have balanced training data, which is, of course, unbalanced training data, biased training data, it is, of course, one of the main reasons for bias and even if you don't have gaps in your training data the selection of the criteria to recognize a person or a situation is based on random and it is based on machine‑generated stereotypes and even basing decisions on statistics, it is bad because it means that you base the decision on one person, on the behavior of people of his or her group before and deep learning has worked because it is not statistics and involves random as well.
To summarize, the pros and cons of deep learning, the pros is, you don't need rules.  If you don't have rules, you can still use it.  There are some field where is you don't have rules.  Those area, it can be written compared to human action.  If you have rules, use the system that can obey your rules.  It still works reasonably with less than perfect data.  If you have a little bit of contradiction data, the system, it can still perform reasonably well.  Of course, there is a performance that will deteriorate with bad data in a dataset and this is often a problem but it will not break immediately.  If trained well, can being in certain situations provide, produce good results and another thing is maybe you heard about Tusla, it is ‑‑ it drove into a truck.  It can fail in cases where we don't have any question what the right decision is, but since the criteria is situational, auditory, then you can rely on it and can be easily hacked as we have seen it.
What to do with this?  We see that you cannot trust those systems so you call the expert group to develop trustworthy AI.  Of course, you cannot change the technology so they provide some advice that may help in some situations but not really.  A lot of government bodies, oversight communities, UN, governments, et cetera, today the German commission just published a report, a lot of commissions produce a lot of papers, but they cannot change the fundamentals and there is electric transparency, people often say, well, this is a black box system and if we could look into the black box, it would be fine.  You can be glad that you cannot look into the black box.  What's in there, it is really bad.  It is not rules that you think should be there, it is quite a lot of silly rules that in their combination produces good results.  You have good results.  You have statistically good results, but if the rule said that, you wouldn't accept it all.
If you have a case where you want to use this kind of system, it should be made completely accessible for tests and analysis.  If you do so, you can find those blind spots, those areas where they don't form well.  Of course, this will expose the systems, but transparency, it is always good for security.  If you can expose those issues then we have a chance to fix them and high‑level descriptions of the means of transparency, they're not at all sufficient in dealing with those issues.  Not to stay completely negative, AI can make a difference in health.  For example, the cancer detection on radio images, it has huge potential so we have quite positive effects, especially those areas where we don't have specific rules for humans, where only experience counts and how many images can be seen in the life of a human radiologist and how many images can be used for training an AI system.
This number, it is much higher, the system, it is much less, well-developed it might outperform the humans that only have a much smaller training set.  This is a reason why ‑‑ I think there are applications in public health that you have to be aware of the limitations and you should look ‑‑ for certain things, you look for different kinds of systems that are rule‑based and that are not just trained.
So resume, deep learning in health, they can outperform other systems, especially when you look at radio images, radiographs and but they all produce blind spots.  Even if you have a great system, that can diagnose cancer, it will not diagnose cancer with the same quality for all people so there will be certain groups where the system works less well.  Of course, this is not new, you have doctors, a doctor that's never treated a child might not be able to detect some situation in a child as easily as a pediatrician that does this all the time.  The system, they're not neutral, they have blind spots and they fail in situations.  At the same time, statistically thousand perform quite well in a lot of situations.
You have to provide a setting where you can deal with it.  You shouldn't rely on the systems because then you don't deal with these risks and issues, but of course you can improve health by using those systems in a way where you chose that kind of responsibility.  You need to expect bias, it cannot be avoided.
People are out there saying there is a removed buy Y they can remove certain small bits of bias, sometimes they impose even more bias by removing bias because it is imposed opposite bias which is ‑‑ which will not wipe out bias but will basically increase bias.  You just don't know against whom the bias will be.  It might be some groups and we'll look specifically at, it may be a completely different group, but nobody deserves to be disadvantaged by bias.  We need to expect bias, and we need to be able to deal with it.  If we can't, you should not use those systems, we need to have safeguards in place that will be able to deal with those cases, it will sooner or later occur.
We have another issue, we have the issue of the training data.  Training data in the health area is usually highly sensitive personal data.  You first need to train the system and you need it every time again when you retrain the system and you can in a limited way, but in some situations, you can extract part of the training data from the finished systems.  This is a special issue.
You can kind of create training data, synthetic training data, that works, it was proven to work and then you need more data and you reduce the quality of the outcome.  You have to balance whether you want to really do that or not, or you have to ‑‑ well, you have to see if you can justify this by the positive impact.
To be clear, democracy does not save us.  The side secretaries, some can be mitigated by some measure, you will not remove them completely.  You have to deal with them and say if you document every step of the development step, phase, then, of course, you can maybe review some sources, but you will still not have a perfect system because the system is based on stereotype, it is not based on rules.
Thank you.
I'm looking forward to our discussion.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for an interesting presentation there.  I thank all three speakers, you had very different viewpoints on eHealth, very interesting.  Very new material.  I hope our audience really gotten gaged there.
We probably have maybe 20 minutes I think.  We don't have too many members in our audience so why don't ‑‑ I'm just wondering, please, the technical host, can you advise us how we can deal with questions, please?
>> JORN ERBGUTH: People can use the Q&A.  You see the Q&A button below your screen.  When somebody puts a Q&A there, you can look at them and we can answer them. 
>> MODERATOR: Audience, please be welcomed to put in your question there and if you want to ask a specific question, it can be Galia, Herman, Jorn, please state their name at the beginning of the question, otherwise if it is to any panelist, then please. 
I'll start us off with something to all three of the panelists.  Just wanting to ask about the role of judgment, it is an important quality, especially when dealing with new system, human judgment, it is critical in making a very good decision.  You know, how ‑‑ I'll put it to all three of the speakers ‑‑ where do you think the technology is, each of you spoke on three very dinner area, block chain, mobile tech, and the artificial intelligence, machine learning, where do you think we can quickly see the technology picking up to the human, please. 
>> JORN ERBGUTH: I think it is always a human using the technology, it is not the technology running against the human.  Of course, humans can use technology to replace other humans and they always have done that, for decades, centuries, this will continue to be the case.
>> MODERATOR: I have an accounting background and I see repetitive tasks being done quickly, the higher decision level tasks being retained for a long time, however, I'm seeing there is sometimes ‑‑ we have something in accounting called dashboards and this is something that they use very much in healthcare, I'm not a healthcare accountant, we are missing our founder member there in that field with us today, I'm beginning to think that there will be a lot of this dashboard being used.  We know that's a concern to patients.  We have trojan data pockets that suddenly come up there and cause a problem and maybe if the tasks have now been given to staff who may ‑‑ who don't have the very high sophistication of medical experience behind them, there is a risk there for the patient and that's always been something a little bit of a concern for a patient perspective and something we could apply in terms of block chain, privacy, these hidden pockets of data that you have all mentioned.
I don't really see other questions.  I would like to ask Herman, could you please tell us a little bit how you think we should manage ‑‑ I know this is really a sudden question, Herman, how do we manage the linguistic delivery through mobile tech, please?
>> HERMAN RAMOS: I think the technology creators are focused and like to focus on ‑‑ most on the development of technology that don't see the problems of the linguistics.  I think we have a project, in this case, a technology that we want to implement, there's a possibility of if states want to implement these kinds of technologies, these kinds of projects, they must engage with ‑‑ I believe that's where the multistakeholder model, it is important, because we have the engagement of many other organizations and stakeholders in this case, Civil Society, private sector, academia, technical community, I believe these kinds of organizations, stakeholder, if they work together, it is possible to overcome any kind of issues.
>> MODERATOR: It is important to have the multistakeholder approach.  That's very much what our Dynamic Coalition is trying to achieve to put together as many stakeholders as possible so that we discuss, you know, what are the values that we have in common that establishes trust and we have a professor and I'm not up to date exactly on his situation right now, but he has written a new book on the speed of trust and talking about coming to a good understanding amongst stakeholders and how that creation of trust and the standing, it can speed the creation of any of the business processes, whether it is delivery, embracing the block chain technology, artificial intelligence, and even the paper processes as well.
You know, this is ‑‑ this is something, you know, that we're also thinking about, we're saying, okay, if we can have a set of common understandings that will launch us to speeding up the development of healthcare to access universal healthcare access so we would also want to work with the community network and all of the other associated technical and other functions so that we can speed this up globally for everyone.
Galia, I was wondering, you were right at the beginning, you are probably rushing on all of our behalfs, is there something else that you would perhaps like to add, please?
>> GALIA KONDOVA: Yes.
One topic that's of quite interest to me, it is ethics, ethics in artificial intelligence using technology, especially for eHealth. 
Here when I talk about this, I consider some aspects like exactly the privacy data, the data privacy, the one aspect, and the second thing, it is about developing models, especially artificial intelligence, using data, patient data, and coming up to some recommendations and suggestions and how ethical, right, could such models be, Jorn talked about the artificial deeper machine learning models and how trustworthy, how ethical are these suggestions driven by the technology and to what extent should they be accepted, implemented, followed.  This is something which I ask myself the question and it bothers me, the question I'm asking myself for a while.
>> MODERATOR: Exactly.
I think the whole area of ‑‑ that runs through all of us, the stakeholders and it is an important topic when we have the question of where do we have commonalities and definitely one medical ethics, what are the ethics of the administrators, especially the ethics of the system builders and are they similar, are they comparable, absolutely.  It is a very important area and hopefully we can develop that further within our Dynamic Coalition, the study of that, absolutely.
It is a very good topic.
>> JORN ERBGUTH: Looking at the systems, block chain and AI, I think they have a quite different approach.  Block chain is made to be trustworthy.  If you have a system that is most trustworthy, it is block chain, because it is secure, it is transparent, you can have more trust because it is distributed, decentralized and it is almost impossible for a single actor to manipulate it.
AI, it is completely different, it is not trustworthy.  Of course, if a system works well, if a system saves your life you don't care if it is trustworthy.  You use it.
>> MODERATOR: Yes.  Yes.
>> JORN ERBGUTH: And if a system is able to detect a cancer that would not have been detected by a human, of course you trust it.  You don't care whether you don't understand it.  It is not ‑‑ it cannot be understood, the reasoning.  Of course, you can understand how it works, but this does not give you an answer.  If you go to court, I can explain to you how courts in general work.
This does not explain the decision to you.  You want to have the reasoning and even if the reasoning is not understandable to you, because you're not a lawyer, then you can see a lawyer, you can ask a lawyer is this correct, can you verify it?  This is the reason why we really need transparency if you just tell people, I give you some wishy washy explanation, it explains to you the general basics, it is not transparency, it does not explain their decision, how it will work for them.
If you just have some general explanation and a lot of people are going for this ‑‑ these general explanations and think they provide bees transparency because the other, it is not possible, but you have to be clear that it is not just because there is some priority information there and companies don't want to expose it, they don't have it.  If you really dig into it, you will discover that those rules, of course they are there, they're very complicated and they're pretty stupid and they're combined in a way that makes sense.  They have gaps and there are a lot of gaps.  In those gap, they fail and you would never build a system like this, and it is not a system that decides on the rules, it is a system, it is a device, it is a dice, they're rolling the dice and that's the reason why the systems are not complementary.
>> MODERATOR: Yes.  Yes.  Exactly.
Yes.  Very glad that transparency is a topic, transparency, yes.
Thank you.  Thank you, Jorn.
I want to add, you know, we're also seeing newer technologies coming in, I came across hologram technologies in all of the brain scan, developing the images of patient's brains, so forth, so I think we'll see a lot of development on top of the technologies that we already are talking about and as mentioned by Galia, ethics, privacy, this is new areas for us in terms of ethics, privacy, these other areas as well as dealing with the AI, machine learning, block chain, and so forth and the mobile technology and how all of the service providers, among the technology deal with this, across jurisdiction, all of these different things.  We have a number of issues to talk about.  I'm just wonder, audience, again, I have not been following the chat.  Is there anyone else, please, who would like to ask a question of our speakers.
Someone else asked us how they can get in contact with us.  Please go to the IGF website under the section of Dynamic Coalitions, we have our email address and please join our list and you can join us there.
Also, if you go to ‑‑ if you want to contact me personally, you can just look at my profile for the meeting, the IGF meeting, and you will find a Linkedin and on the Linkedin, there is an email address.  It is Amali De Silva‑[email protected].
This is ‑‑ I'm not very familiar with dealing with this.  Bear with me here.  I'm trying to pick up any other questions, otherwise ‑‑ let me take a quick click here.  
Someone asked about heavy files, Galia, could you respond to that, please?  It says Galia, about heavy file, can they be accessed in a more efficient way thanks to block chain?
>> GALIA KONDOVA: Yes.  Thank you..
Thank you for this question.  I have just answered it also by chat.  I have mentioned to her about the so‑called self‑serving identity concept through which you can disclose all the special tributes and in case this is health data, large files that includes x‑rays, other health information you are in possession of, in the identity concept, it is a very good concept in which individuals could discuss and share certain attributes or certain information about themselves.
>> MODERATOR: Please go ahead, yes.
>> GALIA KONDOVA: I also wanted to actually also comment on the remark of Jorn on about trustworthiness of the technology.  I would completely agree that trustworthiness, that's the key point in using technology and here we have now robots that are conducting surgery, right, and I ask myself if I trust this robot and if I go to such a surgery, in case something goes wrong in the surgery, of course, nobody hopes for, who bares the responsibility, right?  I think here is an interesting case when you have trustworthiness, right, and ethics, and maybe some legal aspects which comes into the big picture.
>> MODERATOR: Absolutely.  A very, very interesting area.  Absolutely.  Yes.  Especially, I think, we have the new technologies and, you know, as Jorn was saying in terms of the time it takes for the technology to get sophisticated, there is room for error.  Yes.  Exactly.
Absolutely.
Jorn, would you be ‑‑ would you expand further?  There is another question asking about the trust of users.
>> JORN ERBGUTH: Well, I tried to answer it.  It depends whether, of course, trust does not really always depend on transparency, it always ‑‑ it also depends on experience.
If we have a good experience with the system, we might trust it even if we don't understand why it is doing that.
When you look at the self‑driving cars, you look at humans driving, you might have a human that's driving much better than the average person.  This human, they may still cause an accident, and this person then cannot tell you, but I'm driving much better than the average person and therefore I don't want to be liable for the accident.  Of course the person is liable.
If you develop a self‑driving car that's driving better than the average person ‑‑ we're not there yet ‑‑ but if you arrive there, why should there be an exclusion of responsibility just because the self‑driving car is driving better than the average person.  Humans are not excluded from responsibility.
If you go to hospitals, to surgery, if you have a robot performing operations, that's having the higher success rates than humans, then you still have to ask was this an error or was it avoidable?  If it was an error, you should look for product liability and you should not say, well, this is better than average so you should not be compensated for your loss.  You should apply the same standards.  Even the highly‑skilled doctors that's better than your average doctor by a factor of 10, whatever, if they do an error and commit an error, it is similar and there is no reason to exclude them and we have to make sure we apply the same standards, manufacturer, they cannot pay, the doctor cannot pay either they will require insurance and the insurance will ‑‑
>> MODERATOR: Yes.
>> JORN ERBGUTH: And this is how we deal with it with humans and how ‑‑ why should we deal with it differently with computers and companies doing it.
>> MODERATOR: Very good point.  It is going to be an interesting area with all of the insurance companies as well, and how they ensure all of these technologies.  It is a whole new area there too which I'm sure we need actually to get some people on board who are familiar with the insurance background there on to our Dynamic Coalition.
We're coming to the end of our session time.  I really appreciate the audience who joined us in this conversation. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-dc-internet-in-crisis-management-and-renewal^^

>> VINT CERF: It is Vint again.  We have to use human solutions to solve human problems.  The technology won't solve them for us, Alex makes that point very, very well. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Thank you.
If there are no other comments or questions ‑‑ go ahead. 
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: If you can see the participant list but I have put my hand up.  I didn't know whether to ‑‑
>> MODERATOR: There are two lists and I have to figure out which list I have to go with.  Sorry. 
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: I was going to ask, Alejandro, this is ongoing work, he had presented already at the last of our meeting, and really it is easing into the next stage here, what has COVID‑19 changed in this framework, you know, has it had a massive impact?  Is it still ‑‑ you know, is there no change to it as such?
>> Alejandro:  I have to say that COVID‑19 has ‑‑ COVID‑19 has been a massive test for the internet in many ways.
I have a second presentation for this.
What we ‑‑ I'm presenting also at the Dynamic Coalition on Network Neutrality, an analysis on the impact of internet openness, what we see, for example, there, it is the massive scaling affects have found some boundary, we have been ‑‑ the massive scaling, it is serious, the core of internet, it has held up very well in this scaling.  There were needs more likely ‑‑ it was not a parole call issue, but an operational issue for example when European operators came together with companies like Netflix, other streaming services, or alphabets, Google's YouTube services, in order to demand and to agree to have lower bandwidth requirements.  So for example, Netflix was shown at lower resolution in order to reduce ‑‑ avoiding the congestion.  The scalability, it has been very dramatically invested at the edge.  In countries like mine, in Mexico, the reports are the same in Latin America, South Asia, and they have not gotten details in African countries, but we think that 40% of the population doesn't have access at the edge and would have to remedy that when we have brought all of our schooling online this traffic increase has shown the value of the sustainability by the way, that impact, the scaling, international traffic, of course, it is there, and this is a very good way of scaling the network.  They're reporting increased traffic of 40%.  Almost everybody I know, students at the University, they have spent extra money in getting better connection and an increase in bandwidth or a change of technology to get fiber so that the latencies are diminishes and there was once a house that had a heavy use of internet for Netflix at night, now it has three people at school and two people at work at the same time with very high demands for latency because we went all on video.  These are the ways of the time and using the framework ‑‑ by using it, testing it, these factors, they're critical, and we have things like security and so on, they're ‑‑ I'm in the addressing them within the framework..
You have to see if these factor, if they're preinternet, online, post internet behavior, so complete, relevant, useful, these are three things to be tested, which is ongoing work which I'm inviting everybody to share or to invite to the projects and to share. 
>> (Technology issue). 
>> MODERATOR: Can anyone speak to that?  I will ask, if you have some comments on that, it will be something that we will discuss in the next session.
>> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: There is a beautiful book, it captures mindsets that are coming together for creation of the internet and I'll leave that floor to Vint for his statement, it is built for all things.
The more ‑‑ some of the more technical sites were built for connections, assuming that there would be a lot of the work, network, it would be used for the computers, whereas another set of people were from the 1960s already, they were building the human to human collaboration that will be machine assisted.  These are both there together. 
I think Vint has more to say.   
>> VINT CERF: Thank you very much. 
Is it okay to take a moment to respond?
>> MODERATOR: Go ahead.  Please. 
>> VINT CERF: Alex is right.  The internet was designed as collaboration among a bunch of engineers and in an academic setting and the ambition was, of course, to share computing resources and knowledge to advance the state‑of‑the‑art of commuter science and even in intelligence.  Believe it or not, that was a driver behind the original network implementations.  As it evolved and eventually spread to the general public, it was clear that it was simultaneously a platform which collaboration could occur and also a platform in which competition could occur.  We have seen plenty of both in this environment.  I like very much the point that was being made, the question that was being asked, what can we do, how do we use the internet to be collaborative in our response to COVID‑19?  
It is clear that there is heavy collaboration in the search for vaccine against the COVID‑19 disease, and I think also we're seeing efforts to use it to overcome the problem lack of proximity, we have not done a great job of using the internet in the educational setting yet, the tools are not quite right, teachers don't have the train, the students, they're often uncooperative or outright, you know, misbehaving.  We have a lot of work to do to learn to adapt this technology in a way that make it is more useful.
I'm still very optimistic that we can do that. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Vint.
I have a request for the floor.
>> Marianne Franklin:  If ‑‑ I don't know if you need the visual.  Anticipate happy for you to share the camera.
>> MODERATOR: It is complicated.  It is better if you go ahead, we're at the end of the ‑‑
>> MARIANNE FRANKLIN: Two points, I'm here on behalf of the Internet Principal Rights and Coalition as we're close allies with the core internet coalition, core internet values.  So just want to underscore a support for your efforts in this domain.  
Secondly, COVID and this pandemic, it is a gamechanger.  It behooves us to be even stronger on recognizing it as a gamechanger.  For all sorts of reasons.  I think, Alejandro, you mentioned teaching and learning, it underscores the digital divide on the most basic level, the bandwidth package that you have, whether your laptop is compatible and then we have students with shared accommodation, going to cafes, so it is a gamechanger in terms of revealing the very sort of forms of digital divides within privileged areas.  On the other hand, just to also underscore ‑‑ I have been amazed at the adaptability and the inventiveness of this generation of what we call digital native, of deploying, repurposing, and rejigging of the off of the shelf and particularly peer to peer, opensource applications and so in that sense, there is a lot of hope.
I think that the real issue is to do with top‑down management decisions that are based on ignorance from the point of view of managements, and top‑down, middle management decisions, they're based on the hard sell that they get from certain large internet providers, so I think the huge outreach dimension that would perhaps be good to consider from a point of view of cross Dynamic Coalition work.  We have got to realize, this is the generation that learning online, they're 100%, my students are from China, Austria, North London, South London, you name it and if it weren't for these applications, we wouldn't be able to do our job and they wouldn't be able to continue their degrees.  The potentials are enormous.  I think the technical expertise is needed to sort of keep the options open, free and opensource, affordable, apps that don't force you to upgrade your equipment which I have had to do because of age‑old, decade‑old rivalries between large corporates, that's a thing that coordinates from the technical expertise that you bring to the table, it is really important to hear this from the technical experts and formative influencers and how the infrastructure operates.  It is a resilient infrastructure on the whole.
Yeah.
Still learning a lot.  I just wanted to endorse your efforts here and hope that we can keep the conversation across our sectors and agree to disagree, variety is the spice of life and the internet is not a thing, it is a composition of technology, humans, lots of accidents!  That's all I want to say.  Thank you so much. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
>> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: If I could briefly respond.
The first comment, something that I often say, I quote an economist from 2008, the quote goes when the tide goes out, you see who went swimming without trunks.  That's what we have seen in COVID.  If your company hasn't prepared for teleworking, let's say if they didn't have a password base system for crossing the firewall or working from home and they have to tear it down or they didn't have expertise for collaboration, but also the rules.  In many countries, the courts are stuffed with every type of litigation or for example real property purchasing, it is stopped because people don't have the offices in place to work from home.
You can't sell a house, you can't continue litigation, people are stuck in jail because litigation can't go on because of the courts.  That's one.
The other, complementary, the cost of not doing.  The governments that didn't enact digital transformation policy or national digital strategy, now they have made their citizens incur a very high cost.  It was expensive to connect, it is more expensive not to connect.  The expense ‑‑ the savings was on the government side and the spending, it os ‑‑ this is what's been revealed, this is how COVID and the internet have become an x‑ray of society.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Alejandro.
Thank you for this session.  Thank you for all of the questions.
I will give now the floor to Olivier to introduce the next session and to share it also.
Go ahead, please. 
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: Of course, the next session that we have it is regarding the consequences of COVID‑19 on core internet values.
On this, we had some discussion on this as I mentioned earlier for those people that joined us recently, there are a lot more people than in the beginning of the session, there is a discussion on the internet successes and failure to support the world living under COVID‑19 lockdown.  There is a link in the agenda that will take you to that wiki page with a link to the video recording of this session that took place in June.  There we discussed on whether the internet was fit for purpose with all of the things that's been put through because of COVID‑19, was there a need for a new network.  It was a heated discussion and we won't reiterate it here.  One thing that might have not been totally clear back then, it is really what were the real ‑‑ the real consequences of the internet being used differently with more people working at home and a lot more people resorting to teleworking, plus games, plus doing all sorts of other things on the internet.
We have the luck, the pleasure to have on this occasion Olga Makarova joining us from MTS, they're the largest provider of telecommunication communications of mobile communications, the largest mobile operator ‑‑ I will get it right ‑‑ in Russia.  She's got some real interesting data there to take us through our next discussion, which is the consequences of the COVID‑19 pandemic on the internet, of course on the core internet values.  
Over to you, Olga.  I gather you have some great things to share with us. 
>> OLGA MAKAROVA:  Is this all right?  Thank you to let me take part in this discussion as a speaker.
No one can easily accept changes, most people are afraid of changes, especially global changes.  Changes never come as something we want, we have faced changes.  Has had a huge impact on I'm lives and made huge changes in them.
With respect to people's view of changes, it is always the same, many say no, you can't, it is upsetting to them, well, need to accept the changes and still live in a new way.
Just a moment.  Okay.
The change curve, you see 7 major changes in coping with and accepting changes.  Denial, frustration, depression, experiment, decision, integration, this affects many roles and how.  Let's take a look at this picture on the right.
The shock and denial, it probably starts in February of this year and ended by April of this year.  The growth has been 65%.  In the same month of last year, the year before, we recorded an increase of no more than 15%.  The stages of shock and denial left to a huge increase in video traffic, we saw overwhelming video after the first few weeks in lockdown.  When it started, many people believed that they would be able to return to their real formal lives soon.  That didn't happen.
We're expecting an increase internet traffic in May, during the holidays, along the holidays in May, in terms of people, they are used to spend this time traveling around the globe.  The pandemic has made it impossible for people to travel, people had to stay at home, but the internet traffic that was supposed to grow kept going.  You have seen the frustration stage and then the denial.
The traffic increase and it was distributed between the number of resources.  Video traffic dropped significantly, people stopped watching video.  Social media, decrease decreased slightly.  Our lockdown ended in June.  Today traffic's volume has returned to those of March this year.  There's an increase in traffic of 65% by the end of this year.  Last year and year before we saw an increase in traffic at the level of 12 to 35%.
I'm afraid this may be nearly impossible, if we look at our policy, as precisely as we used to do.  Now a clear understanding of the reasons for the traffic grows this fall, perhaps this is the start of a transmission to a new staged experience.
In this case, it will be very positive news, but perhaps we have just returned to the beginning of when new changes come, caused by COVID, now you keep the precise answer, if they exist, of course, and therefore we must prepare our networks for the changes.  There's some positive news.
The pandemic has had IpV6 to grow faster than ever.  On the importance of being responsible, by mid‑may, it was up.  We saw a rise in traffic from various game services.  In mid-May we witnessed a short‑term significant growth on connections.  This was because of a distribution of game content launched by a global online integrated, this led to several growth, and it was on this viral network, networks.  The action didn't affect our customers but some stakeholders have experienced it, congestion on their external connections.  This case demonstrates the urgent need for great responsibility of each stakeholder, especially now.
On the possibility of improvement, we have started the development of our connectivity much earlier than the pandemic came, at the start of the pandemic, the network had been stable and protected connectivity with plenty of high speeds and service providers.
Almost 19% of traffic from our private peer to peer connections, the connections from our own resources, et cetera, and also our customers, those of our customers.  Before the lockdown, we had received a call from a major partner, it is one of the most famous social company in the Russian market, that's right picture.
It proposed to increase the connections and improve despite the almost ideal connections ‑‑ left picture.
What's done, it is better.  What is done is better but sometimes you do need to do better.  On quality of service, the parameters, it is the page load time, we measured it with 200 websites.  By June of this year, we discovered that over 70% of the problems associated with long page load, associated with long page load, they were related to the sites themselves, not our network.  We decided to partner with content providers to solve the problems together.  We managed to improve the quality of this during the pandemic despite the pandemic.
The benefits of concise and transparent documents rely on the Network Neutrality framework for the negotiations and agreements.  It is a short, concise, transparent document.  It is two pages and everybody can read it.  It was developed by a Working Group of Russian stakeholder, informs December of 2015.  The recommended applications by all stakeholders, allow bringing content closer to consumers by establishing Telecoms, nationals, global content providers, optimizing traffic roles and creating condition for rapid expansions of bandwidth, in particular, in the case of a significant growth of internet traffic.  Perhaps our regional experience might be interesting to start.
In this regard, in this regard, I want to thank all our partners for the contribution during the pandemic.  The development of 5G networks is leading to new changes and these changes will affect not only telecoms but all stakeholders.  We should be ready.
Thank you for your attention.  We can ask for your interventions.  Thank you. 
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: We will follow-through immediately with Sebastien, there are a number of questions in the pod and the Q&A.  I hand the floor over to Sebastien for the link to our core policies.  
Thank you. 
>> SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET: Thank you very much.
I want to talk to you, to take the other side of the situation.  I am an end user.  As an end user, what was the situation with COVID‑19?  I want to talk earlier, some people were able to have the network, I'm in the middle here, it is not a poor country we don't have fiber, we have ‑‑ it is just not a possibility here.  Therefore, when people went to work from home, they discovered ‑‑ we discovered ‑‑ it was quite complicated.  I'm in charge of a local organization here to take care of all types of people, helping children, helping senior people, so on, and all of the families and we put staff to work at home.
They were unable to work from home because of the question of the bandwidth.  When they went home, there was just a connection with satellite, therefore, we don't have the possibility ‑‑ at the same time, if we look at the information system we discover that the system was built to be working on the local network, but not at all to be working from outside.  Fortunately, just before we set up a private network, therefore we ‑‑ part of the work was able to be done from home and it was good coincidence, good planning.  The fact that we don't have enough bandwidth, it is real trouble, both from the user side and from the company's side and we have to wait a few years before we get to some fiber.
At the same time, we try to keep with especially the senior people who are spread among the country, how to help them to be connected, to stay connected.
Fortunately, here again, we have helped 20 of those persons to learn about internet, how to use their laptop, how to use their phone and it was really first time they accessed, learned about internet, how to use it.  It was good that we have done that the year before.  During the situation of lockdown, it was the only way to be able done next.  Even it was a way that they use it to make ‑‑ to get food from outside and to deliver and that's the experience and it is where we need to take that into account, both sides.  Yes, Olga shows us about the networks she's working with, how it was a great tool and was helping people to still work.  That's not the case here.  We need to wait either for the fiber of 5G but we hope it will be something that we'll be able to face but for the second lockdown as we are in today, we have the same trouble, the same question, and I want it take one additional example, my son decided ‑‑ we take him here and he had a good connection in Paris region, here it is not the case, so therefore he can't do what he was supposed to do, his work.
  That's a problem we have to take into account..  That's the same situation in a lot of countries, we'll say in Latin America, Africa, Asia‑Pacific, not just because we are in France and so‑called developed country, we don't have the same type of problem.
That's an idea I wanted to share with you.  We want to have internet as a Human Rights base, it is I guess important but it starts with infrastructure and how we use it on top of that, but having a good cop next, it is something that's absolutely necessary.
I will stop here.  It was just for the sake of time.  If there is a question, I would be happy to answer.
Back to you.  Thank you. 
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: Thank you for that.
Alejandro, you typed a question in the chat for Olga, I wondered whether you wanted to say it rather than reading it?
>> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: I was wondering if there is a seasonality adjusted results, the percentages of the growth and the decrease in traffic, they're month‑to‑month or compared to the year before because for example if the data is for the summer, when school was out, you would expect less traffic from school‑related activities and more traffic for gaming, young people have more time left.
Congratulations for this.  It is a great presentation, the point of view, it was fantastic.  I loved it.
>> Olga Makarova:  Could you please repeat your question? 
>> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: Yes.  The percentage ‑‑ you say you have a 12% increase in traffic from June to July.  Is that compared from June 2020 to July 2020?  Or is it comparing ‑‑
>> OLGA MAKAROVA: No.  No.  No.  In June and July, we have decrease.  We have decreased our ‑‑ we have our traffic decreased.  Decreased.  Just a moment.  Just a moment.  Let me ‑‑ I think traffic has decreased.  It decreased 20, maybe 30, 45%.  It was dramatic but not for us.
That is a traffic decrease, but we would ‑‑ we would have had today, we have the traffic ‑‑ if we ‑‑ if we have had ‑‑ if we have had traffic increase, yes, by June, 60, 65%.  We have today the traffic decrease by ‑‑ I can't ‑‑ I'm afraid ‑‑ I'm afraid to think about it.  I think maybe 100 to 20%, maybe 100 ‑‑ 150%, it is ‑‑ it would have been very dramatic for us.
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: Thank you for that.  
>> ALEJANDRO PISANTY:  I would like to show you a slide for a further comparison when others have asked all other questions. 
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND:  Has there been a situation where the network couldn't cope with the change in traffic, where you saw it, you said, well, your company, you said, well, you know what, we're not ready for this sort of thing and I wonder, the typical internet service provider ‑‑
>> OLGA MAKAROVA:  A big story:  
We were coping with traffic increase.  I decided that it had been well done and I told my technical guys oh, we have ‑‑ we have done great, we have everything very well, but we are ‑‑ we were wrong.  We are not so clever, we are only very lucky.
Of course, there was some participants in our market who had troubles during the pandemic, especially March, especially ‑‑ March and April, especially March and April.  We ‑‑ we received calls for this participant, with the proposal to increase our connections, to increase our connections.  Yes.  Of course. 
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: I'm looking at the chat.  I don't see any questions in the Q&A.  I wonder if ‑‑ I know there are quite a few comments made in the chat.
>> ALEJANDRO PISANTY: There are some questions by Vint Cerf, it is whether our house places, where we live, will have to change in order for several people to be able to work at the same time.  I'm answering that it is a very, very important question.
I have a case among one of my ‑‑ among my students, one of them has three brothers, they're all studying at the same time.  The parents, they're working.  Their father is a physical education teacher.  He's teaching people physical education, they have to jump, shout, move around, he as to do a lot of shouting.  We'll have to make changes in lighting, soundproof, just the ability to share space and when people live in very small homes, apartment blocks, 65 square meters, that's not a lot of space.  You have less than 2 meters on one side of the room, it is a bed probably with two, three beds piled up.  When you live in these conditions, you're not ‑‑ this is another big divide in our society that's highlighted by the COVID epidemic and if we look at the way, the principles, the way they're being challenged, you see the best effort, for example, it has been broken at the edge of the networks and major adjustments were made by the providers like ‑‑ exactly ‑‑ all this shows us here, it is exactly the way that major adjustments are made by the operators, it is not only the metric solution, but it is asking the gamer, so the interoperability have been working well, the device, they're tested, some are not working well.  National border, surveillance, tracking applications, they have challenged the end‑to‑end, as to the network, to do more.  The European Union, for example, the operators there, they're very happy that the way that they manage the neutrality to use end‑to‑end to sustain best efforts and you can see something like this mostly okay but for the universal reach.  This is the way that I see COVID‑19 effecting the core principles and the second framework when used for value.
Thank you.
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: Thank you for sharing this.
That's particularly important as it relates directly to the work.
I was going to mention actually there might be some room for creation of a Dynamic Coalition on working from home cohabitation or something to that extent since it seems to be that we're not in this working from home environment for the short‑term, but rather more the longer term than we currently are in.
I'm seeing more discussion in the chat, but no outright comment.  Does anybody else wish to intervene on this. 
>> MARIANE FRANKLIN:  The access is based on shared devices if a family has a decent laptop or PC, first of all, it is a presumption rather than a fact, and some people, they're having to share phones, living in family units, so at home, it is much defined by access to equipment and the income you need to buy separate pieces of equipment.  It is not immediately on the radar in this discussion but it is crucial, you know, students who have to share the computer because parents and sisters, brother, they're on class at the same time and they don't have enough actual hardware, let alone enough bandwidth coming in the home, we really need to drill down, getting a 360º in picture of how this actually works at the point of accessing as an individual user who may, in fact, have to share equipment.  We're not all as well off ‑‑ people are not always as well off as some of us are in terms of those options.  I want to add that currently to the discussion.  Thank you. 
>> SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET: Definitely, there are different layers here. 
The first ‑‑ I don't know if it is first ‑‑ but how we connect to the internet, what are the tools to use our devices and how we need to share or not share.  There is how we're organizing and the example, the example, it is quite interesting and just to take one example here, my son, he's working during night ‑‑ now he's sleeping in the next room and I have to make this conference call and we are in trouble because we are not living at the same time, but we're sharing the same house.  Fortunately, we have plenty of space, but internet is impacting other places.  Then you add to that, how people know about how to use those tools and how we help them to learn.  It is not the same thing when you send somebody home and say now you have to work from home or you have to learn from home and they know how do it and with that tool, now we're all used with Zoom, Zoom, it is quite complicated too when you don't know how to really use well your mouse.  It is all of those elements we need to take into account in the future.
Thank you.
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: I think you wanted to answer one of Vint's comments in the Q&A.
>> MARIANNE FRANKLIN: It was talking about the economics, and we're talking about the laws of physics, get you there.  There is a cultural ‑‑ there are cultural aspects as well and the COVID crisis and the need for us to be online, it is as individuals but as communities or as classes, groups, it is bringing forth the cultural, psycho, emotional dimensions of how people, communities, groups, extended family, family members presume to use this equipment and I think it makes more powerful this discussion to remember the cultural aspect, there are different ways of using these portals and devices.  I'm reminded of my privilege when my students knock on the door, I can't get to class, I can't actually get to the computer.  You know, it is my dad is using it, for instance, and he's got to work.
These sorts of things, they're subtle but very concrete in consequences.  Point taken, Vint, Robert.  Too, wanted to add that cultural aspect as part of the critical data.  Thank you.
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: Time is going fast.  We will closeout on this topic after Sivas.
You may be muted. 
>> SIVASUBRAMANIAN MUTHUSAMY:  I'm sorry.  I wanted to recount some of the observations made by participants in our past sessions.  In particular, we had a session two years ago where Matthew Sales was saying he wanted to apply the notion of freedom from harm to core internet values, and he was observing the core internet values should not be harmed.  Here we are in an age of pandemic, quite a lot of values pertaining to the core values, including freedom of ex precious or more compromised as an amount of necessity.
The question that is to be raised at this point of time, it is how temporary or how do these regulatory measures, that's what ‑‑ that's at this point.   .
Another participant, they were saying that a new central layer, a center of control, must never be created, and it appears that during this pandemic, there is a certain degree of regulatory control as being put in place and that also should be temporary.
We also have said in 2015, we proposed, that there be a defined, agreed upon list of core internet value, and these core internet value, they need to be the reference standard for global internet policy.  I wanted to mention this, that it was very, very important at this point in time to see how the core internet values are heard, it is something like broad commandment, the values, they're part of the goal and they're never meant to be changed, at the point in time, they could be altered in a certain way but whatever altercations are done, it is temporary.  That's all I want to say.  I would like Vint, someone to bring in their insights on this specific topic before it is closed.
Thank you.  Thank you. 
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: We have very little time.  Did anyone want to wish to comment on this briefly? 
I note in the chat, the Internet Invariants that Leslie Daigle has talked about and I know the Internet Society has followed up on much discussion on this topic as well.
>> VINT CERF: I would like to respond to that point. 
I think I'm reaching the conclusion, I don't know about anyone else, that all of feet bombs that we want to apply to the core values of the internet have to be tempered somehow.  I think we're learning that we can't have a completely unconstrained environment because humans don't behave well in environment where is there are no guardrails and where there are no norms.
I think if there is any lesson to be taken away from the last couple of decades of experience with the internet, it is that it needs to have a framework in which freedom is tempered by responsibility and where people are irresponsible then it is tempered by ways of enforcing behaviors that are constant with the type of society we want to live in.  Of course, the tension here, it is figuring out what those guardrails look like and how they're enforced.
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: I guess that's words of wisdom for the end of this topic.
We have much more discussion in the future on that.  The last part of this section, of this meeting, it is about a statement that's been drafted by a number of people in the coalition, and that's been ‑‑ the effort is led by Gregory Name, whose joining us here and we also have some members of the other Dynamic Coalitions that have decided to support this statement.  Gregory, over to you.
Would you just show us through it?  I don't know if you can share the screen, where you want me to share the screen?
>> GREGORY NAME:  It would be good if you could share your screen, please.
Thank you, everyone, for this opportunity.
I suggested this statement in order to address government behaviors that are detrimental to freedom of speech.  We have listed five instances of excessive controls, especially we call excessive, any unilateral control of the internet for political reasons, especially for political purposes.
Reason can only exist if human beings are allowed to scrutinize each other and this applies especially to political life.  Every country that's a signatory to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights has the way to ensure freedom of speech, but not every country is fulfilling their commitments.  As a Dynamic Coalition on Core Internet Value, we have the duty to express our concerns and this statement, it is an appeal to dialogue.  It projects the notion that political control of the internet can be exerted without the participation of stakeholders.  Nobody knows everything.  No argument is so good that you can dispense with dissent.  Freedom of speech is a precondition for mutual understanding.  These are the values we defend and these are values that all UN countries have committed to uphold.  The text is divided in three main parts, the preliminary consideration, the problematics and the call to action.  Now, to the statement.
The internet is architectural as an ecosystem free and open and decentralized end‑to‑end and robustly reliable, as a global network of internet, it is a universal medium to be open regardless of geography or nationality.  The interoperability makes it possible for any computer system to run application programs from different vendors and to interact with other computers around wide area networks regardless of the physical architecture and the operating systems.  The Internet Technical Standards are open standards that enable any device or network to connect to the internet and allow this services and allow diverse services, applications or types of data.  The internet is meant to be free of any centralized control.  Its end‑to‑end and user‑centric nature gives control to the end users over the type of information application and service that they want to share and access.  The internet is robust and reliable.  The internet owes its success not only to the technology, but also to the way it operates, with no single authority directing it, accept the unique addressing system coordinated by ICANN which is designed for robustness and reliability and whose policies are developed in the multistakeholder manner and internet governance is a multistakeholder global process of furthering the evolution of internet as a universally accessible free and open and operable end‑to‑end decentralized ecosystem.  The internet is free of barriers to connect, communicate and create the IGF in particular, it is a forum of multistakeholder policy dialogue and these so far are pretty linear considerations and now we're going to look at the programization. 
Recently, unilateral government actions have undermined public trust in the internet as a call for good, such actions do not reflect an international consensus, they do not result from dialogue with stakeholders in the communities affected, they are not endorsed by the IGF to form the internet governance, such actions include suppression of political dissent, despite calls of content moderation due to circumstances, there is no consensus of what constitutes or what constitutes reasonable moderation.  On the other hand, there is a consensus that the suppression of political dissent, it does not qualify as reasonable moderation, and national fireworks, global reach, it is a core principle of the best technical practices, it is built on end‑to‑end communication and interoperability.  This principle only works if the internet is shaped with a view to facilitate free internet and among users and functions as a network driven by the end points of communication without censorship or controlled duty.
National shutdowns, by shaping the internet in ways that leads to fear and confusion in local communities, governments jeopardize international good will and if there are security concerns, there are technological ways of finding out what specific target is effected, with no reason to shut the entire network down.  Shut downs infringe basic Human Rights such as had freedom of expression and the rights to information with harmful consequences from people's lives.
Fragmentation of the internet, the blocking of internationally available service to a proportion of user, including the blocking of applications, applying provided discriminatory or regions specific shaped policies, it causes the fragmentation of the internet.  Preventing the internet offends the principle that all humans are born equal and must have equal access to any information and knowledge available to mankind.
Data and traffic shaping, the internet is a global network of networks, by dictating how networks should connect to each other and by splitting traffic governments undermine the agility, resilience, flexibility of the internet.  The rules of connection between networks should result from technical rather than political considerations.  These are ‑‑ this is a problem and then a short call to action.  The undersigned organizations and groups distance themselves from political actions that distort the inclusive, global nature of the internet, we therefore encourage governments to seek democratic legitimatization of the policies, this is only possible by engaging in a participatory dialogue with stakeholders.  Dynamic Coalition and core internet value, Dynamic Coalition on Internet of Things, Internet Rights and Principles Coalition, the Coalition on Internet Governance.
This is the statement.  As this is an ongoing debate, we welcome ongoing input.  We thank everyone who contributed to the drafting and I very much look forward to further constructive discussions and dialogue on this.
Thank you.  Thank you very much. 
>> SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET: Thank you.  I take back the presentation.
If you have comments raise your hand, put the question in the chat.  If I ask, can other leader, leaders of other coalitions, Dynamic Coalitions, would like to take the floor and express your ‑‑ their view on this document and we are supposed to finish soon.  I don't remember what time we were supposed to.  Please, if there are other people from other.
>> NOHA ABDEL BAKY:  We support this, youth is from Generation Y and Z, they're still digital natives and main users of the internet and they're highly affected by everything that happens online.
So during the crisis we observed many things happening online, like applications, getting blocked, we observed partial and sometimes total shut downs in other countries.
We are observed youth being affected because their education is effected, they need to study online, sometimes as full timers and many also, they were affected because we had to work from home or the freelance jobs were effected or even their start‑ups got affected by the crisis.
Also we observed political suppression in some countries, youth were not able to express their views or how their governments handled the crisis or the pandemic situation.  That's why we're supporting the statement, because it promotes protecting the basic Human Rights of youth or any other ‑‑ or all of the end users to be online, and to protect their online presence.  
Thank you.
>> SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET: Thank you very much. 
Any other Dynamic Coalition which would like to take the floor now?
>> VINT CERF: Could I jump in? 
I just put something in the chat, but as I listened, it occurred to me that maybe we should take as a basis this statement that we just heard from Gregory and develop a Universal Declaration of Human Digital Rights and Responsibilities, and I note that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights did not include the word responsibility and it strikes me that this would be an important addition to a statement in this digital context.
>> SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET: I'm sure we'll take that into account.  May I give the floor to IEPCT, representative, is it ‑‑ it is ‑‑  it will be Marianne or Minda. 
>> MARIANNE FRANKLIN: Thank you.
Yes.  Yes.  Minda will jump in if she wants to.  
We support this statement because it is as I have noted in the chat, it resonates with the Charter of Human Rights and Principles for the Internet.  I do believe responsibility, Vint, it is mentioned in the charter, it includes our corporate responsibility and the charter encompasses all of our points here very well because it was a collaborative effort ten years ago now ‑‑ ten years ago.  Many people in this session, they were actually in some of those early ‑‑ some people in this session, they were in the early drafting stages.  I think it may be a self‑serving argument on the part of this coalition.  I don't think we have to reinvent the wheel, we have to get our shoulders behind the wheel that's already turning and we do this ‑‑ we do it in this way by endorsing these statements, we may in the agree on every single point, but why should we?  The basic ‑‑ the basic principle is there.  I think ‑‑ so I would just like to know that the charter has been around as it is in public domain and draws on Universal Declaration on Human Rights and our subsequent treaties and covenants with all of the imperfections and perhaps arrogance positions on the statement of humanity just to refer to this here.  That's why we have had a discussion, basically endorsing this statement.  We need to go deeper and have all of our efforts resonate more deeply rather than more thinly.  Vint, with all due respect, I feel we have the sort of Document that you're advocating, and I think we need to use that and build it out more with these sorts of statements.
Thank you so much.
>> SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET: I see that you want to take the floor, but before I give you the floor, may I ask if somebody from the Dynamic Coalition on Internet of Things are with us and if wants to take the floor?  I have ‑‑ all right.
>> OLIVIER CREPIN‑LEBLOND: I don't see Shane.
>> SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET: I will give the floor to Gregory.
>> GREGORY NAME:  Thank you for the comments.  
If there is a problematic aspect, which there needs to be more academic research and more discussion, it is arguably there can be a conflict of Human Rights when it comes to things like encryption. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-dc-public-collaboration-on-multistakeholder-heath-data-values-%E2%80%93-raw^^

>> MODERATOR: Everybody, a very warm welcome to our session.  We're a new Dynamic Coalition.  Data driven health technology, very new, just a few months.  Our group is excited to host you today and thank you for joining us.  My name is Amali De Silva‑Mitchell and this session, just to give you a quick introduction, there will be two presentations and then there will be a bit of a time for impressions from some members of our Dynamic Coalition and we hope that some invited guests will be able to reach us.  At the moment, due to COVID, we have two of our members either very busy in hospital administration doing that or due to sudden lockdowns in the area there, they cannot reach us through technology to be with us.
We will have to play it by here and deal with that at that point in time.
Our group has a focus on issues, risk, benefits and opportunities to end users of the full value chain for healthcare and associated activities.  That's the focus of our work.
Okay.
That will come alive through our presentations and right at the end, in the discussion with all of you.  Okay.  We have broken this down into a couple of segments, sort of 30‑minutes each, that's kind of how we have planned this out and so I just want to say that all of this information, all of these discussions, we're going to bring this in to a paper which is going to be our very first paper on technology values for healthcare.  We're looking at services within the healthcare industry, looking at technologies, the manufacturing of drugs, the whole full sphere of healthcare services, product, so forth.
We'll start on this project and then we'll keep updating it each year as we get more information from all of you and that's how we're proposing to move forward with our DC.  Our DC also has two educational components on block chain and machine learning, that's two of 4 paper, presentations, that we have said that we will be producing for this Dynamic Coalition.  It should be very, very interesting.
We also are going to be having a survey in 2021 and also a poster competition in 2021.  The announcement of those activities will be posted to the announcement areas of the IGF website.  Okay.  Please, I would like to also invite all of you to participate with us in this new Dynamic Coalition and to sign up to our list, the email address is also found under Dynamic Coalitions and we're currently number 7 on that list there, you can find us there, please.
I'm just going to give a little bit about who I am and then we'll start this session.  I am section ri Lankan, I have worked in the technology industry, software, hardware, I was a President of an internet service provider in Canada, a non‑profit, a director of Freedom of Information and privacy association of British Colombia and I have worked in the government sector in hardware and software development.  I am an accountant and an economist but I also have background in computer science.  That's a little bit about myself.  Each speak, I will ask each speaker before they speak to tell where you say they're from and a little bit about themselves and then please start the conversation with us, either through representation, impressions, so forth.
Our very first speaker is a founding member of our group here, Galia Kondova.
Galia, you have the floor, please. 
>> GALIA KONDOVA: Thank you.  I'm very happy to take part in this exciting work.
I'm Bulgarian and I have an international background, exactly as you do.  I have a Bachelor's in economics, master's in political science and a PhD in economics and I have had the privilege to live not only in Bulgaria but also in Germany, in the U.S., at the World Bank for eight years and now I do research at the University here in Switzerland.  It is really exciting to talk about such an important topic and I'm really looking forward to the discussion today.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
You are our first speaker, Galia.
>> GALIA KONDOVA: Yes.
I have prepared some slides.  I would like now to share this with you..
The topic I would like to talk to you, the application of block chain in eHealth records and this is a very important topic because now we're looking in many countries for solutions of how the patient should have control over their own data and block chain seems to offer some acceptable technological solutions for providing the patient with control, so‑called sovereign control over their data and disclose it to the extent that is necessary.  I would like first of all to start with a very brief introduction on the most important characteristic of the technology of block chain.  What's so different when we talk about block chain as compared to other technologies, well first as you can see here we talk about decentralization which means that the patient, the institution does not need to have a central place so to store this data, but the storage of the data could take place in a decentralized manner, on ledger that's managed and to which there are different parties that have access to.  This is something that's quite new as a concept as compared to the data models where we have the data centered in one specific database.
We have the categories of the block chain technology, and mainly we have persistency, Anonymity and auditability, that has to do with the fact that all of the participants, in block chain, they have access to the stored data and the data that's stored there can also be tracked back and in this case we can say that the Auditability and the persistency of the data, that persistency of the data means that the information available on the different ledgers is the same, it cannot be changed by any more specific actor.
This has to do with the cryptography applied for storing the data on the block chain, here there are big challenges related to technology and all of the regulations that effect the data, in particular also the privacy, data privacy aspect, and in Europe we have the general data protection and that's why here this factor is very, very important to be analyzed when we talk about the application of block chain in eHealth.
I in this presentation have spent some more time, particular time on looking into the security aspects also of using the block chain for eHealth data because cybersecurity issues, that's of particularly importance, especially the last few months when we have read Articles on the leakage of data, this is a very important aspect related to the block chain technology.
Here is an overview of the different possible block chain applications and now we have many good use cases that provide examples of the applications.  Here you see there is a number of the block chain applications that now we have experienced.  It started with finance, of course, the crypto currency application use cases and then it also quickly went to Internet of Things and we have the possibility of block chain, this is the peer to peer block chain trading platforms, in Europe, there is a huge development in the European block chain and infrastructures, it is considering the demand of having cross‑border efficient forms of information and the data and here we have the HLC industry and this is exactly what our coalition is looking into, HLC and eHealth applications.
Let's move slowly to the health sector.  Here I would like to focus on the electronic health records.  As I said, there are legislations, I can just mention here, Switzerland, where I live, the project related to the introduction of an electronic patient record and this concept of electronic health records integrates an individual's medical health records generated by a health service provider such as a physician, a medical assistant, a pharmacist and private health records generated by the individual.  With this here, we talk about not only the private health records, but also any additional information that could be generated by health service providers.
What is the requirement about the electronic health records, they should allow the sharing of data between authorized providers and an individual but in a data‑protected manner.
Here, because of the sharing of the information block chain comes into the picture and provides some technological solutions, but as I said, it is a work in progress and there are many aspects that need to be looked at.  Here in detail is data in the health records, data types, we're talking in particular.  Here when we talk about health data and we talk about the different LDCs RGs and also the demographics like what is the patient age, where does this patient live, fetch files, photo, some others, other documentation, then we have the evolution, the progress in crate Cal healthcare for this patient and the history, what is, so general information, emergency contact, we have the information and any home monitoring data, collaborative ‑‑ lab active results, medications, prescriptions, prevention, so on.  Here as you could see, when we talk about electronic health records, basically this is a comprehensive set of all of the information associated with the patient and the track record of any treatments, et cetera.
Now, I would like to come to my last slide and then I have prepared a slide that provides an overview of the coverage of cybersecurity‑relevant requirements for these electronic health records by block chain if we would like to apply block chain, for example, I could take this here and there is an analysis, a preliminary analysis that's been conducted in the sense of what percentage does the block chain cover the cybersecurity relevant requirement for electronic health records.  Here you see on the dark blue bar, they're presenting these requirements or categories to which block chain accommodates best.  Here we could see availability, so this is the accessibility of the data and also integrity, the coverage, the integrity, the fact that the data cannot be amended or altered or changed once on the block chain.  As you see here, (poor audio quality).
Here you have the cybersecurity and also here I should say that the GDPR requirement, for the possibility to delete completely some of the information currently in discussion, so I wanted to provide an overview that block chain provides potential for the coverage and the cybersecurity requirements for eHealth records, however, there are aspects that are still open and I assume that the prill cent technologies will have a solution if you would like to think of a serious implementation of the technology.
So, at this stage, I would like to, of course, thank you for your attention and here you see also my contact data and most of all, I look forward to the discussion on these issues. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That's very informative.  Interesting to see all of the data lines and the integrity and so forth and, yes, we'll keep the questions right to the very end after all of the speakers have spoken.
Thank you.
Please now we're going to move on to this section called Mosaic.  I'm not sure who is actually with us.  I'm just going to call out names and hope that we have people we were expecting to have.
Okay.  We don't have Yao.  Yankees ao was going to talk about language.  We're particularly interested in the access to eHealth and Yao was going to talk about the importance of translation and so forth so that we can increase access globally.  That was what he was talking about, an important value for us.
You know, hopefully, I'm not sure if he'll join us later, we'll come back to him.
Do we have Lakmini Shah?  We don't.  She was a guest, a counselor, from London, in the U.K., and she was going to talk a little bit about smart cities, but she did email me and say that she was not well so that's probably what that is.  We had also a retired Secretary‑General of family planning association, federation internationally and she is unfortunately, due to restrictions of lockdown suddenly unable to reach technology.
We have also Janna Belote, who was going to be speaking, senior hospital administrator in the U.S., and she just told me a few minutes ago she has to rush off to deal with some issues there for COVID, so forth, which she's covering.
I'm beginning to think ‑‑ Herman Ramos, are you available, please? 
>> HERMAN RAMOS: Hello.  
>> MODERATOR:  Herman Ramos, if you take the floor, that would be great.  You have full time because so many are delayed due to COVID and related.
>> HERMAN RAMOS: I'll just start to share my screen.  I have a background in physics and I have been working with technology globally and most recently here in Mozambiqe and I'm one of the 2020 Internet Society youth Ambassadors.  I'll just start my presentation.
The development of internet information and technology has been contributing to the digitalization of many activities and sectors and health is no exception.  The advancement in popular technology and digital computing improved the speed and pishcy which data can be processed and exchanged.  Due to the unprecedented spread of mobile technology, as well as advancing the normalcy application, tens of millions of citizens and people now use mobile device as they communicate and the data.  We have been addressing a high range of challenges in areas such as disease surveillance enhanced systems and health education.  Basically we define mobile health as mobile computing, a medical sensor, communication technology for health.
We have noticed the increase on mobile application solutions because they can address a high number of different health issues.  Also mobile health allows or offers the ability to remove individuals to participate in healthcare, basically individuals can be in communities, they don't need to go to healthcare facilities, at home they can have early diagnosis and can monitor any kind of diseases.
Basically, most common application of mobile healthcare is using mobile phones and communication devices to educate consumers on preventive healthcare services.  However, there is a range of applications with this.  You see here if you integrate the diagnosis and monetary systems, this can offer control measures to reduce the speed of any infections, we're talking about disease, et cetera.
Basically, this offers two types of benefits.  First of all, the increasing access to healthcare outside of healthcare settings.  This is what I was talking about earlier.  We don't need to go to a formal healthcare facility, you can do the self‑testing at home.  The second, after making the test, you can haval diagnosed results and that's important for you and for the healthcare professionals that will elicit the rapid, appropriate clinical and appropriate health response to the issue.  In this way, we can see that the diagnosis and monitoring of disease are clear to clinical maturization.
Here we have a table basically that has all of the tests, the diagnosis, it gives the opportunity to give early detection, the automated results, capture, analysis.
Treatment and patient management, there is a linkage here between the results of when the patient has the results, there is a linkage here to the clinical care because the care has a connection with the mobile.  Also we have the disease control and elimination.  After we have the results of the diagnosis, we can apply the epidemic control, in this way, public health can implement control strategies to monitor and to control the diseases.
The application of mobile healthcare is not only for Developing Countries.  This is also applicable for Developing Countries and we know that the infrastructure in Developing Countries is much smaller than in Developing Countries and access to medication is limited especially rural, remote areas, we can look at the cheaper healthcare to provide and create an efficient, early diagnosis of most common diseases, including the wording for academics.
As many area Reyes lated to internet, the mobile healthcare also has some challenge, one of the challenges is regulation.  In this way, to address this challenge of regulation, it is important to develop a regulatory framework that is with medical apps, managing ‑‑ that are merging.  We can see that regulatory, they're not keeping the pace with the technological innovation.  Also the cost and clinical effectiveness, in order to guarantee a best integration of this kind of system, it is important to have or required to have evidence and is clinical effective and resulting in cost effectiveness.  
An important challenge, it is the digital divide, because we know in many countries, many people don't have access to internet and then if they don't have access to internet, there is no possibility of enjoying the mobile healthcare.  In this way, it is important to ensure that no one is left behind.
Conclusion, investigations in modern physics sparked the technological development of health systems which with the design of various equipment and the diagnostic techniques, now it is time for the internet, information and communication technologies to create a digital revolution in the health system.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.
Your contact information is there for people to contact you.
>> HERMAN RAMOS: Yes.  I'm open to any interaction and engagement.
>> MODERATOR: Excellent.
>> HERMAN RAMOS: Also we have our mailing list at the Dynamic Coalition.
>> MODERATOR: Yes.  Thank you.  Thank you for mentioning that as well.
That was very interesting presentation and again, audience, we'll keep our questions right to the very end.
I am just going to ask the Mosaic speakers, do we have any others, please, with us?  Is there anyone of the Mosaic speakers here with us, please.
Okay.  I don't think anyone made it.  We have a number of medical people with us, they are obviously very busy with COVID and so forth.
Would you be able to bring your presentation forward, please?
>> JORN ERBGUTH: Sure.  Just let me start it and share screen.
Please allow me to take a little bit of a larger angle and I would like to take a look at AI and while it is a promising technology, it is often misunderstood and I would like to focus a little bit on how it works.
I'm Jorn Erbguth, head of technology in Geneva Macro lab, my background is in law and technology.  I'm not a health expert.  I teach at the University of St. Gallen, Lucernee and the Geneva School of Diplomacy.  I would like to talk about I didn't AI works and why currently AI is overestimated and a better understanding is needed.
We start with some myths about AI?  You remember Brexit?  It is quite ‑‑ I'm not happy at all about Brexit happying.  I don't think it has been caused by any kind of bots or Cambridge and there has been an inquiry and the information commissioner said ‑‑ they have found no evidence so, of course, they have broken privacy law, it is not a good company, but they also lied about capabilities, they did not have the power to influence public opinion in that way.
We must not be too afraid about technology, we don't understand, it and often those powers and risks are overestimated.  Another example, maybe you heard about Twitter social bots that spread fake information about COVID‑19 and about any other topic as well.  The good message is they don't exist.  The bad message, it is people.  Actually, there are some publications that are cited, there are some papers that cite those people, but actually there has not been an evidence of a single social bot.  There are bots that automatically post cop tent, like from publishers, and there is a big ban of bots, they're posting all the time, but this exists, but a social bot that behaves like a human, that cannot be distinguished from a human and is actively pushing a specific agenda has not been identified at all.
People claiming that 50% of the accounts involved in certain discussion, bots, they should be able to at least identify a single one.  There has been a research within governments and he's asking every single publication about social bots, please Naomi the accounts, I will track them and he is checking them and he did not find any of those accounts that were not human.  Good news is there are no social bots, the bad message, it is humans that posed those..
How we treat AI, it is a cropping of images by Twitter.  When you pose an image A tweet with an image on Twitter, you have to ‑‑ you can add any kind or size of image to the tweet and if the format, the ratio does not fit within Twitter, they crop it, meaning that they cut it and select the most probably interesting part of the image.  The most interesting part of an image is usually a face.  So they will select a face, which works pretty well and the trouble starts when there are two faces on the opposite ends of a face ‑‑ of a picture.  They have to then select which face to take.  Of course, then they can only take one face so there will be a decision and sometimes it is an easy decision if you have a big one in the foreground and a small one in the background, then it is obvious and if they're pretty similar, of course, we know one person is more important than the other one, with you the system doesn't know that and the system selects the same face regardless of where it is in this picture.
This is not proof that there is some general preference to skin color.  Actually there has been a test with 90 pictures, which is not too big, but reasonably large, which has shown that there has not been a specific preference for skin color.
Of course, those systems, they don't behave according to rules so we don't trust them and we expect the worse.  This kind of systematic, how we deal with this type of technology, because it is there, even in a context where it doesn't really matter.  Nothing of the image is lost.  It is a preview.  Imagine when these type of things happen to the use of AI and health and some group of people will be not treated equally and then we have a scandal, and it will happen, and it happens, because this technology, it does not go along with rules and we have to either accept it or use a dinner technology.  There is no way to stop AI from doing that.  It is a basic essence of deep learning.
Let's see what is AI.  When we look at computers playing chess, they can outperform even world champion, the world chess masters.  Is computers playing chess AI?  The calculate, they can outperform any human so it is obvious they outperform humans in a task that animals cannot do.  Are they AI?  No, we don't ‑‑ we don't name them AI because they are too trivial to do.
It is like AI is only the cutting edge technology.  When the technology comes into place, it is not AI any more.
The definition, it is more ‑‑ it is not a scientific definition, it is more like a common definition for some new technology.
AI is when a human cannot distinguish another human from computer.  Okay.
Sounds reasonable.
We have this in a little bit of a different way, when a computer wants to know whether you are a human or a robot, they ask you to fill in a capture where you have some writings that's distorted and you need to decipher it and computers are getting better than humans in deciphering it.  A little bit of an issue, are computers now capable of AI?  Well, actually Google replaced the captures with some softwares that are spying on us to determine if we are just a robot taking content or if we're really human.
How does deep learning work?  In my view, deep learning works like a dog.  You teach a dog, if the dog behaves well, they get a positive reward.  If not, they don't get it.
You present a lot of examples again and again and again and again and that's exactly what you do with deep learning.  Actually deep learning is using neuro nets that are done similarly to the brain.  This is not a surprise, the behavior is a bit similar, and you have to take this into account because deep learning is really different from other type of computing.  You cannot expect that it behaves according to rules, that it is programmed and people know what they have created, no, that's not the way deep learning works.
How does it work?  First you get a neuronal net and the initial state of the neuronal net, it is random and it needs to be random, basically it is the random ingredient into deep learning.  That's the reason why deep learning is not stake statistic.  It uses a lot of data, it is similar to statistic, but it is not statistic., if you do a statistical analysis on data, you do with it twice, three times, four times, five times, you always arrive at the same results.  At deep learning, you always arrive at different systems.
Besides the neuronal net, you need training data, and you need the training algorithm.  The training algorithm is basically tuning the neuronal net so it fits the training data.  How does that work.
I just put three examples.  Usually you have thousands of millions of examples.  Of course, in random state of the system, it is quite different.  Now you have the differences calculated and you queue the system in the way that it is closer to the examples and do you it again and again and hopefully, finally the system goes through the examples and gives the right answers to those examples.  This is not really what you want to achieve because you have already stored your examples.  What you want to achieve, it is the generalization of the system.  You have examples like this, that the system has not seen before, and then you check whether the generalization is good enough for those as example, test data, validation data.
You split the training data into training, test, validation data.
To summarize, deep learning, the training is based on data and random.
The system, it is based on generalization which is the same as stereotyping.  It does not it meet any rules but does not obey any rules either, and it is imitating intelligence and you always have to be aware that if there are new inputs, that the system hasn't seen before, so as a result unpredictable.  Of course systems usual Libby behavior well and there is a high probability I would say that we'll do it correctly but even new inputs might behave quite differently, may produce unexpected result.
What can these kind of systems achieve?  Here we have a system that can distinguish criminals from non‑criminals.  Wow.  Well, when you look closer, you can do so too.  You will see those people with the white collar, nice, CV photo, they're not the criminals and those people who don't look so happy, they just have been arrested and those photos from just being arrested, they look quite a little bit different than the photos on the CV.  The system can distinguish a photo of an arrest and a photo of a CV, but they cannot distinguish whether somebody is a criminal or not.  This is basically the issue.  We're not using the right criteria.  If the criteria met us, you shouldn't use them, it is a rule that uses the system that obeys by the rule, plays by the rule.
It can be hacked.  Here is a stop sign and a Google car.  You see the stop sign on the right‑hand side, on the left‑hand side, the stop sign has some patches on it.  Those patches are really big.  The system does not learn that a stop sign is this shape with stop in white letters and the system just picks some points where the stop sign is different, for example, than the speed limit sign.
If you analyze the system and find out which bots those are, you just have to put patches on those spots and you get a different result.
It gets even worse.  Here is a picture of a life boat that's recognized, if you add a little bit of Natalia Mochu to it, it becomes a scotch terrier with a high probability there.
Is research that shows it can be sufficient to even change one pixel of an image to get really substantially different results.  This is the kind of hacking you don't feed to invade the system, you just have to have the input in a little bit and then you have a completely different result without being detected because the system does what it does but produces completely different results.
There is discrimination, of course.  That's often in the headlines and sometimes it is due to gaps in training data.
If there is a case that has not been trained then there is a high probability that the system will not behave correctly.
If you only have white faces in the training data then the system might not correctly recognize people of color.  It is important to have a well‑balanced training set, and even more than well‑balanced, because minorities need to have an equal stake here.  If you have a minority that's 1% or .1% of the population, and the system should work for them as well, it is not sufficient to just have one example out of 1,000 of this minority.
You have to balance the training data, but unfortunately, this is not enough.  Even if you have balanced training data, which is, of course, unbalanced training data, biased training data, it is, of course, one of the main reasons for bias and even if you don't have gaps in your training data the selection of the criteria to recognize a person or a situation is based on random and it is based on machine‑generated stereotypes and even basing decisions on statistics, it is bad because it means that you base the decision on one person, on the behavior of people of his or her group before and deep learning has worked because it is not statistics and involves random as well.
To summarize, the pros and cons of deep learning, the pros is, you don't need rules.  If you don't have rules, you can still use it.  There are some field where is you don't have rules.  Those area, it can be written compared to human action.  If you have rules, use the system that can obey your rules.  It still works reasonably with less than perfect data.  If you have a little bit of contradiction data, the system, it can still perform reasonably well.  Of course, there is a performance that will deteriorate with bad data in a dataset and this is often a problem but it will not break immediately.  If trained well, can being in certain situations provide, produce good results and another thing is maybe you heard about Tusla, it is ‑‑ it drove into a truck.  It can fail in cases where we don't have any question what the right decision is, but since the criteria is situational, auditory, then you can rely on it and can be easily hacked as we have seen it.
What to do with this?  We see that you cannot trust those systems so you call the expert group to develop trustworthy AI.  Of course, you cannot change the technology so they provide some advice that may help in some situations but not really.  A lot of government bodies, oversight communities, UN, governments, et cetera, today the German commission just published a report, a lot of commissions produce a lot of papers, but they cannot change the fundamentals and there is electric transparency, people often say, well, this is a black box system and if we could look into the black box, it would be fine.  You can be glad that you cannot look into the black box.  What's in there, it is really bad.  It is not rules that you think should be there, it is quite a lot of silly rules that in their combination produces good results.  You have good results.  You have statistically good results, but if the rule said that, you wouldn't accept it all.
If you have a case where you want to use this kind of system, it should be made completely accessible for tests and analysis.  If you do so, you can find those blind spots, those areas where they don't form well.  Of course, this will expose the systems, but transparency, it is always good for security.  If you can expose those issues then we have a chance to fix them and high‑level descriptions of the means of transparency, they're not at all sufficient in dealing with those issues.  Not to stay completely negative, AI can make a difference in health.  For example, the cancer detection on radio images, it has huge potential so we have quite positive effects, especially those areas where we don't have specific rules for humans, where only experience counts and how many images can be seen in the life of a human radiologist and how many images can be used for training an AI system.
This number, it is much higher, the system, it is much less well developed might outform the humans that only have a much smaller training set.  This is a reason why ‑‑ I think there are applications in public health that you have to be aware of the limitations and you should look ‑‑ for certain things, you look for different kinds of systems that are rule‑based and that are not just trained.
So resume, deep learning in health, they can out perform other systems, especially when you look at radio images, radio graphs and but they all produce blind spots.  Even if you have a great system, that can diagnose cancer, it will not diagnose cancer with the same quality for all people so there will be certain groups where the system works less well.  Of course, this is not new, you have doctors, a doctor that's never treated a child might not be able to detect some situation in a child as easily as a pediatrician that does this all the time.  The system, they're not neutral, they have blind spots and they fail in situations.  At the same time, statistically thousand perform quite well in a lot of situations.
You have to provide a setting where you can deal with it.  You shouldn't rely on the systems because then you don't deal with these risks and issues, but of course you can improve health by using those systems in a way where you chose that kind of responsibility.  You need to expect bias, it cannot be avoided.
People are out there saying there is a removed buy Y they can remove certain small bits of bias, sometimes they impose even more bias by removing bias because it is imposed opposite bias which is ‑‑ which will not wipe out bias but will basically increase bias.  You just don't know against whom the bias will be.  It might be some groups and we'll look specifically at, it may be a completely different group, but nobody deserves to be disadvantaged by bias.  We need to expect bias, and we need to be able to deal with it.  If we can't, you should not use those systems, we need to have safeguards in place that will be able to deal with those cases, it will sooner or later occur.
We have another issue, we have the issue of the training data.  Training data in the health area is usually highly sensitive personal data.  You first need to train the system and you need it every time again when you retrain the system and you can in a limited way, but in some situations, you can extract part of the training data from the finished systems.  This is a special issue.
You can kind of create training data, synthetic training data, that works, it was proven to work and then you need more data and you reduce the quality of the outcome.  You have to balance whether you want to really do that or not, or you have to ‑‑ well, you have to see if you can justify this by the positive impact.
To be clear, democracy does not save us.  The side secretaries, some can be mitigated by some measure, you will not remove them completely.  You have to deal with them and say if you document every step of the development step, phase, then, of course, you can maybe review some sources, but you will still not have a perfect system because the system is based on stereotype, it is not based on rules.
Thank you.
I'm looking forward to our discussion.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for an interesting presentation there.  I thank all three speakers, you had very different viewpoints on eHealth, very interesting.  Very new material.  I hope our audience really gotten gaged there.
We probably have maybe 20 minutes I think.  We don't have too many members in our audience so why don't ‑‑ I'm just wondering, please, the technical host, can you advise us how we can deal with questions, please?
>> JORN ERBGUTH: People can use the Q&A.  You see the Q&A button below your screen.  When somebody puts a Q&A there, you can look at them and we can answer them. 
>> MODERATOR: Audience, please be welcomed to put in your question there and if you want to ask a specific question, it can be Galia, Herman, Jorn, please state their name at the beginning of the question, otherwise if it is to any panelist, then please. 
I'll start us off with something to all three of the panelists.  Just wanting to ask about the role of judgment, it is an important quality, especially when dealing with new system, human judgment, it is critical in making a very good decision.  You know, how ‑‑ I'll put it to all three of the speakers ‑‑ where do you think the technology is, each of you spoke on three very dinner area, block chain, mobile tech, and the artificial intelligence, machine learning, where do you think we can quickly see the technology picking up to the human, please. 
>> JORN ERBGUTH: I think it is always a human using the technology, it is not the technology running against the human.  Of course, humans can use technology to replace other humans and they always have done that, for decades, centuries, this will continue to be the case.
>> MODERATOR: I have an accounting background and I see repetitive tasks being done quickly, the higher decision level tasks being retained for a long time, however, I'm seeing there is sometimes ‑‑ we have something in accounting called dashboards and this is something that they use very much in healthcare, I'm not a healthcare accountant, we are missing our founder member there in that field with us today, I'm beginning to think that there will be a lot of this dashboard being used.  We know that's a concern to patients.  We have trojen data pockets that suddenly come up there and cause a problem and maybe if the tasks have now been given to staff who may ‑‑ who don't have the very high sophistication of medical experience behind them, there is a risk there for the patient and that's always been something a little bit of a concern for a patient perspective and something we could apply in terms of block chain, privacy, these hidden pockets of data that you have all mentioned.
I don't really see other questions.  I would like to ask Herman, could you please tell us a little bit how you think we should manage ‑‑ I know this is really a sudden question, Herman, how do we manage the linguistic delivery through mobile tech, please?
>> HERMAN RAMOS: I think the technology creators are focused and like to focus on ‑‑ most on the development of technology that don't see the problems of the linguistics.  I think we have a project, in this case, a technology that we want to implement, there's a possibility of if states want to implement these kinds of technologies, these kinds of projects, they must engage with ‑‑ I believe that's where the multistakeholder model, it is important, because we have the engagement of many other organizations and stakeholders in this case, Civil Society, private sector, academia, technical community, I believe these kinds of organizations, stakeholder, if they work together, it is possible to overcome any kind of issues.
>> MODERATOR: It is important to have the multistakeholder approach.  That's very much what our Dynamic Coalition is trying to achieve to put together as many stakeholders as possible so that we discuss, you know, what are the values that we have in common that establishes trust and we have a professor and I'm not up to date exactly on his situation right now, but he has written a new book on the speed of trust and talking about coming to a good understanding amongst stakeholders and how that creation of trust and the standing, it can speed the creation of any of the business processes, whether it is delivery, embracing the block chain technology, artificial intelligence, and even the paper processes as well.
You know, this is ‑‑ this is something, you know, that we're also thinking about, we're saying, okay, if we can have a set of common understandings that will launch us to speeding up the development of healthcare to access universal healthcare access so we would also want to work with the community network and all of the other associated technical and other functions so that we can speed this up globally for everyone.
Galia, I was wondering, you were right at the beginning, you are probably rushing on all of our behalves, is there something else that you would perhaps like to add, please?
>> GALIA KONDOVA: Yes.
One topic that's of quite interest to me, it is ethics, ethics in artificial intelligence using technology, especially for eHealth. 
Here when I talk about this, I consider some aspects like exactly the privacy data, the data privacy, the one aspect, and the second thing, it is about developing models, especially artificial intelligence, using data, patient data, and coming up to some recommendations and suggestions and how ethical, right, could such models be, Jorn talked about the artificial deeper machine learning models and how trustworthy, how ethical are these suggestions driven by the technology and to what extent should they be accepted, implemented, followed.  This is something which I ask myself the question and it bothers me, the question I'm asking myself for a while.
>> MODERATOR: Exactly.
I think the whole area of ‑‑ that runs through all of us, the stakeholders and it is an important topic when we have the question of where do we have commonalities and definitely one medical ethics, what are the ethics of the administrators, especially the ethics of the system builders and are they similar, are they comparable, absolutely.  It is a very important area and hopefully we can develop that further within our Dynamic Coalition, the study of that, absolutely.
It is a very good topic.
>> JORN ERBGUTH: Looking at the systems, block chain and AI, I think they have a quite different approach.  Block chain is made to be trustworthy.  If you have a system that is most trustworthy, it is block chain, because it is secure, it is transparent, you can have more trust because it is distributed, decentralized and it is almost impossible for a single actor to manipulate it.
AI, it is completely different, it is not trustworthy.  Of course, if a system works well, if a system saves your life you don't care if it is trustworthy.  You use it.
>> MODERATOR: Yes.  Yes.
>> JORN ERBGUTH: And if a system is able to detect a cancer that would not have been detected by a human, of course you trust it.  You don't care whether you don't understand it.  It is not ‑‑ it cannot be understood, the reasoning.  Of course, you can understand how it works, but this does not give you an answer.  If you go to court, I can explain to you how courts in general work.
This does not explain the decision to you.  You want to have the reasoning and even if the reasoning is not understandable to you, because you're not a lawyer, then you can see a lawyer, you can ask a lawyer is this correct, can you verify it?  This is the reason why we really need transparency if you just tell people, I give you some wishy washy explanation, it explains to you the general basics, it is not transparency, it does not explain their decision, how it will work for them.
If you just have some general explanation and a lot of people are going for this ‑‑ these general explanations and think they provide bees transparency because the other, it is not possible, but you have to be clear that it is not just because there is some priority information there and companies don't want to expose it, they don't have it.  If you really dig into it, you will discover that those rules, of course they are there, they're very complicated and they're pretty stupid and they're combined in a way that makes sense.  They have gaps and there are a lot of gaps.  In those gap, they fail and you would never build a system like this, and it is not a system that decides on the rules, it is a system, it is a device, it is a dice, they're rolling the dice and that's the reason why the systems are not complementary.
>> MODERATOR: Yes.  Yes.  Exactly.
Yes.  Very glad that transparency is a topic, transparency, yes.
Thank you.  Thank you, Jorn.
I want to add, you know, we're also seeing newer technologies coming in, I came across hologram technologies in all of the brain scan, developing the images of patient's brains, so forth, so I think we'll see a lot of development on top of the technologies that we already are talking about and as mentioned by Galia, ethics, privacy, this is new areas for us in terms of ethics, privacy, these other areas as well as dealing with the AI, machine learning, block chain, and so forth and the mobile technology and how all of the service providers, among the technology deal with this, across jurisdiction, all of these different things.  We have a number of issues to talk about.  I'm just wonder, audience, again, I have not been following the chat.  Is there anyone else, please, who would like to ask a question of our speakers.
Someone else asked us how they can get in contact with us.  Please go to the IGF website under the section of Dynamic Coalitions, we have our email address and please join our list and you can join us there.
Also, if you go to ‑‑ if you want to contact me personally, you can just look at my profile for the meeting, the IGF meeting, and you will find a linked in and on the linked in, there is a email address.  It is Amali De Silva‑[email protected].
.
This is ‑‑ I'm not very familiar with dealing with this.  Bear with me here.  I'm trying to pick up any other questions, otherwise ‑‑ let me take a quick click here.  
Someone asked about heavy files, Galia, could you respond to that, please?  It says Galia, about heavy file, can they be accessed in a more efficient way thanks to block chain?
>> GALIA KONDOVA: Yes.  Thank you..
Thank you for this question.  I have just answered it also by chat.  I have mentioned to her about the so‑called self‑serving identity concept through which you can disclose all the special tributes and in case this is health data, large files that includes x‑rays, other health information you are in possession of, in the identity concept, it is a very good concept in which individuals could discuss and share certain attributes or certain information about themselves.
>> MODERATOR: Please go ahead, yes.
>> GALIA KONDOVA: I also wanted to actually also comment on the remark of Jorn on about trustworthiness of the technology.  I would completely agree that trustworthiness, that's the key point in using technology and here we have now robots that are conducting surgery, right, and I ask myself if I trust this robot and if I go to such a surgery, in case something goes wrong in the surgery, of course, nobody hopes for, who bares the responsibility, right?  I think here is an interesting case when you have trustworthiness, right, and ethics, and maybe some legal aspects which comes into the big picture.
>> MODERATOR: Absolutely.  A very, very interesting area.  Absolutely.  Yes.  Especially, I think, we have the new technologies and, you know, as Jorn was saying in terms of the time it takes for the technology to get sophisticated, there is room for error.  Yes.  Exactly.
Absolutely.
Jorn, would you be ‑‑ would you expand further?  There is another question asking about the trust of users.
>> JORN ERBGUTH: Well, I tried to answer it.  It depends whether, of course, trust does not really always depend on transparency, it always ‑‑ it also depends on experience.
If we have a good experience with the system, we might trust it even if we don't understand why it is doing that.
When you look at the self‑driving cars, you look at humans driving, you might have a human that's driving much better than the average person.  This human, they may still cause an accident, and this person then cannot tell you, but I'm driving much better than the average person and therefore I don't want to be liable for the accident.  Of course the person is liable.
If you develop a self‑driving car that's driving better than the average person ‑‑ we're not there yet ‑‑ but if you arrive there, why should there be an exclusion of responsibility just because the self‑driving car is driving better than the average person.  Humans are not excluded from responsibility.
If you go to hospitals, to surgery, if you have a robot performing operations, that's having the higher success rates than humans, then you still have to ask was this an error or was it avoidable?  If it was an error, you should look for product liability and you should not say, well, this is better than average so you should not be compensated for your loss.  You should apply the same standards.  Even the highly‑skilled doctors that's better than your average doctor by a factor of 10, whatever, if they do an error and commit an error, it is similar and there is no reason to exclude them and we have to make sure we apply the same standards, the man facilitator when you arer, they cannot pay, the doctor cannot pay either they will require insurance and the insurance will ‑‑
>> MODERATOR: Yes.
>> JORN ERBGUTH: And this is how we deal with it with humans and how ‑‑ why should we deal with it differently with computers and companies doing it.
>> MODERATOR: Very good point.    it is going to be an interesting area with all of the insurance companies as well, and how they ensure all of these technologies.  It is a whole new area there too which I'm sure we need actually to get some people on board who are familiar with the insurance background there on to our Dynamic Coalition.
We're coming to the end of our session time.  I really appreciate the audience who joined us in this conversation. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-dc-schools-on-internet-governance-%E2%80%93-raw^^

>> Captioner: Testing, testing.
>> AVRI DORIA:  It leaves us with about a minute.  Okay.  Okay.  It's now 10 minutes after the hour.  I ask one more time and then perhaps I'll ask again later, but if any of the attendees who isn't already a panelist is an organizer or director of a school, I'd like to invite you to join us as panelists and ask you to raise your hand so that I can ask that you be promoted into the panelist spot.  If not, I see a hand.  Could you please make holelo way a panelist?  I see her hand.
With that, I suggest that we start.  Sandra is the founder and chair of the ‑‑ first of all, let me introduce myself.  I am Avri Doria.  I have am the coordinator and working on the documents and such.  I would like to introduce Sandra who is the Dynamic Coalition to sort of start us off with a few words.
>> Sandra:  Thanks to everyone who took the night hour in particular in the U.S. and in the other part, it's not a night hour, but in the U.S., I know it's pretty early for joining us at this time.  I just want to go take very briefly why this Dynamic Coalition was formed and would then like to invite everyone to give ‑‑ to introduce him or herself quickly so that we know who's on the call.  It's good to see so many and this is basically a sign that the concept of organizing schools on Internet Governance has really stretched across the world and it is a sustainable one.  And we are actually very happy about every school that we see emerging and, um, at some point, it was like 4 or 5 years ago, we were thinking about what can we do to create sort of a network because some schools could help each other and draw an agenda.  You could, of course, exchange the best practices and among potential speakers.  And, um, also the panels could basically form sort of a network if there's a basic network for schools on Internet Governance.  And, um, since two or three years we are working constantly on different tools that might help, new schools to emerge, but also existing schools to develop and I think these tools that I think I know these two toolkits and operations guides including the website and WIKI will be part of our discussion today.  I encourage everyone to contribute with their experiences and if you are not yet subscribed to the network mailing list, please do so.  This dynamic coalition is meeting once a month and we are very efficient thanks to aviary who is organizing the secretariat and the communication with everyone.  So it does not add much to your agenda and much to your workload that you have, but I'm sure you will find it beneficial to work on this network on schools on Internet Governance and meet once in day while.
With this as I said, I would like to ask ‑‑ actually, I don't know who to do that in the webinar style.
>> AVRI DORIA:  If I can interrupt, perhaps we can basically go through the people who are the directors and organizers who have been promoted to panelists and again, I invite anyone who is an attendee who, ah, has not been promoted but is an organizer to raise their hands so that we can add you to the panel.  So if we just did through the panelists and perhaps can either go through the list or can ‑‑
>> Sandra HOFErich:  We can go down from the list and go down from the top to the bottom.  On top of my screen is Avri Doria.  Avery as I said already is the secretary and coordinator.  Basically the heart of this effort.  Without her, it won't happen, let's put it that way.
And on top of that, AVRI is the member that attended the various schools and I can say that for sure she attended every European school of Internet governance.  The last one was only remotely, but she was there.  I think this should probably make you the golden star among all the veteran among all faculty members and I'm very glad that you are ‑‑ that you took on this job.  But maybe, AVRI, you say a few words yourself.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thanks.  I don't have that much more to add.  You know?  I enjoy doing the schools.  I enjoyed teaching in them.  And, ah, I think there's a lot more people who can interest.  I will be talking all the way through after this.  So enough of me.  And thanks.
>> Sandra:  And the next on this list is myself.  So just to introduce myself.  I am coordinating together with both the European Internet Governance school and most of you will know it was the first ever that was invented and that started off.  And we are running our schools since we are entering now the 15th years and we had 10 years anniversary and we hope we all have reasons to celebrate the 15th anniversary.  And Wolfgang is also on the call, but he preferred to stay on the listening mode.  But maybe we will hear from him later on because he is really the chair of all this.  He was the one Mo introduced the concept and made this all come alive.
Then next on my list is Anriette.
>> ANRIETTE:  Hi, Sandra.  Hi, Avri.  Good morning.  It's morning where I am.  So good morning, good night, whatever, everyone.  I'm talking to you and I am together with my colleague and you'll meet her liter.  The convene of the African school on African governance.  It is also an international school and it was launched in 2013 and has since then taken place every year.  I have had the pleasure to be faculty a few times, but also convene with the advice of others on this group such as Olga Cavalli.  Thanks a lot, everyone.  It's good to have the school.
>> Sandra:  Thank you.  Next is Rainy.  You are muted Rainer.  Still muted.  Okay.  Then ‑‑
>> Rainer:  Thank you there are having me.  Basically the convener of the European summer school and that's how I came to the network and I'm responsible for the ticket means of the Dynamic Coalition.  If anything is wrong with the website or with the WIKI, then I'm responsible for it and please let me know so I can fix it.
>> Sandra:  Thank you, Rainer.
>> Hi.  This is Jabberra from Tanzania.  You are getting challenged to Connect and we are using our account ‑‑ my account.  With me I have ‑‑
>> Sandra:  Thank you very much for introducing.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Sandra:  Now I go fitter down the list.  Olga, it's your turn.
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  Good morning, Sandra.  Hello, everyone.  Hello, Anriette and Glenn and all friends there.  Thank you for organizing this meeting very important and I'm here with my colleague.  He says hello to all of you.  We created this school we call it South School of Internet Governance because the intention wasn't for South America.  It has become quite an international especially the last virtual version.  I will tell you later in the meeting about it.  My English is bad.  And that was 12 years ago.  Inspired by the European school of Internet Governance.  And then 4 years ago, we started with the Argentina governance school, but it happened to have participants from Latin America.  So the international ‑‑ the original one was both in English and Spanish all the time.  This is why we have some participants from other regions and Argentina in the moment is only in Spanish.  I have prepared some pictures to show you about the last literal version that was a different version event.  Thank you for inviting me.
>> Sandra:  Good to have you here.  Next is Ilona.
>> ILONA:  Thank you, everybody.  It's not just Russian, it's aimed more at the broader Russian speaking community.  So we have participants from the regions and today I will also shed some light on our experience because auto the first school for us this year, but we didn't start from scratch.  We accumulate all the experience you made in other parts and we conducted summer schools.  And I will be happy to share some slides also and how we did this selection, the application process and how were the outcomes.  Thank you.
>> Sandra:  We are very curious and the material is already helping to you take off.  Next on the list is Danco.  I am not currently ren rolled with the school of internet governance, but I am very interested in the sent because I believe ‑‑ subject because I believe our region that we speak a similar language here.  And I believe that we need the school of internal governance because it is such an important certainty and especially for smaller countries.  I am planning on doing something about it.  My (inaudible) is ending at this meeting.  So I'll be trying to follow your leadership and the starting something in the region and I'm counting of stealing your best practices and on your support.  So thank you for doing this.
>> Sandra:  You are welcome to steal it.  Next is Adrian.
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  He doesn't have a mic, but he says hello.
>> Sandra:  Okay.  Thank you.  (inaudible)
>> My name is Colimma and I organize the African school with Anriette and she's given some background.  So we'll share our experiences as the conversation goes.  Thanks.
>> Sandra:  Thank you.
>> Hi, Sandra.  Hello, everyone.  I've been helping with new school in the region Danko in the neighbors area.  We had the first addition in 2019 where we wanted to have one this year, but everything happened.  (inaudible) about planning something for spring next year.  Probably some sort of a hybrid format.  So the school sufficient name is the (inaudible) governor and policies and innovation and in addition to that, we're also running a smaller very focused new school in the framework of (inaudible).  Thank you.
>> Sandra:  Thank you.  And then we have half person here on this panel Mark relate.
>> Margaret:  Good morning and good afternoon.  My name is Margaret.  And in part ofma we are doing if for helping African countries to create their Internet Governance forum school of IG.
Starting this year, there are countries that have never had it in their school of IGF and within 23, we focusd on 10.  Namely Esotonia, Erupt, Liberia, Morocco and Mortania.  We hope we wanted to do the same so other countries have already done their school of IG.  We have noted that in IGF.  We are working with them apart from Madagascar.  So I'm here to learn from you and to see what we can improve better.  We did a curriculum just to say that (inaudible) is part of the African addition.  We're here to learn from other people who have done this and see what we can do together.  Thank you.
>> Sandra:  This was the last person on this panel and I'm glad to say that we have almost worldwide presentations.  We are just missing the Asia‑Pacific region and again, I would like to call on the participants whatever might have joined later and as an organizer of a school in particular of that region.  Let us know in the chat and we will put you on the panel so that we have good presentation across the world and now I also seek Glenn.  Glenn, good to see you back.  Glenn is from the north American region.  So Glenn, please quickly introduce yourself as well.
>> GLENN McNIGHT:  Sure.  Actually I'm from Canada just to be clear.  Yeah.  I've been involved with the organizer of the emotional American school of governor.  We did the first one in San Juan, Puerto Rico followed by Montreal and we were supposed to do one this year again in Washington, but due to COVID‑19, it has been on stall.  In the last almost 6 months, we've been focused on the virtual school of governance project.  So that's our main concern.  We really have not been sure if we will do another one next year due to COVID‑19.  So time will tell.
>> Sandra:  Yeah.  Indeed, COVID is shaking the entire world.  So this was the tour tabla.  With this, I would like to hand over to AVRI to walk us through the agenda and conduct the meeting.  Go ahead.  It's your turn now.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Okay.  So let me ‑‑ first of all, I do want to ask if there's anyone else who came in late who's a convener, organizer or direct ore what have you of a school that would like to be added to the panel, please raise your hand and then you'll get added to the panel.  Okay?  Gustavo, I they'll youp organizing a school not to pick on you, but I thought you were one who was the organizing one that you haven't raised your hand.
>> GLENN McNIGHT:  AVRI, what are you doing with your hand?
>> AVRI DORIA:  I am playing with the attendees list.  I'm sorry.  I'm using an iPad.  Maybe if I use the pencil it will be less offensive.  Let me go to the agenda then.  And we already started with the introductions.  And glad to do it in that.  Now, I can tell we're going to have to change the agenda some what because I've had to people mention they had slides to show us.  So I'll put that in at the end if that's okay.  So the normal path that I wanted to take through here of the first review the work done since our last meeting.  And basically go through that quickly, but I want to make sure that people know it's there especially the people that are perhaps new to the Dynamic Coalition and haven't been meeting with us as often and sort of explain.  So we'll go through a quick tour of the website just to show what's there and to see where people are at.  Introduce the toolkit which is one of the documents we've been working on for two years and, ah, the operations guide.  Then I wanted to get into our discussion about possible plans for the coming year.  And there are some initial suggestions that came up in various meetings that we've had over the course of time of people bringing up saying, okay.  We should do this.  We should do that.  So I spent a little bit of time on that.  Then I have any other business.
So the first thing I would like to put under any other business is to, you know, make it possible for people that did bring slides about their school to show them and I understand that there are two that want to, but I'll ask again when we get there.  And so that's about it for the agenda.  Is there anything else that people think I should add to this agenda before we go on with it?  And oh, yeah.  I have to look through hands.  Pardon me hand going up and down in front of the screen.  Okay.  I don't see anyone.
So in which case, we'll go with this agenda and we'll start off basically just looking at the work that's been done and since the last meeting, which was in Berlin at the last IGF.  And at that meeting, Rainer introduced the website.  It has been worked on some more and I've asked him to take a quick tour through that especially showing us places that are available for you all to either identify your school, to identify yourselves as teachers or what have you or the WIKI that offers opportunities for anyone that has a school to add information.  Can I turn it over to you now, Rainer?
>> Rainer:  Thank you, AVRI.  We are more or less in a state of construction site with the website.  As you may see, sorry, I need to make some space to be able to show you the website.  Here we are.  Just let me know if you have any problems to see this week.  We (inaudible) outside.  We have all activities since we need on the IGFs.  There are the different meetings listed.  We have also the schools on Internet Governance.  We got some new school just recently that's the Russian summer school on Internet Governance.  It's already on the map.  As you can see, we have a lot of schools basically in Africa and we hope to get more from other regions in the world.  You can (inaudible) a new school just filling in the form.  It shouldn't be that complicated and then we will put you on the network and also put you on the map.  That's also a small overview of the schools that are listed so far and with the year of foundation.
Next two points are mostly to be filled in.  We thought about to have fellows and also faculties listed.  These are more or less faculties and fellows taken from the Euro tech school seat because nobody else has volunteered.  We also have forms.  They are for other people to fill in and be listed on the site, but we have not decided as the coalition how to go under with people who are wanted to be listed.  That needs to be discussed.  Also we have the possibility to draw in the network.  That's mostly done as Sandra said via the mailing list you can subscribe here.  That's very easy.  Just send an e‑mail to this address and you will put on the list.
Now, I can show you the WIKI.  We set up for summer schools for the schools on the Internet Governance.  Also here we do have a list and we have always a small kind of brief description for every school so you can get an impression about who is on the network already.  Some people as the peel from the north American school on Internet Governance especially Glenn, did already submit some additional material beyond only this brief description and we put it on the website.  The point is the WIKI is meant to be Augustd for this kind of material to the whole community and we ask everyone to be part of it and to contribute.  As of now, we only have very few people that have already signed in to the WIKI.  You need to (inaudible) by just sending an e‑mail.  As you can see, only a few people have taken advantage of this possibly.  And I really want to invite you become active, become a member of the economic coalition and also subscribe to the WIKI to contribute active.  That's basically it is from my side.  So back to you.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Yeah.  One question was asked on could we give them in the chat the URL.  But you can see it here it's WWW.IGschools.net.  And that will take you to the website and it's open.  So I'm doing it on an iPad.  If somebody else wants to type it in, however, you will see it on top of the agenda.
Can you take us back to the agenda?
>> Rainer:  Yes. 
>> AVRI DORIA:  And really looking at that to develop as a source.  Now one of the things we're still working on as Rainer says it's still being constructed.  In some cases, we're looking for a means to ‑‑ for example, we record all the meetings we had.  We had six of them, you know, and they're Zoom meetings and we record them, but finding the space to store them is still some what a challenge.  So we are looking for, you know, a way to either fund storage or to find an (inaudible) donation of storage so that is something we are looking for, but that will ‑‑ so there's a problem that we're still working on.  And, um, but it is coming along nicely and I'm really glad to see.  Last year when we showed the map of schools, I think there was only one or two on it.  When we first showed it at the last meeting, so really happy to see all those nodes in it.  And as Rainer said, anybody that wants to go further and start building something in the WIKI or wants to register those schools, wants to put themselves on the map, et cetera, please get in touch with Rainer and, um, he will be able to give you the pointers and to help relieve to do that.
So I don't know if there's any questions on that.  Are people who report panelists able to raise their hand to ask questions?  Or not?  I'm not sure.  But I don't see any hands up.  Yes, I do see a hand.  Please, go ahead and ask your question.
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  AVRI, this is Olga.  Can I make a comment?
>> AVRI DORIA:  I see a couple others.  I was trying to get the person who was asking ‑‑ so, sorry.  But in the mean time while waiting for him to get on the questionable list.
>> Hello?
>> AVRI DORIA:  Hello.  Yes.  Is this JABORO?
>> JAGORO:  Yes.  Sorry.  We had ‑‑ my question was in terms ‑‑ this is JABERA from Tanzania community.  I was very much interested to know how does substantivability achieve this?  Thank you.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Some of that is documented in our documents in terms of ways of putting together ways of fund raising, ways of making them sustainable.  So I don't know if anyone wants to jump on that, but perhaps some of the people that are actually in the cue now can take a shot at that one.  But otherwise, you know, I basically recommend there's various ways of doing it and that's one of the thins that we're trying to collect in the documents we're producing.  I have Glenn and Olga with hands on.  If you can say what you plan to say and then if you have an answer, perhaps you can add it to your discussion there.  So Glenn?
>> GLENN McNIGHT:  Yeah.  Great.  I just lowered my hand as well.  The question ‑‑ the reason I put up my hand was regarding the website.  So, um, it pre‑dated my involvement.  So my questions are quite clear.  How do you sustain it?  Where does the funds come from in order to maintain it and are we looking at a model where active members are actually paying into the pool to sustain it?  That's sort of a logistical question I'm having on the website to pay for Rainer's time or development and promotion.  So that's the one question.  And response to the question that just came up.  Yeah.  I think we tried to address the issue of fund raising and sustainability in the operations guide, which we'll be talking about a little bit later.  But I think it's critical that every school has a familiar plan, a business plan looking at ways and means of making it sustainable.  It's one thing having an idea to do a school and it's an honorable thing.  There has to be some familiar resources behind it.  So it's a real challenge in some cases because the sponsors are not even in terms of where they give the money.  It's not ‑‑ it's a real difficult time for a lot of schools to raise the money.  My simp thees are for the schools especially new schools.  That's it.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Okay.  Thank you.  I don't have an answer to your question.  I don't know whether Sandra would be able to answer your question, but I'll give Sandra a chance to think about it and I'll go to Olga who has her hand up.
>> GLENN McNIGHT:  Sure.
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  Thank you, AVRI.  Once we organize the school in Washington, we had to help in the Caribbean.  There were 40 people attending the school from remote.  Now everything is remote, but at that time, it was quite new.  My question is:  I did subscribe to the list and thanks to Rainer for his help in putting our information into the website.  We did that.  We talked with him in Berlin last year and so he guided us to do that.  Thanks for that.  I think we could add more information soon.  But I did subscribe to the list.  I don't get the information about the meetings.  I would like to participate if possible and contribute with our experience.
About sustainability, it's difficult.  We do not charge.  Nobody pays for the South School of Internet Governance or the Argentina school of Internet Governance in our case.  We rotate among countries and the key issue is the host organization in every meeting.  So we have to start from scratch every year.  That's very tough, but it's funny at the same time.  And, um, yeah.  It's difficult especially now that it's virtual.  Everyone seems to think that it's cheap or cheaper, which is not.  And I will show you some pictures of what we did organize and it was not cheap.  It was very expensive, but it turn out to be very interesting and virtually different and a different experience.
>> AVRI DORIA:  And I'm looking forward to seeing those pictures at the end.  Sandra, did you want to add anything to this before I move on to the documents?
>> Sandra:  Thank you for giving me the floor.  Since this question at least what I understood it was directed to European summer school is financed.  I would like to give a very brief and Frank concept.  We don't rely on one big donor, but we have many that give little and with this, we are not in a position that if one steps out for whatever reason in a year, that's the entire concept that becomes challenged.  And I think this is very important and also while I do have great simp thee with a concept that everyone can participate for free, every country or every region can think of that there are people in the region like government or from the business sector that are able and willing to pay for education.  And, um, we always have certain amount of people that pay for their participation and this also gives us the advantage that we bring together two communities when you think of it in a mighty stakeholder concept.  You have people in a position to pay for education and you have people that are really youngsters.  And this is another additional advantage that offers a lot of peer learning experience in this regard.  I'm pretty sure that every region, every country has people that need that knowledge about Internet Governance and have the funds either by their organization or by themselves to be able to pay for it.  I encourage every school national or regional to take that into consideration and not be too shy and thinking that it has to be free.  It's also a notion in some people's mind that what is for free is worth nothing.  I'm not in favor of that notion because I think a lot of thins can be for free and they have a very great value.  But still some communities are used to pay for their attendance and conferences and they are rather puzzled if it's for free.  You can just attend without paying for it.  So just keep that in mind and that might also give you an additional resource of funds if a third of the people basically pay for their participation.  Thank you.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you.  Before I go to the documents, I will take one last person.  Mary has her hand up and she should actually be sitting with us on the panel as I know she has done several schools.  So Mary, can you speak or do we need to be ‑‑ do you need to unmute yourself?
>> Mary:  Thank you, everyone.  I'm coming in late.  I'm happy that I managed to come to the session.  I just wanted to share with my brother from Tanzania the little things well done in the west Africa school of Internet governance.  We have done the third one ‑‑ we have done the third one and one of the things that has helped us is that we rotate from country to country in west Africa and we have ‑‑ we have the whose country do some take up some of our costs.  So in kind, he has us.  So then ‑‑ I'm sorry.  My grandchild is disturbing me.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Grandchildren are wonderful.  Don't worry about it.
>> Mary:  And we had hybrid.  That's (inaudible).  We'll provide some part of the costs.  For instance, we provide them materials and we provide some other costs.  What does that mean?  This year we said we were not going to have any fellowship and since it was going online and, um, we only asked those that could attend, that is their Connecting with that or be anything.  That's why we have done big over the years.  What we do is that we start on time to seek for funding and support from all over.  Most of the times, the (inaudible) country and some of our partners do help us.  We have not been able to charge anything because we believe Internet Governance, the school is part of Internet Governance process and if we develop the next generation that would take over from the (inaudible), we should give them the necessary training.  So we prepare on time.  We get the country involved and we get our secretariat.  We get them involved as well so they can come in like give those supporting T breaks and the rest of them.  It's always good to prepare and again, we know that we don't have the resources to do five days or six days or seven days.  We do three days.  And we make sure we take the most important modules the young people in particular would be able to grab and run with when (inaudible) process.  I hope I have been able to share a little bit of testings we do in west Africa.  It will help.  And we're happy that we're seeing more school on Internet Governance in west Africa nations.  Kind of where to go and booking and all of them are coming on board and we're happy and we're also encouraging them to be part of the dynamic coalition.  You fill out the forms and become part of it and then there's also Nigeria.  Nigeria did not hold this year, but I know by 2021, it will hold.  Thank you very much.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you very much.  I will go one more post before I move to the documents, but then I really am going to move.  One thing I want to mention, all the things that people just said are the kinds of information that we like to try and collect into the documents that we're going.  When I looked ‑‑ I will show you the tables of contents into the document and while we're doing this, if you can put up the toolkit, that would be good.  But Anriette, the last one I talk before I go into the documents a little.
>> I have nothing really to add.  It was in response to the question about funding and resources and I think all the different models have been covered.  I just I guess the one thing I want to say is there are different types of schools and I think the residential and long schools cost a lot of money and they do need more resources.  Partners a lot and Mary has demonstrated that Lawrence is written about partnership.  But also the hybrid model, I think we have to recognize who the participants are.  Some can pay.  Some can't pay.  And I think that is really what we try to do.  We try and accommodate people based on what their sheets are.  Partnership is very important, but I think there is space for free schools linked to a national regional IGF.  You can have maybe one day of learning activity, which is not as expensive to run and which can be subsidized or covered by the host.  So just to say lots of different models that I think I've been covered.  Thanks, AVRI.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you.  Today I will hold off because I want to get started with the toolkit and then I'll bring you in.
So if I can have the toolkit document, please.  I think you have it right there.  Thank you.  Okay.  And can you take me down to the table of contents?  Basically a little bit.  Okay.  There it is.  So basically just want to show that, um, I'm sorry, Rainer, to ask you if you want to do this.  With this toolkit, this is the second year that we're working on this document.  It's a living document and you'll find at the bottom ‑‑ first of all, you will find this document on the website and it's pointed there.  On the bottom of the page, you will fine the name.  It's small characters down there, but it's basically a Google drive document that is open for anybody that wants to suggest new content that wants to suggest changes to thetect either adding, correcting, what have you.  And basically the way we have been working on it is that as I say, the document is open.  Everyone that participates in the DC is invited to contribute to the document when you are reading it.  You know something that isn't in there.  For example, all the information we got about, you know, the funding models.  We have under here on the heading called same descriptors, but basically we talk about the focus in schools, funding models, (inaudible) and programs, metrics and recording.  Partnerships, residential status, requirements, et cetera.  So you see a lot of that information in this toolkit.  The part that was before this that we went by is basically just a sort of discussion of the various types of topics that can be discussed.  Now all the information that goes into these is basically offered as a resource and none of it is rules.  None of it is saying one must do this versus that.  In fact, what we are trying to do is to collect as much information as possible and such.  I'm getting messages from panelists, but I'm not sure what I'm supposed to do about it.  So basically if you go up a little on this, Rainer, just to show for example, we talk about the various topics that one might cover.  We add topics every year.  We added content to the discussions, but basically going through all the various topics and then, you know, you sort of see these are topics that might be in a curriculum, et cetera.  Not going to walk through this document at the moment.  But we do walk through it frequently.  Whenever we have a meeting, what we basically do is we walk through all the recommended changesna people have offered since our last meeting.  We discuss them.  We either accept them into the document.  After that discussion, or, you know, we talk about them more.  You know?  Sort of frying to sort of building up the collection very much working on this in a bottom‑up manner to try and build a document.  So there is no one offer although I would suggest that in this document, a lot of it has been cob tributed by some ‑‑ contributed by some very talentd and a small handful of people some of whom are attending this session.  So basically ‑‑ okay, Glenn.  I don't know if you wanted to ask something while I ask Rainer to sort of put up the next document which is the document that you initiated and, ah, are a co‑editor on.  Glenn, did you have a comment?
>> GLENN McNIGHT:  Yeah.  Sure.  For those who have been coming to the monthly calls, we've been going through this document and it, ah, the origin of the document itself is from after participating with the taxonomy logically now that you have bare bones concept and setting up the force, funding the course, all the nuances that come in and a lot of times people say hey, I want to have a course too because they have in another country.  And some people have a misconception that it is a money maker or whatever.  This is not a money maker.  This is a viable concept for, you know, whether an ISOC chapter or the local universities or other groups that see that this has value.  So what we try to do with this plan is to provide you with the nuts and bolts and we try to think of all the things that you should consider.  Everything from the facility to the promotion, to the processes of selecting students, selecting the various different committees and then post survey work.  So it's from cradle to grave in terms of how to do this.  So coming from an operations background, this was not that difficult for me where the work in progress is that this is just a Skeleton as well.  It may look complete, but it's not because it doesn't have, you know, the job descriptions.  It doesn't have the metrics.  It doesn't have all the other components that are really quite critical that, you know, and it should be down the road.  It may not be next year whatever, but it's something that I recommend as a progress that we have a repository of the documents that are associated with each of these sections.  So what I am trying to say is that this is really the nuts and bolts of how to run a school.  Doesn't mean it's going to be successful because you do tick marks on all these things.  You can be very unsuccessful, but very good on paper.  So back to you, AVRI.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Okay.  Thank you.  Yes.  This document is relatively new.  I think it's only been in about half a year.  And Glenn, you have done quite a bit on it.  I have been calling it an annotative outline.  There's a lot of rentries and a couple lines, a paragraph about what needs to go in there.  Some this is basically the income level down from ‑‑ next level down from the toolkit document.  At some point, these may be joined as a single document, but this one is further behind the development because it was started this year.  But the idea is that now going through all those details that you saw ‑‑ I will stop there for a second.  Everything from catering to medical and emergencies to, you know, website handling.  So all those new details that anybody that has organized a school or is organizing a school has run into.  So basically what we're hoping can happen in this document is that people will contribute their experiences, their knowledge.  You know?  The way you solve these problems will not be the same everywhere.  It's one of the things that we have yet to do and it's sort of the ‑‑ to sort of take these things and sort of open them up further and sort of look at it.  How is it different in one region or another or is something pretty much the same.  And that's a level of, you know, that we haven't gotten into.
Another thing that Gustavo did not end up joining us in the panel.  He has started a process to let's look at can we translate some of these into other languages.  Now we wouldn't translate the operations one yet because it still needs to be flushed out.  But the toolkit, for example, has gotten far enough along that, you know, it's worth his while to look at it.  Again, you'll find that and sort of a warning upfront on the D.C is every good idea is really appreciated but then I will try to get you to do it.  That idea is sort of coming with and can you help us do it because there isn't a large staff that can sit and, you know, do the research and do the writing.  It really counts on the people who come, who participate to contribute their knowledge and insure people like me and others will take it and edit it and massage it and do the formatting and whatever, but there's only a limited amount of content to which I'm confident at writing or any of us are confident, but hopefully the one that suggests something.  For example, Glenn in this case suggested this document, built it outline and then did a lot of the first, you know, annotating of that outline.  The compensation for a good idea is me asking them to do some work.  Yes?
>> GLENN McNIGHT:  Yeah.  Yeah.  I think you're right.  Sometimes it pays not to volunteer sometimes, but on the other hand, I think this is such an essential thing because it keeps coming up.  Look at the question about sponsorship and fund raising.  You know?  If you don't have a business and sponsorship plan, you're just all over the map.  So frankly, all we try to do with this is that that's just one element of yes.  Money is important, but it's surprising how much you can do with very little money especially like Danco is asking about our partnerships.  Our first event, we partnered with the local university.  At no cost on the facility.  So you can work with the IT sector and getting donated websites or possibly, you know, Zoom account or whatever.  There is ‑‑ there's ways of getting stuff without hard cash.  So that's ‑‑ that should be part of the plan.  I frankly, when I do projects, I tend to work from a budget first and then I work on the physical documents.  So budget work and then back and forth to make it viable.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Okay.  Thank you.  And I don't mean to dissuade people from having ideas and suggesting them.  If we can go back to the agenda now, I'd like to sort of get to the next part of this.
So I basically just wanted to show there the documents as I say are on the website.  If you look at our agenda here on the website, you'll see the pointers to the documents and within the documents and those are pointers to PDF versions and the footer of every page is the drive for the document.  They are open to anyone with the URL to comment and make suggestions.  So if you've got the document, you got the URL.  You can make comments.  There haven't been any abuses of that if there were abuses, I would deal with them.  If I had to do tighter about getting specific people access, I could.  But so far in two years, that has not been an issue and I hope it continues to not be an issue.  Let me just check and see.  Okay.  And now I wanted to go and we only have a certain amount of time here.  I think we only have 90 minutes.
I wanted to look at the plans for the next year.  So one of the ones is the maintenance of the current documents.  So the toolkit we've got, you know, as I say, remains open.  I will make edits on it.  Other people will make edits on it.  If I happen to notice edits on it for one of our periodic meetings, I will then put it on the agenda so that we can go through those.  One item of work for next year is obviously to take the operations guide that Glen just spoke about and start digging into it further.  Looking at how to start filling those in with information and so I'd ask anyone that's reading that and comes to a section and says I know all about this.  This is something I'm really good at.  That's the reason for sitting down and adding Syntax.  Do not worry about making it beautiful.  Did not worry about making it perfect.  Getting one line, two lines, a paragraph page, however much you can because every (inaudible) that someone puts down is something that someone else can build on.  That worked very successfully at getting the fool kit to where it is now and ‑‑ toolkit to where it is now and hopefully it will know if to work.  Those are two items I will sort of assuming.  So that's the first one there which is continue work on toolkit and operations guide.  We've had other discussions.  For example, you know, collect and supported materials and curation and that is sort of looking at the (inaudible).  We had one set of really good contributions to the WIKI.  We can add more.  If we start to add more, it starts to get bigger and easier and figure out how to curate it and how to make if trackable and how to make something that people can look up materials.  Collecting curriculum A. something that's been talked about a lot is how do we do curriculum with one of these schools.  How do I build it?  Interestingly enough, I was at a (inaudible) in that meeting.  Was if yesterday?  Seems like a month ago, but I think it was yesterday.  And they have also started a curriculum collection.  They're correcting curriculum for full courses.  We've collecting curriculums for the schools, but they're not all that different.  So one of the things I the to look at and talk to people is seeing whether there's any way to share and build on each other's work.  I don't know.  It's just an idea I've had.
Developing guidelines for said curriculum.  (inaudible) coming up with suggestions.  Here's the curricula we did if you want to follow it is to come up with different models of curriculum.  So if somebody is tarting school and they say I want to focus on regional health issues.  Then these are the kinds of things or I would like to go to school and focus on international, you know, critical resources, et cetera.  Basically give some guidelines, some (inaudible) and templates.  I don't know what the right word is, but that's an idea that's come up of work that can be done and that might be useful to our work.  And then, you know, basically you can take a few minutes though not that many at this point if people will have a chance to show their slides.  But, you know, perhaps I can see if there are any hands and people's suggestions of any other work and in the mean time, perhaps Olga, you can start setting yourself up to show slides so that we have time to do it.  But at the moment, are there any questions or comments or suggestions beyond those that have been mentionedy to things we should be doing?
>> Rainer:  Do we have any questions in the QFAQ.  We have a question in FAQ.  Maybe you can take this.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Oh, to create an FAQ?
>> GLENN McNIGHT:  There's a question in Q&A.
>> AVRI DORIA:  I'm sorry.  I didn't look at the chat.  Doing these things on an iPad is really dif cull.  Unfortunately my laptop is a disaster.  Okay.  Yeah.  Olga, please.  I don't see the ‑‑
>> OLOLADE SHYLLON:  I can read the caption, if you want.  Antonio says hello from Spain.  Our organization develops a variety of life‑long learning activities especially in the field of digital inclusion through a number of 75 digital competence centers located in rural and remote areas.  Our target groups are low skilled youngsters and also local and regional stakeholders in both public and Private Sector.  We are fund by the regional government and school and Internet governance is something we would like to think about.  How can we start?  How would we be the first steps and I said they can contact us.  He already did by e‑mail and then (inaudible) said hi, Antonio.  We have the operations guy which will be useful in this respect and she shares a link to the IG schools website.
>> AVRI DORIA:  I forgot about the Q&A part and I was only looking at the GA part.
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  How do we teach the media to teach people?
>> AVRI DORIA:  I don't have an answer for that.  Does anybody have an answer?
>> I can try and make an attempt.  So I think this is a model that hasn't been explode yet in terms of linking or having the media involved in covering the actual schools.  So I think the first thing would be to consider partnerships would probably be a local radio stations so that this coverage of the actual session itself, but I think what we have learned also now in the current period where we actually have most of the schools running virtually, what I have seen happening is life streaming of the actual stations during the schools, but in terms of continuous, you know, learning, I think this is way the schools website would probably become in where you have specific models around sharing specific issues covering during the school.  If you look at the website, we keep the resources open throughout the year.  So even though there's no deliberate interaction between people who make reference or look at the specific resources, they are still open and available, but I think it will also be deliberate to come up with a continuous crickla and come up with a plan for you to interact with people on deliberately either on a mainstream media channel or utilize your specific website if not the available tools for live streaming.  I think in Africa, my observation has really been a lot of interaction or live streaming happens on Facebook.  So you can probably even consider Facebook live session.  Thanks, AVRI.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you.  Again, that sounds like the kind of information that belongs either in our toolkit or in the operations guide depending upon what level of detail is.  So that seems a great thing to add to content over time.  Okay.  Glenn, I will call on you next.  What I would like to recommend though in the mean time is if Rainer, you can quit sharing so that alga can start sharing ‑‑ Olga can start sharing her pictures.  Unless there is someone else to share pictures ‑‑
>> Hello?  Hello?  Mary here.  Can you hear me?
>> AVRI DORIA:  Yes, Mary.
>> Mary:  I just want to say (inaudible) in 2019 when the first Nigerian school on Internet governance application opened, we had to have 700 applications.  Thanks to the driver, they did a great job by doing some online tutorrian.  So it wasn't just the school.  So true out.  He did some communications and tutoring of things that would identify to be part of the program.  What we would singe is in between after the school just within the (inaudible), we could also use either Facebook or YouTube or Zoom as we have it now to run some modules that we're not covered or some that we've not able to attend so that it's a continuous training.  And not just the media.  I deep know how the media will wok because I don't know if with that the media would be the best form of communication.  If we do live streaming using any of these channels, I think it will also help.  Thank you.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you.  Glenn?  Go ahead, please.
>> GLENN McNIGHT:  Okay.  So I did it in the chat, but I want to reemphasize that I think it's really important for people to apprentice or job shadow other schools.  This is a way for them to actually rather than go in completely novice, but to learn from other schools and this is getting back to what I said earlier on.  How we make the website sustainable?  How do we get buy in from people to be committed to making this coalition successful.  We have to provide value and this is the challenge.  It would affect so many people are not active.  So how do we get them active in one of the ways is, I think, that the more experienced schools bring into their operations a willingness to shato, a willingness to share the best practice with them so that they are actively involved with the organizational calls and are sponsored to participate with the events on the ground.  So that's just my two sense.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you very much.  I think a lot of schools are willing to shadow.  But yes.  It's a great suggestion.  Olga, can I turn it over to you?
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  Yeah.  I'm unmuted?
>> AVRI DORIA:  Yeah.
>> OLOLADE SHYLLON:  Okay.  So this is the picture taken by Glenn in Mexico last year.  I wanted to show you some pictures.  This is pictures taken in Washington, in Mexico, in Rio dejan arrow and 11 previous additions and this is somehow the story Mexico sao Paulo, but what happened this year?  We couldn't make it face to face because we were going to organize it in University of Buenos Aires.  They offered that space, but we decided it was not a good idea to make it face to face.  We went virtual.  We didn't want to resign the content or the quality or the time devoted to the schools.  So we decided to make it five days with the same amount of time with the same amount of experts.  But the thing is as it was full virtual, we had many, many more fellows from all over the work.  As usual, English Spanish all the time.  We had many, many more fellows from five continents and from 34 different countries.  It was very interesting.  And we had more than 100 experts and 42 sessions.  We wanted a different visual experience.  We found a company that broadcasted everything from a video studio.  Like a TV tile thing and we picked the images ‑‑ mixedd images from the different panelists who were abroad and some of us were in the studio.  So it was visually very different.  You can see some pictures here.  We had experts from all over the world and, um, I was there and somehow moderating making the link about the 42 different sessions.  And, ah, I think visually it ended up being a different event.  So we didn't want to resign that and the fellows were connected as usual through very big ‑‑ not what's up, the other one.  Messaging system so they got information one month before.  So they were all connected.  So visually, it was very interesting and I think I have some other.  As it was virtual, we could have many, many experts from all over the world.  We had (inaudible) and bigsur, Chris participator, many ministers from Latin America and many important people.  So this is what I wanted to share.  If it's virtually, it doesn't have to be small or short.  Thank you very much.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you.  Okay.  Was there another person who wanted to share something?
>> Yes.  I also would like to show.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Would you like to stream?  I caught it going through, but it didn't mark it.
>> Okay.  Thank you.  I would like to share with you our experience of establishing school for the Russian speaking community.  And first of all, I would like to say that last year, we were also planning to make it on site event like week long.  We mostly looked at the URC as an example.  But in spring, we just realized that more and more restrictions are put in the public meetings and all conferences.  We decided to make it online.  Not to make it just a simple form of lectures.  We decided we had a new design for the course.  So just a brief information about the application process you see some info graphics here.  We go through 100 applications and actually, we aimed our school more at students and graduates, but also we get on board some (inaudible) and specialists.  There are lawyers and journalists and lecturures.  Now we have a new channel to build a community for Internet Governance in Russia because the most important obstacle for us was to draw attention to the school because Internet governance is not very popular topic in Russia and we had to work on translating all the things, all the processes into the Russian language and explained what is happening abroad in the world.  So it was a big challenge.  But anyway, we does some campaign for application for equipment of visitors and we went around 100 applications.  It was a really good figure for us.  And this is the breakdown of their background knowledge and expertise.  We got people from AR from ICT in general.  There are different streams.  From (inaudible) and information security.  We had journalists and political scientists, programmers, people who do something with digital economy.  Math, education.  So this would be breakdown of the background.  And since the school was online,s helped us to broaden the geography.  So you see that we have markers from the cities where we got the applications.  If we did this online somewhere around the Moscow, we will just have Moscow participants.  This is not very good.  And also we have people from (inaudible).  We have people from cause it tan and from Germany.  And other states too.
Let's move to the educational process.  So as I said, we reviewed the design of the curricula and we decided to make it very long.  So we have twomons of weekly lectures and interactive sections with learners.  So we decided to do the school in two phases.  The first was preparatory phase.  We take all the applications that we get.  We allow people to start with thethloduction course to the Internet Governance and then we were monitoring their performance during this phase and then select those who complete all the requirements and show the real interest into the course.  And with this phase, we collaborated with Internet Society and they are learning platform.  Our learners for the first two taste and bring the course to the Internet Governance.  So they updated them.  But not to leave our people here, our participants on this course.  We designed in addition to the online course additional home tasks and meetings with specialists from the IG field in order to discuss in Russian all the information got from the Internet Society.  It was a good decision to do this because that's what people didn't lose during the process and they keep going constantly with homework and discussions in their Native language.  This was very important.  And after the preparatory phase, we got 50 active learners out of 100 just the half of them.  And in September, we ‑‑ we continued our school with the wrong footing of them.  On this phase, we have purely Russian content and Russian language.  We invited a lot of speakers from ICANN, from ITU, from (inaudible) CC, from our firms related to cybersecurity and another two discussed in deep detail particularly topics, selected topics from the school.  (inaudible) system related to Internet governance processes.  It is technical topic.  They're all legislation.  So it is low internet governance.  Principals and (inaudible) were built on digital platforms.  And while they were listening to the speakers, they also got creative homework tasks.  In order to think to rethink the documents that are already here, so one of the tasks was to think about the working group on Internet Governance paper.  You remember 2005 setting this paper and we asked them to think how this paper could be written if 2020 given all the changes with the Internet Governance and processes.  So this is just one of the examples of the interactive sessions.
>> AVRI DORIA:  I'd like to ask whoever is eating and chewing with the microphone open to please shut your microphone.
>> I think it's Glenn.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Yeah.  I think it might be Glenn.
>> Someone was done so just final words.  So, ah, the part of this phase was the group debates.  So we organized 40 people in four groups to debate the suggested topics.  It was really good.  Also they write essays that we will pushish on the website of our school.  Some in the end, there were 38 successful grades from our school.  Also we partnered on this part with Saint Peters berg State University.  It provided lectures also for several topics and the most important part, we did it that people get the credits for the course.  It was very important point for moderation because as I said in the beginning, Internet Governance is not very popular topic in Russia.  Mostly students are not aware of what's happening there and it was like (inaudible) for them to get credits for the counts and actually I'm very proud because even today, IGF, we have several participants from the school.  In order to continue the work, just to have a school on this, we are also designing a special clock.  We don't have the precise name for this, but we also aim to work with this community we have 40 people in order to keep them in the agenda, keep them on board, discuss what's happening in the Internet governance in general and locally.  Several speakers and in order to take with them and discuss with them what's on the agenda and listen to them back.  And also this is a kind of use capacity building too because as I said, we are mostly focusing on the use on students and on young professionals that are seeking their way into the internet governance.  So this is what I want to say.  Thank you so much for your attention.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you very much for the presentation.  Very interesting.  I think that's great.  As someone who has taught in schools, I know my greatest pleasures is when I see people that I taught showing up and being the lecturers or being the person leading the session or doing something at major whether it's in the IHF or ICANN or IGF.  It is really the best part of it to see them achieving.  Okay.  We don't have much time left, but we have some.  I'd like to, you know, sort of open it up to any quick questions, comments, discussions.  Glenn, I see you had your hand up for a while.
>> Hello?
>> AVRI DORIA:  Let me take Glenn quickly and then I'll go to whoever it is.  Did you raise your hand?  No, but yeah.  Okay.  Your hand ‑‑
>> GLENN McNIGHT:  No, no.  I will pass it on to the next speaker.  Thank you.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thanks.  Let me see.  I'm looking for the hands.  Who was it that was going to ‑‑
>> Hello?
>> AVRI DORIA:  Yes, please.  Go ahead.
>> This is JABHERA from (inaudible) Tanzania.  This week, this year we conducted our Internet Governance to members of the community.  And the next year, we went to a larger Internet Governance to members of Tanzania and Africa and most of them they're rural area.  Do we have the localized content which we can use for such kind of school of Internet Governance because in most cases, we use the people permission group for addition 7 which sometimes have content which may not be relevant to people in the rural area who are very new to this (inaudible).  Thank you.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Okay thank you.  I'm hopefully things that have come out here will be useful.  I apologize for not having followed the Q&A, but I see people have been answering it.  Since I will be able to replay this before I write up the notes from the session, I'll be sure to go and capture any of the information that showed up in the Q&A and such so that it's not lost.  And I really do appreciate it.  And hello to the people that are sitting with you.  Okay.  Let me see.  Is there anyone else that has comments or questions that they would like to add at this point?  Any of the other panelists have some last ‑‑
>> Mary:  I just want to answer the last question.  The person from Tanzania.  Africa has developed curriculum for, you know, that relevant to Africa when it comes to okay.  Somebody has even post date it.  So you can Connect to Africa and to be able to get updated and relevant curriculum for your community.  Thank you.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Okay.  Thank you.  Any other questions, comments, answers, things I overlooked?  Things that should be said before we finish?  In which case, while looking for more questions, I'm sorry about my finger again.  I have to remember to do it with this thing.  It looks less offensive.  Yes, Antonio, please.
>> Antonio:  Thank you, thank you very much for this very interesting pleating ‑‑ meeting.  I think ‑‑ so as I said in my previous question, we will operate in very rural areas as (inaudible) also mentioned that we would need to provide meaningful activities to those who are less familiar with digital technologies and the Internet governance.  So I am also a delegate from the youth department of the conslet of Europe and there should be youth and youngsters for this targeted group.  So to work specifically on a topic that is directed to young people and I would say also in rural areas, but not only, but also understanding this school of Internet Governance as an opportunity for young people to fully participate in the digital society.  I would like to mention this today if it's reflected somehow.  Because it is important that this youth perspective or any issue related to the Internet to the governance in Internet.  Thank you.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Certainly.  We'll make a note of it.  Certainly encourage you and any others to participate in our ‑‑ Glenn was nice and he said monthly meetings, but in terms of scheduling, I reallyom got six done during the year.  But still we have our periodic meetings and it is referenced on the website.  I recommend that people join it.  I recommend that youth join it.  And participate and, ah, you know, if there are specific projects that, you know, a group of youth want to start within the Dynamic Coalition, I'm certainly happy to facilitate it in any way I can be very distant from being (inaudible), but it would help with the Dynamic Coalition and if you need a space for the school, we can work with Rainer to figure out how to do that.  So very supportive of this being a sort of bottom‑up and invite, you know, people from regions, youths, and any other specific grouping to come and start building it from the bottom‑up and see who we can bring up, bring in and how we can help.  What I'm definitely trying to avoid is being top down about it and say yes.  We need to have a program that is thus and here's what we've going to do.  But very open and certainly an invitation.  Yes, Gustavo.
>> Gustavo:  Hello.  You can guys hear me now?
>> AVRI DORIA:  Yes, hello.  Yes.  Please go ahead.
>> Gustavo:  This is responding to the latest comment from the representative (inaudible).  I am a youth.  I would just like to enforce this.  I am a youth participating in the D.C for quite a while now.  And it hasn't been an impediment.  It is very nice and very easy for you to become integrated with D.Cand I wanted to say that really.  So yeah.  Thank you.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you and I would take this opportunity to thank you for the amazing amount of work you have done and the amazing contribution you have made.
>> Gustavo:  Just one more comment I just remembered.  So we did a workshop about schools of internet governance in Brazil in the Brazilian IGF and none want points that were discussed is this came from Maria Marciel and she brought up the idea of making schools or smaller courses for specific audiences.  She ‑‑  the contact she used initially was for negotiators.  I think on the word economic forum, which is very far from the youth, but the principles still applies.  We think it would be doable.  It would be viable, not necessarily from the big schools, but in theory, it is interesting to consider perhaps a course for maybe a youth D.C or maybe for a fellow program.  That's just joining an idea.  So yeah.  Thank you.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Okay.  Thanks.  I would really like to see something.  I have been in a lot of schools and a lot of groups of people that have talked about lease build specific courses for specific purpose.  But somehow it's never yet materialized.  So I think it's a great idea.  Yes, Antonio.
>> Antonio:  Sorry.  Thank you very much.  I would like to mention I am discovering this initiative at the moment.  That's why I wanted to bring the topic of youth because I'm also as a representative of the Council of Europe.  I do not mention the top sick not covered, but I am really excited with school of Internet Governance more targetd to young people.  So Gustavo, it would be a pleasure to talk to you and to the Dynamic Coalition.  That's from our organization in the southwest of Spain.  And also from the conslet of Europe, they would be happy to contribute.  I didn't mention that it's not covered.  It's more than I would like to focus on our contributions to the Dynamic Coalitions.
>> Gustavo:  Antonio, if you have a minute.  Were you in the youth summit last year?
>> Antonio:  Yes, I was.
>> Gustavo:  I remember our talks.  They were very productive and they inspired some things.  So thank you.
>> Antonio:  Thank you very much.
>> AVRI DORIA:  You guys can probably through the chat mechanism make sure you exchange contact points so you can meet up.  Okay.  Calen?
>> CALEB:  This is Caleb.  Can you hear me?
>> AVRI DORIA:  Yeah.
>> CALEB:  I would like to comment, but more importantly, the main issue I am trying to drive up is I would like to see how we have studies for schools on Internet governance.  What do I mean by study fist we can gety ‑‑ some of you are trying to walk on specific framework.  We should also have specific studies and (inaudible) that can help us understand one who the targeted groups that we can in the future start focusing on aside the youths because I get to see a framework for some of the youths if they do not see ‑‑ let's say for example in Africa, if they do not see future after attending the school of Internet governance, they do not see a future in Internet Governance, they might not proceed to the income volunteer level you might want them to start pushing for issues that are related to Internet Governance.  So for me, I'm just saying generate and I would like to see studies coming out from different places where we can all compare notes.  I know they're working very (inaudible).  I have seen some studies being an alumni thanks to Avri and (inaudible), but I would like to see some of the studies come out from other parts so that we can compare notes and know where we need to start putting more of our energy during selection processes.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you.  I think it's a great idea.  I think we're out of time.  Now what I recommend we do is because the conversations obviously have a way to build and a way to go somewhere, I will go through all our notes on this and try to put some of these topics on our meetings as we go through the year.  And sometime after I have written this report and settled down from this period, I'll start a scheduling process of trying to schedule a meeting for the upcoming year and doing agendas and it would be really good to put some of the topics on so we can explore them further.  This meeting is very good to print out a sent, but we don't get very far in it.  Obviously really happy if you guys work together and come up with ideas to the Dynamic Coalition and then I will try and get some of this on the agenda for future meetings.
At that, I think I'm going to pass it back to Sandra.  Have I missed anybody with a hand?  No, I haven't.  I would like to pass it back to Sandra as our chair to close up the meeting and I thank you all for participation for the pictures, for the ideas and just for being here at this time of day.  So, ah, Sandra, if you're there, can I pass it back to you?
>> Sandra:  Thank you, and basically there's not much I would like to add.  I'm very happy how this session went.  The whole thing is so you cannot really plan.  But I'm really delighted about the active participation and would like to thank in particular those who got up so early and must be so tired.  So enjoy the rest of your day and enjoy the IGF and if you are not part of the network, please join us so that we can continue also throughout the year with a bigger group.  I see there are so many active people aroundd world.  Let's keep in contact and make in network more likely than it is already.  With this and since we are also both time already, I would like to adjourn this meeting.
>> AVRI DORIA:  Thank you.  And thank you very much to the IGF 2020 hosts and co‑hosts who basically put up with our sort of immersion of panelists and all.  So thank you, hosts.  Thank you IGF.  Bye‑bye.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-fostering-a-new-key-role-of-youth-in-internet-governance^^

>>  So hello and welcome, everyone, to the annual session of the youth Internet Governance.  My name is Meri, I'm a Human Rights attorney.  And also at the University of Pennsylvania law school.  And today I have the pleasure to moderate this session in my capacity as the student committee member for the eastern European group.  And my colleague will be our rapporteur.  
So the title of our session is fostering the role of youth in the Internet Governance and 2020 has been indeed been a very challenging year with the pandemic and many developments in different parts of the world as well as in the Internet Governance ecosystem itself from the roadmap to the youth cooperation and through the discussions on different models for the future GIF.  This year offered us a lot to work with.  But at the same time, the pandemic offered us unique set of challenges in terms of the major participation and engagement.  And today at our annual session, we decided to start with taking a tour around the world to identify the developments that happened in the last year in different parts of the world in terms of youth participation.  And then we will have an open discussion on where we are, where we want to go, and how do we envision doing this.
So it is my great pleasure to introduce to you our panelists of this session who represent different youth movements and initiatives from various regional groups.  Today we have with us Emelia from Poland.  Mohammed representing youth special interest group known as the Youth Observatory.  From Portugal IGF.  Lily from Ghana.  And then we have Augusto from Argentina representing youth IGF Argentina.  (sound) 
I'm sorry.
And we will also have a special intervention from our student committee member Eileen from Argentina.  But I will get to that in a little bit later during our session.  
And right now, without further ado, I about would like to give the floor to Emelia as a representive of this year's and also next year's GIF Poland basically to share the state of affairs with regards to youth participation in Poland.  Emelia, you have the floor.  Thank you.
>> EMELIA:  Thank you very much, Meri.  I'm very glad to be here and to see many familiar names.  So thank you very much for inviting me.  Just quickly introducing myself, I'm currently the part of the initiative GIF Poland that was founded this year by me and my good friends.  I am also, as Meri mentioned, active part of ‑‑ information that's main goal is to bring together lawyers and community.
So today I would like to share with you a few of my experiences with involvement in the Internet Governance especially in my region.
I would like to start with a few words about my last year's experience in Berlin during the IGF.  It was a really great opportunity there to meet a lot of people from different countries because there were over 100 people from 30 different countries.  And it was really an eye opening experience.  And I have learned a lot.  And I had a lot of chances to talk with brilliant people who in spite of their young age were already experts in their field.  So that was amazing.
And also very inspiring because due to this event, we had an opportunity to get together a lot of different points of view from different regions of the world.  And that's something that I find very important.  And it inspired me that I would like to continue the discussion on my national level in Poland.  And both on international level because Poland, as you for sure know, was supposed to be the onsite host of this year's IGF.  It was supposed to be in ‑‑ however due to the COVID situation, it is postponed to the next year.  However, it is not too bad because we as yet IGF Poland have more time to prepare.
So we created the initiative, together with my two friends, because we wanted to create this platform for young people also during the IGF to meet again and to share their views because, you know, Internet Governance issues are global.  So it is so important to overstep our national regional point of view that tends to happen, which is natural, but to compare this perspective with perspective of people from other countries.  So that's why we wanted to create this space.  And because of the ‑‑ because this IGF will happen next year, we still are planning to do it.  And we are really hopeful that we're able to provide many opportunities for youth to network, to create this connection, to bring together these different points of view during the preparations to then next year's IGF.
And also I want to invite all of you to support our initiative.  We are very ‑‑ we really welcome all of you.  And we hope to see you next year.  And it is all for me right now.  Thank you. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much, Emelia.  Glad to hear you from Poland and I think everybody here is looking forward to working with the host country hopefully next year.  And we have Mohammed Atif Aleem from India and you have the floor.
>> MOHAMMAD:  Hello.  This is Mohammed Atif from India.  It's half past noon here.  So pardon me if I seem a bit sleepy.  But I'll try my best to be very active and proactive rather in this IG space which most of the youth, I believe, should be.
So, thank you for giving me this opportunity.  I am currently the regional engagement director for Youth Observatory or youth special interest group of Internet Society.
Apart from that, I'm also a research analyst for one of the software firms, multinational software firms, in India.  And I've been actively involved in the Internet Governance and have been contributing to it since past two years.
So last year, I also was awarded the IGF Youth Ambassadorship, and I was lucky to represent the voices of the youth at annual IGF 2019 in Berlin.
And my journey with Internet Governance basically began from I started to interact with more and more people, experts working in the field of Internet Governance.  And then also I was fortunate to, like, connect with youth special interest group.  And luckily I was elected for the position of Regional Engagement Director.
So I'm going to give you an overview of what engagements we as an entity of Youth Observatory or special interest group of Internet Society had in particularly in my region of Asia‑Pacific and what avenues there are for the youth to interact with in this form of Internet Governance.
So I believe in recent years the global Internet Governance ecosystem has witnessed a great number of youth newcomers, students and young professionals.  And especially it has, like, taken a huge surge in these current pandemic times where you have to engage with Internet technologies more as compared to your previous engagement.
So I believe it plays a very crucial role in shaping the digital future, especially the youth.
We need to be ‑‑ they need to be included in defining processes, principles and policies that govern the use of technology globally.  And when we study about Internet Governance, there is a concept of multistakeholderism.  So I think youth are part of the focal point that need to take an equal footing and raise their voice in those multistakeholder meetings so that our voices are heard because we are going to be future policymakers, scientists, and it's very important that we start learning things from the very budding age so that the future is both sustainable and progressive for all of us.
The participation rate of youth from the regions in Asia has increased, and this is basically due to the increased number of Internet public meetings that are there.  These meetings are conducted by NGOs like Internet Society organizations like ICANN, Internet Cooperation for Assigned Names and Numbers.
And there are a lot of organizations that conduct these meetings and have youth as a very important stakeholder in them.  So it's important that we know about these entities and try to, you know, put forward our best foot and participate in it and raise our voice and project what our ideas are and amplify our learnings there.
So, regarding the amplification of research learning, so there is a giga net conference which is held annually by the IGF platform as well on the Day Zero.  So it was very ‑‑ it was a great pleasure for me to see that a lot of youth also participated in the gig net conference and presented their papers, which in the past didn't used to be the past because they used to be professors or presenting their papers.  But this time there were a huge number of papers from young scientists, especially the youth in the areas of sustainability or co‑areas of data, trust, environment and inclusion, which are the goals of IGF in this year.
Apart from that initiatives that we took as part of the entity of Youth Observatory was youth focus.  So we conducted two pep talks by some Internet leaders that are there across the globe, one of them an Internet advocate who is working on how artificial intelligence can be leveraged to detect early symptoms of mental health illness on social media and introduce cyber bullying cases.
And the second one was the initiative of youth for digital sustainability, which was taken by German information so that was primarily based on focusing sustainability and the Working Group involved clearing the Internet, fair digital businesses, social inclusion in digital age and sustainable Internet Governance.
And if I talk about like the Asia‑Pacific region, there has been a lot of work that has been done by active players which are Youth Observatory, youth for IG, which also introduced a mentorship program and successfully conducted the first cohort of its mentorship programme through erudite people like Donna Austin, who is a policy maker of ICANN, and the head of ICANN India, Surim Gupta.
So Asia‑Pacific some were selected for that programme and they graduated in the first year in the first project that was held by them.  Then there was youth IG India which was recently concluded on 1st of November.  So I, on behalf of youth Internet of Internet Society, also collaborated with Youth IGP India on the Code.  And we had interesting session where youth was not only on the other side of the podium but was also into the main policy building and raising voices and among the panels raising their voices to some older erudite policymakers out there.
So we had our voices raised.  
And one very important initiative that was taken from Youth Observatory was working on the policy papers or sessions to implement to raise youth voices in the IGF itself.  So I worked on the team of environment and similarly my colleagues like Elenia and Lily, they also worked on different teams of data, trust and inclusion.
So one of the sessions for environment that we worked was enhancing sustainable computing production and consumption.
So it is basically focus on the sustainability aspects of Internet Governance.  And we do have youth voices like young erudite entrepreneurs from Africa raising their voices.  And also from Asia‑Pacific about what role can youth play in fostering these practices?
So, this was an overview about what are the practices that have been going in Asia‑Pacific region in the form of Internet Governance.  So I look forward to hear from other erudite panelists from here and then let's take the discussion forward, yeah. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much for a very nice recap of the recent developments in Asia‑Pacific region and also you touched on very important other initiatives that were happening on a more global level with participation from our regional groups.
So next I would like to give the floor to Jöao to represent what was happening in the western European and other group basically.  Thank you.   
>>  Jöao:  So I'll jump to the more interesting conversation.  So I see for those who are joining on the Zoom call, you're all familiar faces.  I'll get there in a moment because this could be a good thing.  This could be a sign of something else.  But mainly I want to speak a little bit today on the situation first in Portugal and then on western Europe.
I'm not sure, for instance ‑‑ and I'll give the example ‑‑ but I'm pretty sure that in Portugal, this COVID situation took a major blow in youth participation.  There was no national IGF this year, so in some sense I would say that, well, participation in general was affected.  But the idea of getting a satellite event for youth that would channel to the many discussions is unfortunately put on hold.  Even the activities, the initiatives to create engagement and awareness were suspended in mid‑March.
From my experience, the face‑to‑face, the in‑person discussions were a way of getting the youth perspective right in and tuned at the grade level.  But I think this current setup of virtual conferencing is not helping as well.
It's true we are raising ‑‑ or we are lowering the boundary for access, which means we can provide access for more youth.  More youth can attend these types of events they're not constrained by physical traveling to these conferences, but I'm still really skeptical because it will be harder to get noticed.  You'll see probably the voices of stakeholders who are already involved, already taking these conversations.  And I think that makes it difficult not only on a national level but also on a wider level.
In terms of the situation in Europe, I'm glad to report that I was invited to be the coordinator of a youth committee for the You Read, which is the institution which currently manages the dot eu.  And the point is I think this is a clear example of the type of message that we want to pass.
We always talk here about the idea of having a youth representative within the decisionmaking of the different institutions of the different organizations that create or are part of the Internet Governance ecosystem.  And I'm happy to report that in this specific example, we are now an example that recognizes one out of three Internet uses on the decision process.
Also reflecting a little bit on the other points of the discussion because important.  I think we don't have yet a youth umbrella.  Personally, I don't know if this is a good or bad situation.  In the past.  But we all know that there's different initiatives, youth initiatives.  And, for instance, those who are geographically diverse, it's great.  There's also the ones who are local which make great efforts to implement either awareness campaigns or policy development at the local level.  But the idea of having a strong unified youth voice, if we are still getting on the right arguments here, that's something that I'll leave open to the discussion a little bit after.
But I'd just like to throw some ideas so that the others can already think about it.
The idea of youth that can cement the aggregation of the IGF.  It's something that I would like to hear.  It's something that I would like to debate.  And I hope also for the ones who are listening in and can comment in the shots to be ‑‑ so they can participate as much as they can because in the end, we want these discussions to be broad.  Unfortunately, it will be a little bit of youth for youth conversation.  But hopefully we can move forward and have great achievements.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you Jöao.  Very important points raised in your intervention.  I think we'll get back to them shortly.  
Now I'd like to give the floor to Lily.
>> LILY:  Hi, everyone and good evening from Ghana.  In Ghana we say akwaba, which means welcome.  Jöao has invited everybody to type into the chat.  Maybe you can say in one word how your first meeting with the IGF concept and IGF conference was.  If you can type in the chat what it felt like being a first timer.  Let's see if the experiences resonate with everyone or if there are differences.  I think it's necessary because you're telling us what you have to look at.  And what it means for us to make the space as approachable as possible and how we let people ‑‑ and how we have a keen focus on the different personas and their part with and how they enter into the space and how we are able to guide them from their entry point through to potentially ‑‑
So my journey began with the IGF fellowship with ISOC.  And it was interesting because my very first encounter with anything Internet was when I was in university.  I remember it was only the first year and there was an Internet Society caucus that had started on my campus.  And I was wondering what they were talking about when we all know, well, we know digital communications, we know there is the Internet already.  And everybody was so keen on talking about the Internet.  Probably I thought there was something to it so maybe I should attend the meetings and find out for myself what the discussions can be.
And then I joined them for a few sessions.  And it just got interesting.  So I remember one of the leaders were leaving.  They wanted to take over.  And I was secretary then on campus.  And I'm like oh, that's interesting.  I don't know what you're supposed to do, but let's get to it and see how it turns out.
Then afterwards, after school there was nothing like ISOC or IGF for me.  So after school you are supposed to work.  But I think I chanced on the mailing list, the ISOC Ghana mailing list, that there was a call for young people to apply for this fellowship.  And I just sat in my seat and relaxed and filled in the whole form.  It turned out what I was typing really made some impact and I was selected.
So it dawned on me after the selection that there's work to be done.  That's where everything began for me.  You have to learn the modules.  You have to interact on the platform.  
For people in the chat, actually for some of us also, I remember I'm thinking:  Why are these guys typing episodes?  It was a simple question everybody asked.  And they're writing a very long thing.  I'm thinking to myself, I want to see what they are saying.  It just shows how diverse the community is.  You're able to learn from people.  You're able to also contribute.  And everybody's accepted.
So one of the things that stood out for us in our conversation was where we kept on hammering on the fact that we're not just citizens of our countries anymore.  We have now gained citizens as netizens.  We contribute as developments in our country also on the Internet because everybody's a custodian.  Everybody's a stakeholder and everybody can shape it, you know.
But it got to the point where we had to decipher exactly how to shape it.  So beyond the conversations we're having, how could we feel the impact?  And I think this is why the communication today and the conversation today is important.
So we all know we have a part to play.  But beyond the things we have to say, how do we make it happen?  How do we get the conversation out there, follow through, and see some results happening?  So after the IGF, right, we have projects you have to work on.  And then we worked on breaking down the technicality of the IGF.  We created a project called the global ‑‑ for studies.  You can check it out on Instagram and Facebook.  Also Grace global.  That was a project for us in 2018.  We thought that we had some ‑‑ trying to understand how technical the space was.  So how about we break it down using audio, using videos, using infographics so people understand it.
But it turns out we were doing the work only to a certain point.  Then that had a barrier of having to know if your ideas have gotten any effect.  We're still wondering are we getting any results with advocacy?  Are we making any results with the things we are happening around the world?  So that said to me something you have to talk about.
And then from building, I had opportunity to lead the community, that started the Ghana Youth Internet Governance Forum.  I remember in that year when we send the forms out, the number of emails that came in asking what is the Internet Governance about?  And you get a very popular question:  Is it government?  You get very popular question:  What are we supposed to do?  And the important thing I heard from people is:  What are the career prospects in the space for me?  And I just sat back and thought about it and said yes.  
So if you want to look at IGF for us to contribute to shaping the Internet, how about reciprocal process by helping us also get something out of the journey, capacity wide for young people coming up.  So those have got us thinking a lot.  
So with the Ghana IGF, we tried to do things that are really ‑‑ and over the years, so we had the first one in 2018, massive outcome.  This year, the Ghana Youth Internet Governance forum went online.  So you had it as part of the main IGF process.  And in Ghana, we're not separate NRI.  What we are is registered under the Ghanaian IGF as the youth initiative.  So we get support from them.  They also leverage the energy people have in the country and made the online events to happen this year.
But also want to see what goes beyond the conversations we've had also this year?
Now, most other parts of the space which I play in and which I learn and most of us know how and most of us also play in which is the youth SIG.  And Mohammad was so kind to show what we do.  So amplify these voices and we have the global and regional so that you have discussions sometimes specific to your region sometimes also broad enough to cover the others.
And then also as a part of the youth summit last year and was interesting, I was late to coming to Germany.  But part of the process online was awesome.  And I saw the difference I was looking for before were we able to have draft messages out and to have the conversation out there?  So those draft messages meant a lot to me.  
And this year also I'm part of the team that's talking about winning the Internet.  And interested to know how the Internet has a very close relation to SDGs and everything you're talking about environmental‑wise.  And you wonder why didn't we think this?  And why did we think that the Internet can give us all the positive and not look at the negative that could be there?  So those were the conversations out there.
And so far that's been what has been in the space.  And the Ghana IGF so far is going.  We're still at the process where we have to tell people what it is exactly before having them settle in and want to contribute.  So the journey has been steady.  And we see that it is beginning to rise.  Hopefully we will be able to get that concrete beyond the conversations.  I'm really out for a day where we say that based on our discussion, well we've had some progress like that because in Ghana it was to get a reduction in tariff, but for data bundles, but want to see more.  
So you say you give the credit to the young people for raising their voices.  And you also appreciate them and involve them some more.  Not just inviting us to the table.  Hearing us.  Listening to us.  Not just hearing.  Listening.  Taking our points into consideration.  And putting into execution.  So that's the level we want to look at.  People are able to enter the space, there's ability to grow career wise and capacity wise.  You are able to see your results beyond than focusing on the conversation you're on.  And that will give everybody the zeal to also want to contribute some more.  Sometimes it gets overwhelming as it is.  And I think when you see the results come out, that's the motivation you will have to continue.
So that's it from my end.  And I'm excited to learn from more people.  Thank you. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much, Lily.  And I also enjoy reading everyone's contribution in the chat how they got involved because I think all of us are very different journeys and stories in IGF.  But I think all of us are here to work together, which I really love about this space.  
And last but definitely not least I'd like to give the floor to Augusto about the Latin American and Caribbean group.
>> AUGUSTO:  Thank you for having me.  I started my journey in the Internet Governance as a system engineer and open software enthusiast.  And in 2016 I attended to the IGF Argentina national IGF.  And I have the opportunity to travel to Mexico thanks to the youth of Asia fellowship by ISOC.  And nowadays I'm doing some research.  I'm from the technical community for Latin manners about routing layers of the Internet and security.  And also I'm part of the organising team of the youth IGF Argentina.
And I want to start with this point because I think that the youth IGFs are a key factor, in my opinion.  These are like grassroots initiatives.  We don't need to ask permissions to start them.  And I think this is a really strong point.  And led us to create spaces by the youth for future generations and create spaces where youth can discuss Internet topics, issues, et cetera, in some kind of safe space where we can prepare, all of us, to start taking the places in the Internet world for everyone and not just for youth people.
But also I think that it's not that we should expect always to have a big slot reserved for youth people in these discussion places, we should prove that we are valuable, not just because we are young but because we are experts.  We're committed.  And we can contribute.  We can make a real contribution to the discussions and all the things that are built in on the Internet.
And now talking about the Latin American region, and I think this year was a big one and in terms of opportunities to participate and get involved.
Of course the COVID‑19 caused havoc to all our lives.  And that's true.  But I wanted to see like the right side of all of this.  Because it created the chance to participate to all the events remotely.  And it's true that remote participation was always a possibility.  It's not new.  You can attend to the previous IGF remotely, registries, meetings like Latinique et cetera from your ‑‑ you don't have to travel.  But it always feels like you're in disadvantage with those on site.  It's not like you feel that real participation.  These times it's like everyone was in the same conditions.  And that opens the door to see a lot of youth everywhere in all the events and spaces.
For example, here in Latin America, well, I had the opportunity to feel like participate, to have a real participation in some events, for example, the Latinique meeting also, well, the rights con, from access now, I had opportunity to attend it when it's sometimes harder for people to have the resources travel and pay the fee and that.
And specifically for the IGF or analyzed initiatives, we have a lack, youth IGF for the Latin American and Caribbean region that this was the youth division, it was huge and it was a really great step moving in terms of how many youth people participated because here our region, well, it's like ‑‑ it has a considerable size.  And we don't have the connectivity.  So it's hard to get all these people together because always we have some lack of resources.
But this time we can participate.  A lot of people from all the continent.  All the countries.  And that was ‑‑ I think it was a really improvement for event.
And then just to get finishing here in the local area, in Argentina, this year we ‑‑ I think national IGF, but we as the organising committee of the youth IGF Argentina, we managed to arrange a youth division.  And also the right side of this COVID‑19 situation, and I think it was also an opportunity because we have the chance to have more people from other places and not just Buenos Aires which is the capital City of Argentina.  We even had participation from other countries.  It was interesting, too.  And, well, and also another point is that last year it was the last year that we had a physical place to make the event.  So this year, at the beginning we don't even have a physical place to make the event.  But then with this health crisis we have to do it remotely.  And you just need some ‑‑ well, you can always get some resources to get an account to make the event, the remote event.  So that makes and gives us the opportunity to continue with the event.
So I think it's not all things negative because of the pandemic.  It's also we had a really big opportunities to improve and make more youth people to get involved in these events.
But I'm going to finish my first intervention.  I am really looking forward to the next open discussion in the face of this workshop.  Thank you. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much and I would like to thank all of our panelists for taking us over the world and just giving us a snippet of what is happening in the regional groups.  And very important, I think a lot of very important points were made by all of you.  And I would like to say that I agree that all of us started this journey differently.  And the journey is going differently because we have different interests and different involvements in different spaces in the IG ecosystem.  But I think all of us can attest that the space for youth participation changed and reformed since we all started this journey because in the beginning it was just about having people, having young people in the room and just having them like participate in the IGF.  And that was all.
And then gradually we tried to push further and further.  And now we are here after several years of already participating in different capacities and already having acquired some level of expertise in the field.  So now the question that I would like to start our open discussion with is:  Whether you believe that youth should be considered a separate stakeholder group within the ecosystem or not?
And I would like to note two things.  First is that my colleague Noha already posted a link in the chat to a rice pad where we invite all those to participate.  And we will use this to shape the work for what we are doing next year.
And then I would like to open the floor for our panelists to comment on this and also everybody is very welcome to comment in the chat.  But I think rice pad is where I would like to have everyone's contributions to have everything in one place.
And I will post the link again.
So, your panelists who would like to start with this question?
>>  Jöao:  I'll jump ahead.  I guess this is one of the ongoing questions we're still trying to figure it out.  There's both points in favor and against.  Perhaps the most against point would be that if you're not considered a stakeholder, we have a wildcard kind of position where we can jump into conversations and be as transparent as possible.
But in terms of the why we should be considered a stakeholder group, I guess we have to think a little bit on the numbers.  So we are one out of three Internet users.  So this should be just then why we have an interest in participating in the discussions.
I guess these also correlates with the idea of how experienced we are in these situations and how can we bring more value than the ones that are doing this for years.
But it's true that we are the generation that lived with Internet from an early age.  And I guess this brings a unique vision that for those who haven't, won't be able to perhaps connect the dots as we do. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Augusto?
>> AUGUSTO:  Yeah.  In my opinion, I think it's not about adding more tasks to the stakeholder because we are in this group, we are starting this certain age.  The youth should be a stakeholder.  But then the elder says yes, we should be a stakeholder, too.  And people from First Nations, they can say this, too.  And people from LGBT community, and people for every minority and they say, okay, we have our stakeholder tag and say we select that point.
So I think it's more than just to try to evolve the concept of multi‑shareholder approach and start thinking about we have multi‑shareholder but also we have to think about some ‑‑ it's now so trendy to talk about everything by design.  For example, security design.  Privacy by design.  Okay.  Let's talk about diversity by design, for example, and create this discussion groups, organically, with the most diversity as possible.  Sometimes it's not ‑‑ it's hard to build these teams that can represent everyone.  But I think we have to involve this concept and create this group in an approachable and open way enough to welcome everyone to be part of the conversation and they can contribute.
So I think it's not just to add more stakeholders because the list could be ends.  And I think we should evolve this concept and take the world and diversity as a really strong concept.  And we should create all these participation groups well, with diversity in mind.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Yes, Lily, please.
>> LILY:  So apologies.  I had to raise my hand this way because I think giving me the option to rather do another thing.  So I just want to also side with what Augusto has said and what Jöao has said.  You know, thinking about it, you want to know on which basis, on which lines we want to break away as a stakeholder.  This is why.
So like Augusto mentioned, we have the same, the stakeholders.  And then the group, they get broader and broader.  But in essence, everyone is a stakeholder.  You are.  I am.  The youth, like we are stakeholders spread across this broad categorizations.  So these are just broader baskets so that we sit in there.  And we are able to contribute.
But I see that from the angle we are coming at, from as young people, the issue remains or the issue remains like this that we are invited.  You want to think of it to some extent as tokenism.  You know what to say about tokenism.  So there has to be a young person there so we are bringing themself.
So like they said, we have to enforce diversity and inclusion.  Everyone is an Internet stakeholder.  Like you've all said, we are the very first generation of active users of the Internet who not only grew up using it but we contributed building its core.  We understand how it has been made.  We are able to have so much views from young people and wondering how they're able to understand how this works and what it can contribute.
So, yes, we have inputs that are very insightful, very valuable to the discussions.
On breaking away from, I'm breaking away a separate stakeholder group, I think we are already.  What has to be done is enforcement.  Just like enforcement is lacking everywhere.  It's important that you have to enforce diversity, have to enforce inclusion to its fullest not just invitations.  What do you get from youth?  What do you work with them?  Beyond what happened to that?  Are they allowed to even contribute to the discussion?  Even grow in the space.  You know, so that we don't see only people, or certain kind of people occupying the spaces and then you're wondering what the young people are doing.  Are we waiting until people hit 40 and 50 and 100 until you see them assume positions.
Like this afternoon, right, when we spoke to ‑‑ it's interesting to see how she started as a very young age, able to interact, able to contribute as her age and how she deems it's important that even as of now, she has to pay it forward and allow space for us as young people to talk.
So when we consider us already as stakeholder group, our voices have to resonate one thing and that is enforcement and inclusion.
Someone said that we have to get this space, contribute and have the contribution realized.  And it shouldn't just be because the young people have to be there.  So that's what I'm thinking.  I don't think it's a matter of exactly yes or no.  You can talk about it some more.  Already we are.  This space is us.  Everybody can contribute.  We are probably born to be.  You can also have your voice captured.  So that's it from me. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Yeah.  I can also just say what I thought about this because when I was just starting, I thought that why should we have another stakeholder group because it's multistakeholder groups are everywhere because of us are different.  We are wearing different hats.  So we are basically involved within other stakeholder groups.  But then as I went on doing my journal, I realized that, okay, that is just messy, because they do not understand you and perceive you as presenting the voice of youth at all because you are just talking about a specific subject matter and they do not understand that this can in any way be the voice of youth regardless of your age and whatever organisation you are representing.  And just pushing this further and taking this forward didn't feel like something is going to happen.  We are doing a lot all of us but even with the pandemic, we didn't experience that much youth involvement and participation in all of these spaces.  It's a bit better but it's not as it could have been.  Because with this, everybody was kind of put on the same footing with just being online.  Like there was no Visa or travel restrictions applicable to anyone because nobody was traveling anywhere.  But still in the end it was the same, almost the same.  So that's why this discussion is very important.  And I agree with Lily that maybe this is more about the enforcement at the moment and also receive the comment/question in the chat which is about how to make this situation more formal, the situation of youth being a stakeholder. 
Yeah, so if anybody wants to address that.  I think Emelia wanted to jump in, too.
>> EMELIA:  Yes, I wanted to jump in like maybe I will get to this question.
I wanted just to say that I couldn't agree more with all of you, especially with you, Meri, because you make a really good point that we are all from other panelists, as well, we are all from different backgrounds, but, for example, me myself, I am ‑‑ my academia background is low.  But taking part in the IGF, I usually feel participating in this event more as a young person as, yeah, representative than as a lawyer.
So that's why I guess it's more of how we perceive ourselves and how we want to be perceived.  Because as other panelists mentioned, we as young people have really unique view of our Nikol perspective that is really worth being heard because we were the ones who have grown up in the same time as most modern technologies, Internet technologies have been developed.  So we are really into it.  And that's why I guess that being separate stakeholder group wouldn't be such a bad thing.  Of course, taking care of the diversity of inclusion in the matter, as well.
And, of course, also inviting others to dialogue because there's also these senior IGF are the people who are usually the decisionmakers, the policymakers.  So that's why it is so important to invite them so that dialogue with us because they are people who can help us to make our voices heard.  And right now we can say first steps, even the first steps, even the farther steps to be recognized as stakeholders because last year we've had the IGF summit.  This year we also had the FIGF summit that is super event and also there's ‑‑ summit.  So I guess we are going different direction.  Thank you. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you.  And I would like to say I'm enjoying all the comments in the rice pad.  Please keep them coming and we will make one piece of something that will try to incorporate all of your comments.
I think we can move to the next question.  Yeah, if we can move to the next question.  This is more to what I think Jöao mentioned during his intervention, even when we thought the pandemic first started we thought there would be more opportunities for involvement but in fact maybe we faced more challenges, one of them being the Zoom fatigue.  What has later been coined as that.  So I would like to ask you to answer this question from your regional perspective, too, so that we understand what are the current challenges and unfortunately the pandemic is not over and we don't know when it will be over with a lot of countries facing the second round or the third round of lockdowns.
So moving forward, we would like to know what are the current challenges that you are facing.
And then later we will go into what do we think can be done to overcome them?
So whoever wants to start, please jump in.
>> EMELIA:  Okay.  So maybe I could start.  As I mentioned before, the thing that I find really sufficient and I think might be a challenge that, you know, it's a great thing that we have these events, but my observation is that most of attendance are young people.  And the other groups that we would like to hear we have to say they're not much represented during this meeting.  And I guess that the thing that we should find the solution to is how to encourage these other stakeholder groups to take part in our discussions to share our ideas with them and for them to share their ideas because it is the way how we can encourage them to invoke us in their decisionmaking processes, in their actions.
So, that's ‑‑ I think that's the challenge that we should focus on during our next steps by fostering the involvement.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  As we are talking about challenges, I would like to also voice what Gustavo posted in the Q & A.  His point being that well he's responding to our previous question, but I think this is very applicable to our current discussion, as well, because what he's saying is the relevant topics for youth involvement are decided by those who are already involved in the ecosystem but it doesn't mean that these are the questions that resonate with a lot of young people, with which I also personally agree.  And that is why we had our questionnaire that we did earlier this year, my colleague will talk about that later.  And just to add this to the topic of challenges, I think it is important that we come to a consensus about priority topics for youth in general so that also we can coordinate the efforts more productively.  And I think Jöao wants to go next.
>>  JOAO:  Exactly, Meri.  I'm totally in sync with what Gustavo said.  If there's not a universal message, you can be a stakeholder, whether you have different backgrounds or not.
I would still be focused or interested in answering this question or giving more input for this question.
It's true what I said about the virtual conferencing might give the appearance of participation but we can assess it as effective or not.
Other things that come to mind and already we kind of touched upon, so we all have these experiences behind of getting in the IG space through initiatives youth programmes that were funded by different stakeholders.  And it's true.  I mean, we are getting in a place where we have a lot of newcomers.  It's like Mohammad said about the boom in terms of the youth that is getting involved.
And the idea here is, again, also touching on some of the points that I read on the rice pad, that sometimes they're not really interested in having a longer approach or participation in the space.  So you go to one or two maybe youth programmes, you get to benefit on a personal level from the programme, but then it's yet tangible to see if you stick around.
And until we get a place or a mechanism or a process that really captivates and catches and holds the youth, it will be difficult because although it's good to have similar faces, I know ‑‑ and I'm sure the similar faces are not enough.  It's really good to have different perspectives on the topic to get to know a lot of new people.  But if they don't stick around, it will be difficult to have this conversation as youth against the rest of the IG space this year.
>> 
>> MOHAMMAD:  I think I agree if I have your permission, Meri.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Please go ahead.
>> MOHAMMAD:  I agree with Jöao there.  I think we need additional support for youth inclusion policies in Internet Governance.  And it's definitely not a question about whether youth is a stakeholder.  Even if there's not a formal entity for you to represent youth, there are several boards through which you can raise your opinion.
For example, there are governments ‑‑ one of the positive aspects of our generation is these technologies that are coming up, like be it artificial intelligence, be it block chain technology, Internet of Things, these are very new.  And definitely the older generation will take some time to grasp it.  But we are in the knowledge phase of our careers.  We are adapting to these new knowledge areas of upcoming technologies.
So if I see it from that standpoint, we definitely hold a very good viewpoint to present our views as to how these upcoming technologies will affect our future.  And that's why youth is a very important stakeholder.
So, to answer one particular question that I saw in the chat:  That do you need to be specifically from a formal entity?  I will say no, that you can be from any entity.  Like as Lily mentioned that everyone is a stakeholder here, be it from academy, even if you are from technical society, you can, you know, raise your voice through research papers, through amplification, your ideas.  Some of the big corporations that are making big money today, those were started by founders who were very young in their age.  They were just teenagers.
So definitely it's not about a formal entity to enter or you need a tag of youth to raise your voices.  Just having a youth for the sake of it makes no point.  It's when you ‑‑ when our voice start influencing the technology policy decisions or the political decisions or the constitutional parts of the democracies in the sense that major Human Rights issues are addressed, then I would say that we have made some contribution for the cause of it.
And as Jöao said it's very important the youth to stick to this ecosystem of Internet Governance.  We do see similar faces.  But then we choose different parts.
So if we do stick to our niche choices and amplified it with Internet Governance, then I think this generation will pave a way for the future generations to have greater amplification because, again, I would say these technologies, even we are not aware of what will be the next technologies that students would be working on or the youth would be seeing after 20 years.  There's robotic process automations and so much coming up that it's a very good thing.  I mean, in terms of ‑‑ it's an opportunity window for the youth which it should definitely leverage, yeah.
So that is something I wanted to put forward.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you.  Lily?
>> LILY:  Thank you so much.  So I'm seeing comments in the session, I mean the chat session that I really resonate with.  So people are hitting more on entry.  People are hitting more on mechanism to reach people.  I think to some extent because the youth IGF and the IG space is a community just like we have been many communities, we have similar challenges like what open communities have.
Number one, it's entry point.  You want to talk about how do people get?  So have you ever had ‑‑ I don't know if anyone ever had the question.  Most of you are doing stuff in the IG space and say how can I be a part?  I don't know what you told them.  You start to think about NRI, you start to think about programmes.  You start to think about ‑‑ you know, sometimes you might be tempted to say to find some way they can fill in or register on this site.
So how do we make it clear how to first interface?  Or where do you start from?  And then you want to look at another problem that is very familiar with open communities, first the entry point and look at the personas and the pathway.
The way Mary entered into the space is the way different that Lily entered the space.  It shouldn't be just for the lawyers, the IT people and everything.  But how are we working to portray it as something that's acceptable for all, everybody with every skill to let somebody who's in the hearts know that look, you're able to pretend your work and there's the privacy because you know there's advocates for this and can be the voice to tell other people that, look, your work is safe if you do this kind of thing are or you're able to protect something to protect your artist alliance.
So it goes from ‑‑ it's to the entry point of how you're able to meet people at their different skill level, how different approaches reaching out to them, how different way they can contribute.  And that's where I come to talk about how people see their work materialize.  Because if you come to the space and you will all meet us like this, somebody came in as an ambassador, has said a lot of things, the person is wondering, okay, after this, what's next?  That's where you think about the sustainability and how this should go beyond conferences.  And how there should be supports, yeah.  Supports is very important.  It doesn't have to be monetary.  But support as to what else after the conference?  What else afferent erg the space ‑‑ after entering the space.  How do people rise even to leadership position?  What is the support of having people in the space?  That's very important now when we have such conversations.  Not just advocacy but for people who come in to even see how the space can help them check their own career choices.
So one challenge I see is one that is familiar with open spaces, that people have very different points that they can enter.  And another point is:  People have different backgrounds.  And so there should be a way that the message is customized for their skills.  And to be able do this, right, we are a lot of us, we have to hear all maybe and have the message out there.
I mention I spoke about Grace when we're trying to use infographics and do IG lessons.  It felt like people were really getting some information from the infographics.  But we really don't see how it helps anyone beyond it.  So it's booking.  Have things changed?  No.  Then the support beyond the conferences.  How do you get support to keep your community, your work in the space, actually how do you keep it going on?  Some of us have had to volunteer on multiple parts and learn more to be able to contribute.
So I think from the entry point to skills and to approaches that we use to meet people tuned to the support that helps everyone beyond the conference to be sustainable in their work is what we're lacking as it stands.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Yeah, I think Lily provided a great recap of all the challenges that we were all discussing and all of our attendees were also mentioning in the chat.
So from the fact that it is not ‑‑ well, now it is relatively easy to enter the space because you don't need to go through any specific programme to become part of it.
But at the same time, it's not self‑intuitive.  So it's like you need to understand what to do next.  The space is not only about this conference.  It's the work is done in between the intercessional work is what matters, actually.  And a lot of people do not see this because when you go to the conference, you do not really envision and understand this system to be like that.
So, just quickly going to our last question for the open floor is just how do you see us tackling these issues?  Just very short two sentences, two three sentences if you are offered.  I know all the challenges are very complex.  So it's not easy to say that in two sentences.  But I think all of us are working towards resolving these challenges.  But I would like to hear your personal perspectives, as well.
>>  EILEEN:  I would like to hear Gustavo.  It's relevant.  We have a relevant number of capacity building opportunities about Internet Governance, but the thing is that we are lacking very few leadership capacity building options.  And it was raised at one of the schools of Internet Governance sessions.  And I'm going to pass to the next slide, of course.  Please.  I know we have a lot of ambassadors also attending.  Please raise your voice if you can or type on the chat. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  I will say also type in the chat because of the webinar system, it is difficult to give everyone ‑‑
>> LILY:  We can give them the chance.  I am a cohost.  So if anybody wants to speak.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  We can do that right now and then we'll go Jöao.
>>  Hello.  We are having a problem? 
>>  No problems.  Thank you.
>>  Okay.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  So, Lily, if you can allow the person.  Okay, I think I can.
>> LILY:  I think this was Issakha, I will allow you to speak in a bit.  Please go ahead, I think you should be able to.  Oh, sorry.  Okay.  Issakha, the floor is yours.
(muted).
>>  ISSAKHA:  Can you hear me?
>> LILY:  Yeah, we can hear you now.
>>  ISSAKHA:  I'm from Chad.  My question is about the global messages that we have been addressing, I mean, on behalf of our respective, I mean, youth.  So I would like to make sure that when we address, like, global messages, I want us to take, I mean, our local realities and address the messages.
For instance, in Africa, in some countries we are still facing Internet shutdown.  We have like our daily topics which are related to access to Internet while in different or in other continent; for instance, youths have been debating some high level panels such as like Internet Sustainable Development Goals, Internet in digital sustainability, Internet and artificial intelligence.
So how, like, we can make sure that the, I mean, youth are represented, I mean, respectively by taking into account our national or local realities?  Thank you.
>> LILY:  Right.  Meri?
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Yes.  Anyone would like to address this?
>> LILY:  I think I have some thoughts on it.  So if I got the question right.  Issakha.  Was asking how we could have different needs from different regions all meeting at a certain point.
So I think it actually links to what Gustavo said the first time.  Even though we have some similar questions, similar problems with the Internet globally, it would be very interesting to know that in specific places, there are very unique situations.  So it's true.  Some of us are talking about infrastructure and even affordability and access here in Ghana.  You'd wonder how long somebody has to work to get a phone.
In other parts of the world, you are talking about net neutrality.  And we're wondering:  Okay, so you have the access.  Now you want to say everything should be allowed online.  That's well.  But I think where we can meet halfway is some way somehow what happens in some part of the world Internet gradually affects everyone.  And I think it's an issue of mitigate these at the threshold before it gets out of hand.
So there was the threat of an Internet shutdown in Nigeria.  We were wondering as Ghanaians.  We were interesting if that starts somewhere, it could come into the country and then we could have the ripple effect.  So to some extent what we can do as young people to have our voices resonating around the same thing is on global issues, there is one step you can take that is a step of solidarity.  So if somebody brings, if youth brings up issues from their region, it is not only to them.  If it's time to rally, everybody rallies around the things, if you don't know anything about it, you can probably ask how do we help?
So you have very different situation, but how do we help you?  And you can share ideas.  You can share what you think can be done.  And to get working towards a certain goal.
And it's the same as in communities.  I want us to see henceforth it is not just your original issues, your country issues, the Internet has made us so much of a global village.  One person has gone in multiple directions.  So this is why such communications are important that are able to lend your voice and want to know or be interested in things that are happening and how you can support.
So still stay on the course of heralded things from the region that need help.  But if there are other issues from elsewhere you can pick to make yours better, ask.  If you don't understand something that is speaking about, ask also.  People are able to describe things from where it pinches them the most and able to help you understand it so you can also contribute to it.
So maybe a way of collating this communication is what would be difficult?  Because we are so many.  And then we have to all work at one time to collate information.  I see the chat I'm running out of time.  Nice submission.
>>  Jöao:  I'll try to keep my two sentences short, Lily.
I'll try to wrap up really quick the ideas I'll our answer to Gustavo.  I also locked at what are the points raised in there?  So hopefully I can sum up really quick.
To Gustavo, I do agree what you said.  Lily links well to the things put up on the rice pad, as well.
So the idea was to have to reserve a seat on the decision processes and advisory boards.  And here it's totally in sync with one of the messages on this year's youth for sustainability.  On the track for Internet ‑‑ I also like the translation of the reserved seat to a liaison position.  That's really on a personal matter.  Because as I brought in my intervention, I really think that solution here or the option is to bring youth as a cement for the IG space.  It's all mentioned the challenges of bringing youth for their expertise.  The challenges we face when we're brought through these different integration programmes.  So if we think youth could be the cement that kind of connects the dots because, well, we'll live within the Internet.  And we pursue or we understand the different motivations for the stakeholders that are involved.  I think it would really be a plus.
I'm sorry, I didn't read the last question.  But hopefully one or more speakers could address it.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you, Jöao, I'd like to give the floor to Gustavo for his comments.  And then we will move forward.
>>  Gustavo:  Thank you, Meri.  Can you guys hear me?
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Yes, yes.
>>  Gustavo:  Okay.  So to start off, I wanted to bring a word that Lily mentioned.  It's solidarity.
I think your choice for this word was extremely fortunate because ‑‑ and I want to tell just a little bit of what was my mind set when I became involved with Internet Governance a.
A few years ago I came in, I had in my head a few ideas of issues I thought that were relevant based on my very restricted, my very limited personal experience in life.
And then you know I had a few years here.  I got to meet all sorts of people.  I went to forums and this and that.  And then after a while I started realising that, oh, well, you know, these issues I initially brought up, they aren't as important as I imagined.  And not only that, many of the issues which when I stopped and reflected, if I'm making a serious honest reflection of what are the main issues for the youth, then I need to first question what is the reality of the youth in my region, in my state, in my city, in my country, and in the globe.
So that's why I think that Lily's choice of the word solidarity is extremely important here because I think if we want the youth, all of us, to become strong enough as a policy entity to be able to be a stakeholder group on our own, we need to start visualizing like the interests of the youth beyond our personal lives.
I think this is essential.
So what this means is that in the Brazil IGF which I was involved with, I realized that, you know, I come from a Civil Society background.  But given the specific issues that my people, my state is facing, I ended up bartering with the private sector because I realized that questions of access were extremely important here and the small ISPs were the main partner for this issue.
So, I think this is essential for us.  This idea of solidarity.  And maybe working with and looking across stakeholder groups to try and identify in advance the topics which we, the youth, think are the most important for all of us, not only one, not only me, but all of us and mainly, mainly the people who are underrepresented in other ways.
And by this I specifically mean low income people and low income regions and countries.  Thank you.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much.  Very, very crucial points made.  And I also agree with Lily's choice of the world solidarity.  And yes, in a way even with this pandemic, we are a big global village.  And even though I very much agree that we have different issues in different regions, there is a vast number of issues that are cross‑cutting for all the regions.  And that is why working together is something that is very important in this space.
And now I just as a reminder that is the YC situation.  We heard of all the groups.  I would like to give the floor to Eileen representing the Latin American and Caribbean group to represent what we did during these years.  Eileen, you have the floor.
>> Eileen:  Thank you very much, Meri.  It has been very interesting to hear you all.  Unfortunately, the time is, you know, is very strict.  So I'm going to try to make the administrative announcements as soon as possible.
So, basically I'm going to recap a little bit on the things that we have done this year.  For example, we have made a questionnaire which I'm going to share with you in the next slides.
We also prepared the charter, which is if you want to think about it is like the constitution of our Dynamic Coalition.  So it's the way that this is regulated.
We also created a code of conduct which, you know, is very important for every organisation.  We are not an organisation, but you get what I mean.
We also are very happy to share with you that this year, while we submitted sessions with ‑‑ also known as UC, we are having three sessions.  So the first one is on Monday.  I hope you can join.
We are also engaged at the youth engagements strategy with the IGF Secretariat, the Polish government and an institute on other more relevant stakeholders.
We have a special mission now, which is that we have been part of the mentorship programme for the Internet Society's IGF youth ambassadors programme, which I hope you guys can speak at least some minutes close to the end.
While we also participated in the survey on the IGF plus, the global stakeholders dialogue hosted by ‑‑
We held the session at the EuroDIG thanks to Meri.
Here we also participated at the open course at the youth lack IGF.  We are also engaged in other sessions, maybe Noha can share a few words.  Today earlier was a session of the DC on Internet core values.
Let me see.  We also participated I think it was last Sunday the youth IGF India and what we have also a keynote at the youth Lac IGF 2020.
This is just a partial list.  We have made other things.
So now going back to the questionnaire, we launched this questionnaire to identify the top priorities for 2020 from which we organized the work for our community.  And we discovered that people were interested in webinars, mentorship programmes and other points and most of the people who replied to the questionnaire were from the African region.
And also from that survey, since I think Gustavo and Meri were mentioning about the topics that were relevant for young people, after we launched this survey, we found out, which wasn't very good, I mean wasn't a surprise, that's one of the topics that youth are more interested was on the protection of privacy, which became very relevant after the break of the COVID‑19.
Also on environment and technologies, inclusion, inclusion in general.
So you see we have a bit of everything on the topics.  Sorry if I'm going a bit fast.
Let me see.  Okay.  So I'm not sure if we can have a few minutes of the voluntary commitment to foster the aims and goals of the IGF during the next year.
Maybe it could be a general commitment from our speakers.  I'm not sure who wants to lead this part.  So we can have a few minutes of the youth ambassadors if they want to speak, of course.  Thank you.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Lily?
>> LILY:  I want to keep it brief.  In the coming year my commitment is to inspire, involve and impact.  Inspire people to do more.  Involve people so they understand what's happening and they know how to contribute.  And impact so that we have this going forward.  Thank you.
>>  Also to keep it very brief.
>> MOHAMMAD:  In one sentence.  Commitment would be strengthen, enhance the engagement of stakeholders and especially the youth and disadvantaged stakeholders for the future Internet Governance.  Particularly those from the developing countries.  Thank you.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  This is going as I suggested to take this.  Jöao:
>>  Yeah:  I haven't thought on 3 in a sentence.  I'll be brief.
Well, I think my commitment is already to the initiatives I'm contributing to.  It's the promise that I'm sticking around.  And those familiar faces know I'm already involved for a while.  And that means I'll stay involved at the regional level with the different initiatives from Council of Europe, from the Dot EU management institution and from the youth IGF movement where I'm currently involved but also trying to seek a more unified approach, trying to engage in these difference institutions and try to connect the dots as I'm already doing at the personal level.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Amazing.  Next, Augusto?
>> AUGUSTO:  Just keep working, creating opportunities for all the youth to be part of the conversation.  That's all.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  And, finally, we go to Emelia from hopefully next year's in‑person IGF host country.
>> EMELIA:  I really hope so.  I really hope that I would be able to meet all of you guys on site, not online.  So.
So conclusion to make it very brief is after this meeting is diversity, to make sure that as many points of view will be represented as possible.
And the second one, networking.  And networking opportunities because I think this is something that we all are missing this year because it was one of the best parts of the IGFs even these evening networking, the parties and so on.
And I really hope that we all will be able to experience this next year.  And hope to see you there.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much.  So any last comments from our audience?  Now is the time to take the floor for any last comments.
>>  Eileen:  We have two questions from the Q & A, Meri.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  I do not see questions.
>>  Jöao:  I've answered one through text.
>>  Eileen:  There is a point raised by Germán.  I'm not sure if we addressed Nadia's comment, as well.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  I cannot find the comment again.  But if I can recall, that was about the gender issues in Poland if I'm not mistaken.  I think I read it.
>>  Eileen:  He's saying that he was contributing actually requesting, I think he was talking about different issues people have.  I'm seeing EI and other things.  So thank you.  Yeah, go ahead, please.
>>  Okay, thank you.  Sorry, guys.  I forgot something very important, which is this year we have the elections.  You might imagine that each year we have different, well, election cycle.  So in our case, we are having the elections after the IGF within six weeks of the IGF.  Of course we are going to publish everything at the mailing list.  The call for the elections committee and all that.  So stay in touch.  And if any of the ambassadors want to speak, this is your time before we wrap up.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  So taking this opportunity, I would like to thank our panelists for a very interesting discussion.  This is the information that you see on your screen is the way to connect with youth CIG.  It's a very interesting way to get involved with Internet Governance on a global level.  It is not an organisation.  It is a Dynamic Coalition and we are basically involved in the intercessional work that I mentioned, which happens after the IGF concludes and until the next IGF.  So this is a very interesting space.  And you get to meet other people from Dynamic Coalitions working on different issues and also have a chance to work with IGF Secretariat.  So according what my colleague Eileen mentioned we are going to launch our elections soon, so please sign up to our mailing list to receive more information on this.  And follow all the events that we share.
And we also organise or co‑organise.  And, yes, so this IGF is a bit weird to me because it's virtual.  And it's taking place during almost three weeks.  So I just would like to take this opportunity to thank everyone and wish all of you a very fruitful IGF.  Hopefully next year we will reflect on this in person already.  But enjoy the rest of the conference.  And thanks again for all your contributions both in the chat, in questions, and also in the rice pad.  I really enjoyed reading all of that.  Thank you very much. 
>> NOHA:  Can we take a group photo?  Can we allow everyone to open their cams?
>> LILY:  Cameras.  Let me see what I can do.  One moment, please.
>>  Lily, I think you can only allow ‑‑
>>  I activated it.
>>  Say it again.  It has already been activated.
>>  I'm trying to see if I can give everybody a chance.
>>  Take the can take a selfie with us.
>>  Yes.  Imagine how do it.
>>  And post it on Facebook.  On social media with hashtags.
>>  Yeah.
>>  I'm looking.
>> LILY:  Let me see if I can promote to panelists and take it from there.  So Carolina, if you can help, let's have as many people promoted and we can all turn our video.  So I'm doing that, if you join in just click on your video before we leave.  Can you help?  Let's have as many people here.
>>  Yes, yes.  Okay.  Videos on.
>>  Expect this to be your most crowded livestream of the IGF.  So don't worry.  Enjoy it.
>>  Yes.  I see familiar faces.  Take a photo already.
>>  It's really great to see everyone.  Okay.
>>  Is everyone taking screenshots?  Take it.  I see with a baby.  Right.  I think you have a photo now.
>>  Or a hundred.
>> LILY:  Maybe say goodbye also the voices, everybody.
Bye everyone.  
(everyone saying goodbye)  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-nri-cybersecurity-local-policies-and-standards^^

 
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Are we ready to stream and start the session?  Good morning.  Good afternoon, and good evening, everyone.  Welcome to the NRI Collaboration Session.  This is the NRI Collaboration Session on Security Locals, Policies, and Standards.  We do have with us a whole host of NRI colleagues who will be giving their interventions.  We will have interventions from Brazil IGF, from North Macedonia IGF, from Chad IGF, France IGF, and Albania IGF, and also have other IGF colleagues who will be making other interventions throughout the entire program with us.  There will be several policy questions answered at this time.  These are what are the contemporary challenges for our societies regarding cybersecurity; the second is what are concrete examples of defense in Cyberspace; and the third one is what are good practices of successful, regional cooperation on cybersecurity matters?
I guess I'm really happy to really kick off the whole conversation with looking at the national cyber defense mechanisms and why we need them and what the good practices are.  In this particular segment, I would love to invite examples from Brazil IGF, and North Macedonia IGF.  If I may right now, just a question really to our speaker from Brazil IGF, Ms. Cristine Hoepers, if you could tell us possibly what the situation is right now in Brazil.
   >> CRISTINE HOEPERS:  Good morning.  Good morning, everyone.  Thank you very much for inviting me in for the question for the session.  So, in Brazil the work on security actually started more than 20 years ago when the Brazilian Internet Steering Committee here in Brazil called for specialists to provide an overview on what would be a good model for security in Internet, and especially for coordination across the country.  And that report set the scene that really we needed several organizations, not only one, especially in recognition that security is something that is actually not achieved by one agency or one organization but really you need to have all actors as part of a security mindset, so at that time CERT.br was created and other CERTs or Computer Response Teams or Computer Emergency Response Teams as also known were created and that was a process that was slow because you need to have maturity in the country and mindset and during this whole process we had ‑‑ there is lots of teams and all of the teams work in network governance and so no really hierarchy, nobody is really mandated to report to any other team.  So CERT.br is a national team of last resort and provide services to any network and we are in contact with everyone that needs to reach Brazil regarding cyber issues or security or defense.  So in that sense, we have another team with more responsibility that's more focused on the government and that team is really more focused on government networks and helping states and cities, but really states and cities are not hierarchically obliged to report to that team.  It's a network of cooperation.  This has been formed for over 20 years and most people know that we have a cyber strategy coming on but we already have a cyber defense strategy that's much older around 10 years and they all focus on cooperation between private and public sector and involving academia to bring up new ideas and bringing in solutions, and they all recognize that all networks need to have their own capabilities for defense and own capabilities really to secure the network because I think this is the most important so there are a lot of efforts in training and capacity building and really in having a lot of people in the country trained and continue cooperation inside and outside so this is really a brief history and what I could share in like this short time for the session.  Thank you very much.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you for information about the Brazil situation.  It seems quite clear and it's been in place well over 20 years.  It's interesting to hear that.  I forgot to introduce myself.  I am the moderator for this session.  I'm Jennifer Chung, a MAG Member for this year and also part of the Secretariat of the Asia‑Pacific Regional IGF.  And with me also, our Co‑Moderator and discussant, Mr. Laurin Weissinger.
   >> LAURIN WEISSINGER:   And we'll actually be facilitating the conversation and asking questions to the panelists and listening to our attendees as well.
With that, I would like to give the mic to North Macedonia IGF.  Apologies if I mispronounce your name, but could you give us some background on what is happening there?
   >> PREDRAG TASEVSKI:  Yes, of course.  In Macedonia it's quite interesting that before 2016, we haven't had any information regarding the cybersecurity capacities and it was just passed under legislation law but nothing more concrete.  Where later ‑‑ later that year in Macedonia in 2016 first and foremost established in Macedonia, Critical Emergency Response Team.  Later coming to the capacity and to the scope of that agency, the World Bank and the global cybersecurity capacity center raised a cybersecurity capacity review conducted in July 2019 where the main consulting took place using the central cybersecurity capacity maturity model, and within five dimensions such as cybersecurity policies and strategies, cyber culture and society, cybersecurity education, training and skills, legal relation frameworks, standards, organizations, and technologies.  Within such report, we Macedonian ministries and Macedonian CERTs, drafted a national cybersecurity strategy 2018‑2022, actually published the same month and same year, quite interesting.  (Laughing).
The main goal of the National Cybersecurity Strategy is cyber resilience, cyber capacities, and cybersecurity culture, combating cybercrime, cybercrime cooperation, and exchange of information.  And all of this the National Cybersecurity Strategy has been kind of developed from the recommendations of the previous report review that I have mentioned.
Also, on the other hand with the multistakeholder approach, we have established the Internet Governance Forum in North Macedonia and within that each year we coin a group multistakeholder approach of discussing very important topics about cybersecurity and, for instance, last year we were conducting ‑‑ we were conducting and discussing topics for the governance level, how they're implemented, what are the metrics in the national level, how do we increase and do we need to increase for the cybersecurity professionals and education effort toward the development of even more security professionals.
And within all, I can sum in that in a very spirit the North Macedonian cybersecurity has been increased and the capacity of dealing with a cyber-attack or incident and so on.  It has the capacities and knowledge and the agencies and established steps and procedures and guidelines.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you for that.  I know you're really in the middle of the National Cybersecurity Strategy that you mentioned, 2018 to 2022, I think you mentioned, but probably we'll come back to you on that if you have a little more information and possibly compare what's going on in the region as well.  But before that, I would like to give the mic over to Chad IGF.  I believe we have a speaker from Chad IGF, Dr. Bakhit Amine, apologies if I mispronounced your name, but if you could give us a bit of an overview of what is happening in Chad?  Dr. Amine, are we able to hear you?
   >> BAKHIT AMINE:  Yes.  I can hear you.  Good morning, everyone.  Thank you for inviting me to participate in this panel, which I think is very important.  My name is Bakhit Amine, and I'm from Chad.  Chad is a landlocked country at the center of Africa, bordered by Libya to the north, Sudan to the east, Nigeria and Cameroon to the southwest.  It's a strategic and economic interests and it's open to attack from all directions by cyber criminals and cyber tourists, Boko Haram, Al Qaeda, was set in 2009 several of the regional on the border between Nigeria, Chad, Cameroon and Niger, and it's one of the deadliest tourist groups in the region, so really it relates to our security and Boko Haram are taking information technology and training members and recruiting new members and communicate and so on.  So Chadian authorities are aware of this situation, and also are aware of the country's internal and external isolations and quick work to provide the country with telecommunication infrastructure, regulatory and legal framework and institutional framework.  The Chad has established a National Information Security and electronic certification agency in 2015.  The cybercrime capacity in Chad is at the early stage.  We do not have a cyber defense strategy and no policy framework at the national level.  Chad doesn't have also ‑‑ doesn't have a computer security incident response team, and as you know, without a computer security incident response team, there would be no effective way to share information and resolve an incident at the national level.
So our citizens, like the others are subject to cyberattack, and Chad is in real need to is establish, you know, an appropriate strategy, which is why we are here to learn from experience of other countries and apply in Chad.  That is a nutshell of what we can say about the situation of Chad related to cybersecurity.  Thank you.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you so much, Dr. Amine.  I can see other colleagues from West Africa IGF and other regions as well, so I think this is a really good session for us to share best practices, especially listening from national IGFs and also some states who already have quite mature CSIRT ecosystems and also CERTs, so it's actually good to have this conversation right now.
I'd really like to turn it over to looking at more of a national and regional international cooperation.  I think to this we can probably turn it over to France IGF.  Mr. Lucien Castex, could you give us a bit of information on what's going on in France?  I know there is quite a mature network over there and several other things including the Paris Call from the President back in to 18.  Could you give us a bit of information and context?  
   >> LUCIEN CASTEX:  Thank you.  We have framework in France, and basically, France has cybersecurity as cornerstone of digital agenda for the past couple of years, so idea is to develop a national expertise as it concerns cybersecurity and also to raise citizen awareness of threats and try developing collaboration with the stakeholders in France prospectors, Civil Society and so on and strengthen educational programs in this regard.
As it concerns policy, basically as you know, France is a member of the European Union so we have a number of legal instruments that are in in place France transposed the NEISS that pertains to cybersecurity, and GDPR which includes principle of privacy by design and privacy by default concepts and implement security into design of interfaces and products.  And France is quite engaged in ENISA its European Cybersecurity Agency and dedicated agency and related to cybersecurity questions, and also to answer your question.  
France is quite engaged with Europe, for example, as cybercrime convention, of the convention and has a number of initiatives at the international level.  The first one you mention is indeed the call for trust and security in Cyberspace which is aiming at bringing basically the international community together to ensure cybersecurity in Cyberspace.  France is also championing which is violence.  And in this regard, there is an advisory network bringing Civil Society and a number of experts to the table to discuss these issues.  And again, getting back to it next round, but basically there is also a number of initiatives from French organizations, a number of regulatory bodies with regard to data protection, cybersecurity, or media regulation, for example.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you for your information in France right now and of course all of our colleagues are standing in solidarity with you with what is happening in France right now and it's actually very good to already have such a mature network and such mature policy strategies that aim to address these types of attacks and have a regional cooperation there.
Turning now to our next speaker from Albania IGF and this is Vilma Tomco the General Director of National Authority on Electronic Certification and Cybersecurity.  So, Ms. Tomco?  Could you give us a little bit?  Yes.  Thank you.
   >> VILMA TOMCO:  Thank you for inviting me in this really very professional panel.  I am here to say something about the Albanian framework regarding cybersecurity situation and certain cooperation that we have in the region and internationally.  I have to go shortly because they say that lastly, we have done a lot of things in the cybersecurity field.
Cybersecurity as in the Macedonia case has begun lately in our country something with very few limited schemes in 2009 and after with policy document in place during the 2014, to 2016 and after we saw that we need to work hard on it.  So, in 2017, we have cybersecurity law in place and we have worked also to fulfill the framework, the frameworks and regulatory things.  So I think that we have all of this legal framework in place but we still have the need to improve it because we have not fully transposed the NEISS Directive and it is now objective this year within this year and next year that we need to be fully transposed the NEISS directive into law and at the same time the policy directive is finish and we made the conclusion of how we have fulfilled the action plan that we have together with it.  We are drafting the new strategy of cybersecurity, national strategy cybersecurity in the country where a lot of stakeholders have worked and made contributions to it, review it, et cetera, so we're in the process to approve it.  Together with that we have also drafted an action plan and we have also approved the indicators in order to see how we have to fulfill it.
What is important to our side is that we have identified the critical and important infrastructures, so we have fully transport this part of this directive and we have through a very clear methodology, we have defined which will be the critical and important infrastructure in the country based on the methodology and this year we have a large number of these stakeholders and institutions that has to belong to the critical infrastructure.  And what is more important based on the on the tools or let's say procedures that we put to them, we have seen an increase in the interest to invest in cybersecurity to all of these critical and important infrastructures and also interest to increase the staff capacity‑building of their staff.
And this has put us to application to organize time after time, workshops, seminars, cyber drills, and other events in order to bring together all cybersecurity experts to train them, put them all together, talk with each other, and let's say to break this barrier that exists between the information.  So, we have tried to make them to share information, to share cases, and to help each other of what to do in case of cyberattack.
So, in this moment, we have had the support of a lot of international partners like ITU, like DCAF, a lot of others in the region like national CERTs in Macedonia or Serbia or Cyprus, so we have a lot of memorandum of understanding between national CERTs in the region and more in Europe also.
And this is for our, let's say for support to help us in different cases.  I cannot say that we have big numbers of cases, of incidents, or let's say other things that they are still not confident to share this with us, but what we are doing is a very strong efforts to raise the capacities of the teams.  So, we have also with our policies, we have impact in creating sectoral CERTs in each critical infrastructure, and in the others to open several cybersecurity programs in the academia in order to produce good experts in the field.  So, we are in this process to match the request with the offers in the cybersecurity market.
This is an endless work and we are to continue, but this kind of event that you are organizing is also a support to enlarge our networking, collaboration, et cetera.  Thanks to you and thanks to also the organizers of IGF.  Thank you.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you very much, Ms. Vilma Tomco.  I see there are several questions in the Q&A pod.  I attendees and colleagues please do use the question and answer pod to pose questions.  We already have a first one, a question to all the panelists, and I guess I can expand also to NRI colleagues on the call.
International cybersecurity cooperation runs into issues from time to time.  How do you think that international cooperation can be improved?
I think this has already started nicely from a segue from Albania IGF who gave the intervention about some memorandums of understandings with other national CERTs, but I would like to open this question and also ask my co‑moderator, Laurin to see if he has anything to add to this question before we add it up?  Laurin, please?
   >> LAURIN WEISSINGER:  Thank you, Jennifer.  So, yes, I think I'm seeing two interesting dimensions to cooperation here.  And both, essentially, have been picked up by the panelists.  Right.  So, one would be more about kind of regional or in‑country cooperation, so the first intervention by Dr. Hoepers, right, about how-to Brazil in CERTs in different places deal with each other.  And then there is the kind of international dimension that Ms. Stevens mentioned, which is how do you go outside of the country.
And so, I guess either is fine for all panelists to answer in terms of what they're doing, in terms of regional or in‑country cooperation what they're doing internationally and where they think they have done well or where they might have to improve or find new solutions.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  All right.  Perhaps I'll direct this question first to Brazil IGF, Cristine Hoepers?  Or any other panelists or other NRI coordinators or speakers would like to address this?
   >> PREDRAG TASEVSKI:  This is Predrag from North Macedonia.  I can address this.  I think both international and regional cooperation is extremely important for sustainable cybersecurity capacities.  So for instance, why Macedonia has been progressing in the spirit of light in the four years we kind of reached a very good level of cybersecurity since ability is due to the very extremely big support of the international organizations, such as NATO, OECD, DCAF and so on when it comes to training, to capacity building, to education, to workshops and so on.  Where on the other hand, on the regional level, there is already we recalling from Albania mentioning that we have memorandums with Albanian Critical Emergency Response Team, Kosovo, as well as Serbia, Bosnia, Bulgaria, and Greece.  And we're working to get and we're having each year; unfortunately, this year due to the pandemic circumstances, there weren't any collaboration or regional trainings.  However, for past year, 2019, there were several, around three to four workshops that were conducted.  Of course, with the support of international organizations.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Okay, Mr. Tasevski, it's important to hear about the international cooperation there.  You did mention a bit more about the memorandums of understanding with other national CERTs, and it is quite interesting to see that regional cooperation there.  I guess staying in that region and going back to France and also Western Europe, perhaps, Lucien, if you could expand a little bit more on that on the regional cooperation?
   >> LUCIEN CASTEX:  Sure.  Sure.  It's quite interesting, indeed, and the question is quite important because, basically, one of the key points is information sharing.  Not everyone is on the page, and then you need to improve capacity, which needs to basically at a local level in country cooperation, CERTs, local stakeholders, but also at the global level so that we can try aiming to global cybersecurity.  So, recalling as we mention earlier, we're trying to do so by bringing multistakeholder approach and there is a number of other initiatives.  And indeed, in France, we have quite a few.  For example, we have French commandment of cyber defense which was created in 2017 to increase cyber capacities and we have a number of legal initiatives as it concerns fake news, hate speech, and content regulation, basically.  
So, for example, quickly, on fake news we passed a law in 2018 against manipulation of information which is aiming to better protect democracy against fake news, which are deliberately spread.
There is particular attention on election campaigns.  It's quite important in the U.S. presently, and basically the aim is to improve transparency to digital platforms and the law is also creating legal injunction so that fake news can be taken down if they manifest and disseminated deliberately.  And also, it's creating a duty of cooperation, which is quite an important stake in sharing information.
So, the other point I was mentioning was cooperation at in‑country level.  And for example, in France, we have a number of different regulators.  We have CEP which is telecom regulator and concierge which is regulator of digital sectors.  And well, basically, you need both of them to cooperate, and this is done by a number of ‑‑ well of workshops and extending good practices between authorities so that regulation can be, you know, effective and that expertise can be shared with authorities.
At the local level, I can give you a quick example.  For example, from AFNIC the state appointed registry.  So, during the COVID‑19 crisis, well basically, in cooperation with DGCCRF which is basically the general directorate for competition in consumer affairs regarding fraud online.  And such cooperation, in my opinion, quite the first step obviously but also the cornerstone of cybersecurity because it's cooperative and multistakeholder by nature. 
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  I think we have several questions in the question and answer pod that has built up during this time and I would like to still give an opportunity for NRI colleagues either from European region or I can move to different regions to answer this cooperation question.  But before that, I see there has been quite a few questions for Dr. Amine.  The first one is more of a statement, I think, and it's a statement I think to reaffirm what you mentioned in your intervention about needing to develop the computer security incident response teams and also there is another question from Madeline, and this question is directed to Dr. Amine as well.  Do you have cybersecurity capacity building initiatives from private sectors in Chad and how does the private sector landscape provide digital tech and services look like in your country?
   >> BAKHIT AMINE:  Thanks for the questions.  First, I would like to intervene about the regional cooperation.  The regional cooperation is important for us, in particular, in the regions of the area, so the United Nations Office organize a training workshop, a workshop also was attended by the officers from Chad, Niger, Nigeria, and so on, so we think the regional cooperation is important and it will help us to increase the capacity of our officers, and increase also the sharing of information.
In Chad we do have the initiative to ‑‑ to build the capacity because Chad has already established a national higher school for information and communication technology and this will show a clear political will of the highest authority to provide Chad with advanced education in ICT and in particular with degrees in cybersecurity.  And also, we have also the incentive to implement national cybersecurity strategy which is why we requested from the ITU in order to help us implement our national strategy.  Thanks.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you, Dr. Amine, for that.  I would like to open up this question really to any colleagues from NRI colleagues from the Africa regions to actually understand a little bit more about the regional cooperation.  I do see a few of them on the call, so please do let me know if you would like to intervene to add a bit more of a dimension on the African region right now and on cooperation regionally as well as internationally, so do let me know in the chat or if you're able to raise hands, please also use that functionality.
I guess I'll pass the mic back over to my co‑facilitator and also co‑moderator, Laurin, for another round of questions.  Laurin, I believe you do have another question you want to ask the panelists and also the other colleagues?
   >> LAURIN WEISSINGER:  Yes.  Absolutely.  Thank you, Jennifer.  So the second thing I picked up during the initial statements, and this was particularly pronounced when Mr. Tasevski was speaking and that is the question of kind of culture, how to leverage a strategy, how to build a culture that is about security to get people involved to support education, to support in‑country cooperation that we already talked about.  So, if we could maybe start with Mr. Tasevski because he brought it up the most, kind of what is happening on that front and where do you feel this might be going in the next few years?
   >> PREDRAG TASEVSKI:  Thanks very much for such a great question, and I have to say one of the biggest challenges when it comes to national cybersecurity awareness is to create the cybersecurity culture and that is a question of a million dollars.  Unfortunately, I don't have the answer to that question.  But on the other hand, I can say how in Macedonia what kind of approach we have taken in Macedonia.
One very great example that it just came back this year in the middle of August, which was a part of the national cybersecurity action plan is how to make the people actually, the most vulnerable and the human firewall on the national level is to create a quite interesting and also very interactive educational commercials that are going on the national TV, and one example was between, so in Macedonia CERT, they took example of how the grandma is educating what the secure password to the grandson, and what is the malware, what is secure banking, what is phishing?  And so on.  So, these are the best practices that have to be taken.  And I have seen this on my parents, relatives, older ones as well, I see that everyone is perceiving that information very well and they're taking it.  They are digesting it and they're taking care of it, their digital identity, their digital information.  They're starting to understand that the data itself on the Internet, it's vulnerable and they have to take measures to be able to protect themselves and to be, of course, aware about it.
So this is one of the ways how the action plan of the national cybersecurity strategy in Macedonia started, but then also when you build the cybersecurity culture, which was really mentioned by my colleague from Albania, it's extremely important to identify, do you have enough professionals, or do you have enough education that can bring more curriculums and syllabuses, not only on for doctoral studies in post studies, but rather on the Bachelor level have you already covered such topics?  Are you discussing these topics with different groups of age, from the younger ones to the oldest ones, the ones that are the more vulnerable at the teenagers, that the people or the generation that is 24/7 on the Internet and I have to be honest, even now days I am a native and Internet savage person, but sometimes with new applications, new technology and everything, you can't keep all up to the speed.  Where on the other hand, those generations they do.  And, hence, we need to make sure that we take everyone into consideration, all different groups from the youngest ones to the oldest ones, and to be able to, very importantly, to be able to deliver to the nation or to the people, to the humans, to everyone in the fact that they will be able to digest that information like a cultural exchange like in Macedonia, the example was through grandma educating a young person.
   >> LAURIN WEISSINGER:  Thank you.  I think that was a really detailed and really interesting answer as well.  Could we go back to Dr. Cristine Hoepers who would like to speak about the aspect of cooperation and maybe she could also kind of quickly mention how the aspect of culture impacts on that as well because obviously these things can be tied considerably.
   >> CRISTINE HOEPERS:  Thank you.  The topic of cooperation is very dear to CSIRTs and Computer Response Teams, and actually in 2014 and 2015, we had two runs of the best practices forum on CERTs and cooperation on CERTs so 2014 was when we had activity for IGF, and in those years the main discussion, when we were looking for best practices for CERTs, the things that came over and over were really we need cooperation, but for cooperation we need to establish trust, and really to need to establish trusts, that is an interpersonal relationship thing.
So, those discussions, they really came over and over, and in 2014, the report, and I would encourage everyone to go to those reports because in the reports we actually registered on the first year what was already working and what is a CSIRT and what it can do and what it can't do because it's not really an answer for everything.  In 2014 it was more focused on cooperation, and I think 2020 was one of the challenges for cooperation among CSIRTs because to establish trust you need to know the person and so there is no contract that can establish trust or no MOU or no other organization.
So, CERTs, we have several organizations that we work for cooperation.  So, the main organization is first, and of course that's the forum of instance response and security teams and they're very involved in IGF at the ‑‑ now they're helping to coordinate the best practice forum of cybersecurity since it was established, but we have regional organizations as well and then the regional CERT cooperation organizations are the ones that are formed mostly because of culture.  So, your question about culture, so really, we have AP CERT, that's one of the oldest ones that is Asia‑Pacific, and so they have one goal and they really work well and they work together and they have different goals.  And here in Latin America, we are helping to create Lexi CERTs more for cooperation in Latin America and Caribbean.  We have language.  So, culture is very different and so some countries really having the obligation to report to someone will never work because the culture is not for that.  For reporting to other countries, you have to have formal organizations because people are more formal and want to have contracts and so.
But really for cooperation, I think trust is the main point, and this is one of the points for example here in Brazil that one of our major challenges is how to create this trust, and we usually create through conferences.  We do a lot of breaks and long extended times for networking, and this is usually where the cooperation and trust comes.  And later on, you have long relationships, so and I think that there is no really secret for cooperation, but it happens.
And another thing is also trust on technical expertise because at the end of the day when you have a very serious security incident, you need someone that knows how to deal with that, how to contain the incident, what they can share and they cannot share, how to protect data and privacy.  So, I think this is really important, and this is just to give an idea that we have some reports and previous work on cooperation in 2014 and 2015 intersessional so I think it's a very interesting read on challenges and why some cooperation works and do not work.  Thank you.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you, Cristine, for that more detailed explanation about the regional cooperation.  I note we did have an attendee with his hand up and his hand is now down again.  I think it is ‑‑ I'm sorry if I mispronounce your name, if you're able to unmute, if host, if you can unmute his mic to ask his question?
>> EVGENY TONKIKH:  I had a message for previous topic about how we could enhance cooperation that was raised in the Q&A boxes.  So, I'm not sure, maybe it's already touched during the previous panelist speaker.  I would like to bring to our colleague some examples of interregional or inter‑country cooperation like Project Cyber Breaks, it's the first one is a map of existing regulations and the best practice and develop policy certifications in area of cybersecurity governance, and including personal data regulations.
The second one is Internet access policy and strategy for digitalization for public administration in countries so my understanding such kind, maybe mostly academic project, but it contains many interesting practical information and also provides some very useful workshops and such approach from bottom to top could be helpful, I guess, not only Brix countries because I will say Brix countries present different areas like America, Africa, Asia, and I guess based on these findings, we could take something and enhance and take into account national aspects and bring to the top level, to the international level like IT U, like United Nations agencies about cybersecurity aspects.
I guess it's could be a possible way to enhance and make more actual ‑‑ actual initiative.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you.
   >> LAURIN WEISSINGER:  Thank you very much.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Go ahead, Laurin.
   >> LAURIN WEISSINGER:  A little bit of interference, apologies.  We have one more audience question that Peter Koch would like to answer, according to the question pod, and that is a question from Angela which is what role if any do you see forensics post cyber-attack, this is perceived as an extension of the CERT role?  Go ahead.
>> PETER KOCH:  Thank you for that question.  That raises at least one interesting meta issue which is that what is the mandate of a CERT and then who is going to define that, so there will not be a one definite answer to this CERTs or CSIRTs usually have a constituency that they serve and mandate related to that which is mostly governed by the constituency or if you want it, or if national CERT or intergovernmental CERT, then the mandate is described by the responsible government entity.
Now, in my part of the world, as in Europe it is not uncommon like specialized services like forensics are delivered by private entities and they would be called in.  So at least a CERT will have a coordinating role when it comes to these forensics questions and forensics is a wide field so it can either go to research in hardware and so on and so forth, but if we expand this a bit are wider, we are touching upon the question of attribution of attacks and of course there is a long way from a CERT and specialized service providers through law enforcement and maybe even to intelligence services when it comes to cross‑border attribution and so on and so forth.
A wide variety, and I would recommend if anybody is interested, that first the coordination center for CSIRTs, first.org has a couple of descriptions of what CERTs may or could do.  But there is no single blueprint for this, so I hope that answers the question but I'm happy to follow up.
   >> VILMA TOMCO:  Can I interfere a bit here?  Since I belong to the ‑‑ okay?  Okay.  So, it is a very interesting question, but I think that regarding the forensic and the CSIRTs, we need to make the differences.  CERTs or CSIRTs has to treat like an incident, so they have to find what is the cause, what can happen, et cetera, et cetera.  When it comes to it, it is an issue of criminality, so it comes to some ‑‑ it is to enter in force the institution of the law, the law, of course, and they have to follow all the processes by the police, others and judges, et cetera, so there is a separation in this.  CERTs can support, can help with information, et cetera.  But they cannot do the work of other responsible actors in this field.  So maybe I'm wrong, but they see this separately.  CERTs need to treat as an incident and they have to share the information and to prevent that this incident happens to other constituencies and other CERTs and responsibility of protection, but in such moment they had to delegate the responsibility to the law enforcement institution, like state police, et cetera, to treat in the other direction as an act of thief or criminal or abuse, et cetera, and they have to be punished based on the damage they have caused, so they are very separated with each other.  To communicate and with the institution that is a separate responsibility, I think.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you, Ms. Tomco, that's very enlightening as well.  I do want to direct our attention to Dr. Hoepers response in chat about more information on CSIRTs and CERTs and I know we're running out of time and there are a lot of questions from our audience as well as our NRI colleagues, but I do want to bring this conversation back over to the African Region, Mary, you've patiently waiting, please intervene and keep it short so we have a time to wrap up with all the panelists.
>> MARY UDUMA:  Thank you.  Thank you, Jennifer.  I hope you can hear me.  Okay.  I just wanted to raise the issue of what is happening in our region.  At the Africa level, we have the Africa Malabo Convention on Cybersecurity, but not many countries have signed.  And at West Africa level, we have directives and not many countries have signed to that.  So, in terms of cooperation, but at the national level, I think countries are developing their cybersecurity strategies and some have gotten to a point of view and act, but the truth is still that it is very, very low so we need to do a lot of awareness.  Even when you come up with the strategy, we have to still do with a lot of awareness and cyber hygiene needs to be on our communication channels, even reviews and television, and even on WhatsApp, people talk to one another on WhatsApp, so you can communicate that way.  So that is where we have.  We have CERTs, Africa CERT, West Africa CERT, we have national CERT, and not all the countries have in our region.  
But one thing that is particularly interesting of mind is that the cybersecurity issues bridges, they have financial and economic information and have not heard talk about that but since we don't have time, I would love the panel to discuss that too.  Issues and implications of cybersecurity or cybercrime.  My colleague from Chad talked about criminality, so if anybody can raise anything that would be fine.  And if there is anything to mitigate that, that would be fine.  Thank you.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you very much, Mary, for giving us a more comprehensive picture of what is happening in West Africa and also the Africa Region.  We are running very quickly out of time but I do want to give a little time to our panelists for a very quick kind of wrap up and just a find question really to all of you about, you know, if there is any action‑oriented commitments from you?  And I would maybe like let's do a 30‑second wrap up from everybody.  Let's first hear from, I guess, Ms. Vilma Tomco from Albania IGF.  Any final thoughts and words?
   >> VILMA TOMCO:  Thank you.  The only thing that I can say is that to work in cybersecurity is an endless work, endless action, endless awareness, and endless capacity building, so the young that want to enter into the field has to admit that this is really the future because there is no digitalization, there is no advancement in the technology for evolution, for fifth evolution without cybersecurity in place.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you, Ms. Tomco.  Lucien from France, last words?
   >> LUCIEN CASTEX:  Thank you, Jennifer.  Quite, indeed, endless action indeed.  I'll just maybe shed some light on digital trust.  It's, in my opinion, quite important, wildly important point to raise.  Basically, it's of importance and to be able to restore a form of digital trust, well basically we need to increase cooperation and we need to raise awareness to cybersecurity question.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you, Lucien.  Dr. Amine, some last thoughts from you on this panel?
   >> BAKHIT AMINE:  Cybercrime is no state, no institutions, no individual, and so we need to raise awareness and implement an appropriate strategy.  Thanks.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you, Dr. Amine.  And Mr. Tasevski, any final thoughts on actions?
   >> PREDRAG TASEVSKI:  Yes, of course.  I was on mute.  Of course.  As technology moves and we're becoming more and more technology savvy, especially due to the pandemic in situations, and we can say that the privacy and security are the cornerstone of the cybersecurity.  We have to be aware; we have to be educated, we have to know what we are sharing, how we're sharing, and we have to be concerned about our data in this place and our surroundings as well as we need to make sure that we handle the data properly.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you for that.  Final words go to Cristine Hoepers from Brazil.  Any final words or action commitments?
   >> CRISTINE HOEPERS:  Yeah.  I think we should all commit to awareness in education.  And I think at least, I am very engaged in this and I hope to be engaged in the future as well, but I think everyone also needs to engage into having and making their own part on cybersecurity and cyber hygiene because I think one of the major points for awareness that we need to do for policymakers to young people is that you have to do your part.  No one else can do your part on cyber hygiene, and you need to be engaged and really it's a process of cooperation in all parts and cooperation of ourselves and doing our part for really having a better cyber ecosystem, and I think we need to engage everyone from vendors to everyone for responsibility because we're only going to have a safer Cyberspace if we have everyone making good projects, people making good policies, and consumers making good choices, and us as citizens also engaging into having a better cyber hygiene and thank you everyone for this great panel.
   >> JENNIFER CHUNG:  Thank you, Cristine, and all panelists and also interventions from NRI colleagues for your words on cybersecurity.  Please continue to engage with us and have a very happy rest of the IGF.  Thank you all.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-nri-data-utilization-for-sustainability^^

>> MODERATOR:  Sorry for the introduction those who listened in the test phase.  Now it's real.  We are starting now this session on data utilization for sustainability.  This is one of the NRI collaborative sessions.  And it has been promoted and built around the contribution of four IGF, national IGF.  The first one is the Benin IGF, with Amessinou Kossi that is with us.  The second is the Spanish IGF with Dr. Felix Hernandez‑Gil that is with us.
The third is the Lebanese IGF with Zeina Bou Harb that is with us.  And the last but not least the Argentina IGF with Olga Cavalli.
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Since 2017 we start health strategy due to health of people.  The Government provides capacity building to start up and some NGOs.  We have in our country some startups follow which the application, one of them is Kea medical.  Kea medical is an application that helps people to know what doctor is where.  You take program with doctor, you go and make, take care of their health.
We are also some application called where you have three specific operations, one operation is detecting pharmacy in your areas, knowing the price of medicine, know what kind of medicine you must have.  You can pay directly.  That application also helps people to plan.  Some women need to be pregnant, they can use one of the, one part of this application.  And it is good to have trainings.  You have also the possibility to contact online doctor, have program for him, and plan that it would be better to come and see specialist if you have some problem or specific disease or the people have the bad health will need to be controlled every time.  They have also one model to help him to control their health every time.
We have also some, another application called Pass Musso, which is something like wash.  With that wash, we have all of your medicine inside.  We can know all of the diseases you have.  At the whole time you have control.  The time you need to make a new (?) 
>> MODERATOR:  Kossi, could you repeat the last phrase.  We missed you.  Kossi?
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  The person in that wash can visit with the person who have ability.  The doctor who have is controlling the system and who is identified, and can access your health information and help you.
For example, when you have accident in the road, anybody cannot know who you are what kind of action we can make to you urgently.  All of that information you have in your wash can help doctor to give you the fast operation needed to support yourself.  That is ‑‑ 
>> MODERATOR:  Kossi.  Can I make a question?  Because usually in Africa, one of the big problems is the difference between the capital and the rural areas.
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Yes. 
>> MODERATOR:  This kind of problem, I think are more for the rural areas.  Is this was aimed to deal with this specific problem that usually exists in Africa?
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Yes.  In the rural area you don't have specialists, for example.  You don't have specialists, and that specialist works with the contacted in the rural area (?) another contact in the rural area, and give them by Internet use, give them a knowledge to how to identify disease and how to help people when we have specific program to resolve in the health concern. 
>> MODERATOR:  When you have a specific problem that has been identified for the application, then you have to go to the capital or to the urban areas to make the ‑‑
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Some action can be made in this sense by using Internet from Niki, for example, and other countries.  Using Internet, we can make intervention online directly.  It's not all of the time necessary to make trip to Capital before you have a good specialist to take care of you.
>> MODERATOR:  And this, I guess, is an application on mobiles?
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Yes, yes, using the mobile.
>> MODERATOR:  Okay.  Good.
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  It is for mobile.  Yes.  Kea Medicine and Dit Moi Doc have this technique to have all of the specialists in the health centers everywhere in the countries.  We have also possibility to share this technology within other countries in Africa.
>> MODERATOR:  This is a local software development or you are using for this application something that already exists elsewhere?
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  It's available in, the application is available in the store now.  It's built for Africa region.
>> MODERATOR:  And it works in French?
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Yes, in French.  Kea Medicine, for example, has some model in English you can use also.  It's possible.
>> MODERATOR:  Not in local languages.
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Not yet.  In local language they don't make it.  In local language, how many people would use it?  How much would we pay to use that?  That is a question we don't, what we don't have solution now.
>> MODERATOR:  Yes.  That's important to know, because there are many languages in the region, so, local languages.  Okay.
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Making technology in local language is not the problem.  The problem is how many persons can pay for that.  And when we pay for that, the system will have, will need also interpretation to be in French, to be in English and so on.  Who will pay for that interpretation?  That is also the challenge we can resolve before moving to that option.
>> MODERATOR:  Okay.  So the services, you can also through the application pay the services that you are using?
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Yes.  When you use, for example, Dit Moi Doc and it identifies somewhere we can pay medicine.   1%, for example, of the payment can be used for application management.  That is some of the strategy we put outside to let application be available every time.
>> MODERATOR:  Okay.  And this, this application is in all private sector developments or the Government has been pushing, paying, incentivizing for that?
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Sometimes Government gives some to all of the startup and when we have a specific application, it's not something like the Government finance directly to make business, but when we are make specific business, we can get them to give submission to let them go up in the business and give them also opportunity to have a new solution designed again, part of the solution are not better used at the time.
Sometimes for last year, for example, when we have our national year of digital, we have some space for the startup who have specific application to come and present their job.  When represented, we have some persons who have money who need and somewhere will put their money to make business, they use that opportunity and contribute also to in the implementation of the startup.
>> MODERATOR:  Good, Kossi, the reason the chat, in the question and answer there is a question is the same that I raise you.  They would like to have the link to the application that you presented or some of these applications?
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  I will share the link in chat.  I will share the link to access the two or three applications we have here in E‑health who help us, I will share.
>> MODERATOR:  Perfect.  Because this could be very helpful for people to have an idea of that.  Kossi, there is more to add or we can give the floor to Felix?
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  At this time, you can give floor to Felix.
>> MODERATOR:  Then you prepare yourself for second round at the end where we have to close with recommendation.  Thank you very much, Kossi for this presentation.  It is very important and interesting because the access to healthcare in rural areas in Africa has been always very challenging, and it's very good to hear that there is progress on that.
Now, we pass to a completely different situation, Spain has problem with rural areas but not the same kind, and the applications are totally different.  In particular, Felix will present us a very interesting research that has been made in with social media about Sustainable Development Goals.  Can you describe us what is this project and which phase we are? 
>> MODERATOR:  Okay.  Thank you very much.  It is a pleasure for me to be here in this session.
Information commune technologies is one of the most relevant information and should have a crucial impact towards the priorities for achieving Sustainable Development goal established by the United Nations.  So at the Spain we have been studying in the last year the impact of the introduction of information and communication technologies on the achievement of these goals using indicators for the adoption of technologies, and also for the achievement of the SDGs.
These goals have support from Facebook in the states.  We have seen, there is a clear relationship between the general advance in the achievement of the SD Gs and the adoption of information and communication technologies.
The adoption of these technologies is associated with important progress towards achievement of this goal.  Some of the goals that are very positive associated with this technologies are poverty reduction, SDG1, good health, SDG3, quality of education, SDG4, or industrialization, SDG9.
We consider that as soon as you introduce, the priority in this goal is very fast.  There is another group of goals including among them the gender equality, SDG5 or the reduction of inequalities which has no correlation with the utilization.  However, studies also show a negative association between the progress in digitalization and the goals for climate and natural environment protection.
While geographical areas with low level of Internet penetration show good progress towards achievement of these goals, they are performing in areas with high digitalization level, this is still poor.  We have seen the devastating effect of the pandemic on the war.  The destruction of the natural environment in particular the climate in our opinion could be the next minor thread for the war.
So we should revert the association between increasing utilization and the deterioration of the environment, especially considering that there are more than 3 million people that do not have Internet connection presently and will adopt this technology in the near future.  To end my intervention, I will add also to give you some information about the use of data to fight the pandemic in Spain.
Here we have been using three kinds of data with their associated tools to fight against the pandemic.  First, we use the localization data from the mobile network and also from application in the mobile in order to measure the mobility of the people and understand the effect of the differing authorities to limit the mobility and reduce the impact of the pandemic.
To carry out these activities, main telecom operator, telephonic, Vodafone, were provided to provide aggregate data on the mobility of all mobile phones in Spain.  A second search of data to fight the pandemic is based on the use of application that are installed in mobile phones.
The application we have in Spain is called radar COVID.  This application can detect if the user is in contact with the people that have been infected by the virus and produce warnings to the user and can help to trace the previous contact if the person is infected.  It is based on Bluetooth and it has been developed with the collaboration of public authorities and major Internet companies like Google and Apple.
This application has been developed not only in Spain, but in more European countries.  This application in Spain has interoperability with similar applications developed within Europe.  There are now around 20 applications in Europe and there is a share to provide data connection among them.
The third social personal data to fight the pandemic is based on land surveys that are intended to collect the useful data to understand the spread of the pandemic and the effects on the people.  It.  These are voluntary surveys, but up until now several hundreds of thousands of people are providing very useful data using this array so that we have seen that they are very interesting.  For the moment, that is my intervention.  Thank you very much for your attention.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you very much, Felix.  That's very useful, and so as you promised, you have the first part more general, and the second was specific on the application for the COVID.  I put in the chat the link to the page of Google with the application rather, and I put also the map for different application of COVID and I see that Kossi has responded from the request to the audience to pry the link for the Benin application.  Perfect.  I think we are on time.  So now I give the floor to the second part of the discussion.
The second part of the discussion is about specific application for COVID, but, of course, this doesn't hamper Zeina or Olga to supplement with other applications that are data‑based and could be useful for sustainable development.  Before that, just one question to you, Felix, to close the first part of your discussion, the research seems still to be ongoing or the final data are available, the research you are making with Facebook about the impact of digitalization of sustainable goals? 
>> MODERATOR:  The research is ongoing and we are planning to continue this research during next year, yes.
>> MODERATOR:  So the result, the final result will be in the middle of next year? 
>> MODERATOR:  Well, you know, it's a very wide field of investigation it's difficult probably to speak about final results because it's an ongoing investigation.  We have already quite a lot of results.  Of course, I just gave a very general description of the investigation, but we have a lot of very detailed data on many indicators and we have studied very carefully the correlation between both kinds of indicators.
But our plan for next year is to continue the investigation, probably to try to figure out more what could be better, the digitalization part for the countries that now have a low level of digitalization will increase that in the future.
What we have seen is that presently many of the digitalized countries have for indicators, especially related to the environment.  And the goal is to try to find out in the future the best way to digitalize and also to preserve the environment.
>> MODERATOR:  Okay.  That's very interesting.  I think that for the whole IGF and especially for the NRIs, this result is very useful, because you can try to think policies having in mind that sustainable goals, development 1, 2, 3 and 9 can be directly influenced by the digitalization while others could have even an inverse impact or there is a risk that could be an inverse impact.
So I think for policy makers, this information is very, very useful.  Thank you.  Felix, you promised to keep us updated on that through the NRI network.  And now I pass to Zeina if she is ready.  Zeina will present us some interesting initiatives that have been made by the Government through the telecom operator in Lebanon to try to counter the pandemic.  In the country, among all of the other unfortunate things that are happening in Lebanon at the moment.  Zeina, the floor is yours.
>> ZEINA BOU HARB:  I am going to brief a little bit about how Lebanon responded to the COVID‑19 through ICTs.  Actually this pandemic imposed on the Lebanese people many challenges.  Among them the next to rely more on the digital tools and on the online content and the infrastructure.
Accordingly, the incumbent operator in Lebanon, OGERO which is the executive arm of the Lebanese Ministry of Telecom so a public institution has to take part of the responsibility.  In fact, it says the motto responding to krona is our responsibility.  So based on the general mobilization decision and to deal with the spread of the virus, OGERO in collaboration with the Lebanese Minister of Communication took a set of measures including doubling the Internet speed for the subscribers with fixed speed without consumption cap, and doubled the volume of consumption for subscribers of a preset consumption volume in order to encourage citizens to stay at home and perform their work remotely and it was the aim of contributing to the success of the Ministry of Education's plan for distance education.  And to enable students to continue their studies online, the Ministry of Telecommunications add 100 gigabytes free of charge to all Internet subscribers operating on the Ministry of Telecom network.
OGERO also launched on social media and awareness campaign calling for the responsible use of the Internet, especially by inviting the subscribers to reduce the number of computers connected simultaneously during the peak hours of the day or also by reducing the quality of the videos they share on social media.
Nothing that OGERO usually keeps a local cache of the main content, but the national group is inundated to the increased traffic.  Some accommodations have been added as major cities need to be linked to Beirut to meet additional demand.
Regarding the Lebanese MAG managed to move the meeting to the virtual space.  A series of five sessions were planned under the general theme Internet Governance in times of crisis.  These sessions covered online teaching and learning, contact tracing and transparency, safer Internet for children during the COVID‑19 crisis, and the free flow of information.
Unfortunately, we were able to only hold the first three sessions.  It the last two were postponed due to the explosion that happened in the Beirut.  It's also good to mention that there was a collaboration between OGERO and the national NGO to establish a COVID response centre to provide the citizens with info related to the virus and the details on the available tests and their result.
As a collaboration by stakeholders that I may mention here is the mobile app that was developed in collaboration between the Ministry of Public health and the American University of Beirut.  It's an application that helps to trace, not really trace is not the exact word, but it's ‑‑ it will show the exposure of the people having this application to people that were tested positive.  So they might know that they were close to these persons through Bluetooth technology by downloading this application so they can be notified to get the test done and the result of their test and everything related to the risk that they encounters when they were close to a person that was tested positive.  This is for now, I think.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you very much.  I think that would be very useful if you could put in the chat the link to some of the applications that you mentioned if they are available, even if in Arabic, there will be somebody that will have a look at it.  Thank you very much.
Now, Olga.  We go to the other side of the world.  You have news for us?  Because you look at Europe and Mediterranean areas it doesn't look promising so everything on Argentina?
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  Not very promising here as well.  I think we are all having this challenging times, but the thing is that we have to persist.  That's the most important thing.  So thank you very much for invitation to this session.  Very interesting work that Kossi and thank you Giacomo for coordinating this session.  What I would like to share with you is the usage of open data through this pandemic, not only for COVID specific infections, but also for other things that the Government has been doing towards supporting the population with some economic help so Argentina is publishing a lot of information as an open data initiative.  The idea is to have a more open and transparent state and so many actions of the Government are published publicly, and people can download all of the information and then use it for research or for knowing what the Government is doing, and all of that.  So what happened with COVID?
That possibility of sharing data, open data has been very, in my opinion, very, very well used, and this is what I want to share with you.  So open data in the context of COVID‑19, so during this pandemic, several data sets, groups of data of this open data have been published to deepen the transparency of key issues such as health, I will go in detail in a moment, emergency assistance for productivity, and emergency family income, among others.
So the team responsible for the open data policy at the national level began working very articulated with other agencies of the Government.  So they could document these databases with state of the art information in fighting the pandemic.  So following this idea of national open data standards and seeking practical and homogenous record, these are the data sets that are documented and online in, related with COVID‑19.
The first one is every day at 8:00 p.m., there is fresh information about how many people is infected in the country, every day at that time with information gathered until 5:30 p.m. the same day.  So this is one of the things that is available online and with very updated information every day.
Another data set is the laboratory test results from every day.  So the government is doing some testing, specifically focused in areas where more infections are expected, and that information is also available in this portal.  Another information is some purchases or donations that the Government has been receiving, and the flights from abroad that have been bringing all of these goods and to Argentina.  And also the purchases that were made with public money, so that can be transparently accessed by the citizens.
Then there are two groups of information which I think are very important.  One is the emergency assistance production.  This is money that the Government has been giving to companies, especially small and medium enterprises or entrepreneurs to pay part of the salaries.  So that information is called ATP, and that set of data is already available online and the other one is what we call the EFI.  Which is Emergency Family Income.  Those are for families that are not owners of a small, medium enterprise, then a family become a special income this has been happening since March.
So all of the different data sets are available online, so the COVID‑19 data case is reported daily, as I said, at 8:00 p.m. local time.  All of the cases and the terminations are generated by the Ministry of Health with a daily update.  Remember that Argentina is a federal country, so we have Ministries of Health in every province, so all of that information is covered by the national Ministry of Health, and also the acquisitions, the donations and this help to the families.  So the democratization of public data is part of a national project for open data, a commitment to make the Government management more transparent, efficient and more responsible.
So the pandemic facilitated access to this data and let the people and also researchers and doctors and hospitals to organize better with this emergency situation that we are living in.  And also I would like to share with you an application that was developed.  It's called with that, which is in Spanish is take care of, which is easy, it's only one word in Spanish.  A verb and the most interesting thing about this application is it was developed as a public‑private initiative.  So many companies, private companies from Argentina, other companies from abroad that are established in the country, the Government, and the health ministry., the ICT contributed very quickly to organize and set up this application.
So I think that is a remarkable issue, because sometimes it's not easy to put all of the people together working.  So that happens.  So this was a very important part of the prevention, public healthcare in the face of COVID‑19 19 so with our application and system.
So the methods and technologies to detect cases early or essential in warranty care and follow‑up as well as to avoid the transmission of the virus.  So thus it enables self‑diagnosis.  It makes some questions so people can know if they are having the virus or not, and after the self‑diagnosis, it provides assistance of what to do, recommendations in the case of the compatibility with Coronavirus, and provides context tools for those cases with health authorities or healthcare.
The application is linked to a broader system that articulates the information that the application collects with the health areas in charge of the emergency care, both at the national and provision Governments.  As I said, it's a federal country.  With that application complements and assists the prevention and care policies of population and provides specific elements and supplies for the health intervention of the different ministries.
It is linked with what is needed to certificate, a certification of circulation.  If you have the app, you can generate that circulation authorization, because there were some days that you were not allowed to go outside, and only for buying goods at the Supermarket, things like that, or if you had an essential work then you could go and work.  It's also voluntary.  You are not mandated to download the application, only if you are coming from abroad, you have to download it and do the check in.  But if you are living here, you are not mandated to download it and, of course, all of the information is collected regarding the local regulations about privacy, and once all of this is over, all of this information will be deleted, but perhaps for anonymous way all of the another is gathered for research purposes.  Thank you for the time.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you Olga.  That is interesting and useful.  I see that behind you have a talisman against the COVID.
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  I have many, India, and then I have from Turkey, and then the other is from Colombia.  I have many things here.
>> MODERATOR:  It works against the COVID?
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  For me at the moment, yes.  Let's see what happens.
>> MODERATOR:  So you have to provide to all of us.  Thank you, Olga.  There is a question in the chat that I think is for all of you.  How did you manage data mixing apps and gender inequality during the data gathering? 
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  I will comment since I have the floor.  Thank you.  This is very important comment.  Thank you for that.  I think this pandemic and all of the use of technology showed new gaps, perhaps gaps that we knew that were there, but I think they are more explicit now.  For example, what happened with the schools and with violence against women.  So people are gathered at home, and they cannot get out, so violence against women at least in Latin America is higher.  This is very sad, but it's true.
Also the access to technology showed that there are people that could keep on with working.  I'm one of them, so I do all of my work, and I didn't get infected because I just go out once a week to the Supermarket, which is two blocks away from home, very early, nobody in the street, so that's very easy, but other people has to go out and work.  And also kids are not going to school.  So those kids that have good connectivity at home, that's fantastic, because classes went on online, but those that don't have that, which is a quite important part of the population, maybe 20% of homes have not good connection or very few or no connection, they are lost.
They lost the whole year of education.  And also for women, they have to work and take care of kids, and they have to work at home.  That's also tough, even if they have connectivity.
>> MODERATOR:  And for gender parity, can I ask Felix or Kossi so give their view on that?
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  Hello, you hear me. 
>> MODERATOR:  Yes, please, go ahead.
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  COVID‑19 changed our life here also our school we close it, university also.  Jobs online, but small we are moving to new way again, we are moving to new way.  It's possible now to go to school, but we have the mask and to use, we have distance to respect, we have small people in the class now.  It's not big like the many times we teaching.
It is something very difficult for everybody, for children, for students, for parents, also for our discretion.  Because everywhere you have some, you have water to wash your hands everywhere every time.  But in rural areas, for example, we have some people who are not sure that COVID‑19 exists.  They are not sure.  We are free, we don't have mask.  They tell us it is disease for capital.  It is not for village.  We have some paradox like that in our region but globally we are making our best to move on, not stop economy.
It is very difficult for our economy now.  Every enterprise, most of our enterprises have difficulty to pay their salary and so on.  But we thank Government who helps some startups, to big entrepreneurs also, give them a reduction for tax, give them also some money to return back in jobs.  It's special for our time.  I don't know if other countries in Africa make the same thing.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you, Kossi for this.
We are now moving to the close because we, the time is running, so I ask all of the panelists to have in mind one minute recommendation of what they have heard that they think could be included as a suggestion for the final report of the IGF as good things to do in order to improve the use of data for the humanity progress, let's say.
And there is a question also if we can answer to this coming in the chat that is about the use of AI.  Of course, this application, I think that they are elaborated using AI if you can in your minute answer also to this question coming from Luis Marie Bell.  We will start in reverse order, I give the floor first to the last, so Olga, one minute thought and say about use of AI.
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  Well, I'm not aware of this information already gathered is used with any AI application.  I can try to find that information.  I know that some AI tools have been used to gather and to process the information before it's published, but after I don't know.  It may be possible.  What I find remarkable of this use of data and also the application with that is the way that very quickly the private and the public sector work together.
As I said before, this is not usually so frequent.  I don't know if other countries, but sometimes Latin Americanos we like to discuss and talk a lot.  It's difficult to put everyone on the same page and work together.  That application was prepared and developed in a very short time, and available to the public almost immediately that the pandemic started.
So I would say that that was a good experience.  The bad is that we see new gaps rising, and I'm not sure if having all of the information gives us the solution.  At least we have the information, which is good, but I'm not sure that we have all of the solutions at hand at this moment.  And thank you for inviting me.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you Olga, one question to understand, when you say private public partnership, these were between Argentina and companies or also ‑‑
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  With Argentinian companies, foreign companies that work in Argentina that have offices in Argentina also.
>> MODERATOR:  You mean the social media or platform?
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  It was mainly software developing companies, companies that can ‑‑
>> MODERATOR:  Locally based.
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  Locally based and also companies that offer Cloud services from abroad, but purchased with established in Argentina, commercial associations and the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Production.  That was very quick that they developed it very very quick, and the software association also.  So that was, for me, it was a good experience, it was a good example that we can work together and do good things.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you.  So in reverse order, now is Zeina.
>> ZEINA BOU HARB:  Yes, to conclude, I might say that the situation we have encountered is basically unprecedented, and the data has a huge role to play in providing the optimal solution to respond quickly to the needs of the Lebanese citizens and all over the world.
So an important lesson learned for the Lebanese people is that a situation can arise at any time and it can only be turned into opportunity if they can apply for data and be connected very quickly in order to survive.  So the data providers, the telecom operators, they have to accel in catering to such needs as rapidly as possible.
>> MODERATOR:  So for you, the key is that to use the crisis to progress, to give definitive answer or permanent answer to long‑time existing problems?
>> ZEINA BOU HARB:  Yes, because many of the issues we were facing can be resolved if we were, if we were all connected online.  And this cannot be done unless the operators, unless the telecom providers are very quick and responding to the connection requests.
>> MODERATOR:  Do you think just to better understand, do you think that this would have been different because you are talking of a national telecom operator.  Do you think it make a difference or it could have been done also for a non‑national operator operating in the country.
>> ZEINA BOU HARB:  With a national or non‑national?  Actually it's for all of the operators.
>> MODERATOR:  You mentioned OGERO that is the national telecom?
>> ZEINA BOU HARB:  Yes, but we have two mobile operator that's can provide data to subscribers.
>> MODERATOR:  And they did?
>> ZEINA BOU HARB:  Did they?
>> ZEINA BOU HARB:  Provide the data?
>> MODERATOR:  Yes.
>> ZEINA BOU HARB:  Yes, they also provided the 100 gigabytes that I mentioned earlier.
>> MODERATOR:  So they participate.  So this was a collective effort.
>> ZEINA BOU HARB:  Yes, actually the operators in Lebanon or all owned by the Lebanese telecom ministry, so they abide by the requirement of the Government.
>> MODERATOR:  So the line of command was very short.  Okay.  Good to know.  This is important to put in context.  Then now is to Felix.  One minute. 
>> MODERATOR:  One minute.  I will be very short.  Our commitment of the Spanish and the Polytechnical University of Madrid was to continue to study the relationship between the adoption of the ICTs and the achievement of the SDGs.  And to try to figure out what could be the best digitalization strategies to progress this goal.  And taking into consideration that climate change is the next big threat to take care of, and we will pay attention to this issue.  That's it.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  So beware of the climate change.  Thank you very much.  You stayed in one minute.  Kossi.
>> AMESSINOU KOSSI:  This is a big opportunity for all.  Data, health data, especially is very critical.  Using AI in the implementation of health data is very critical for people.  Government should control how AI are being used in health sector.  That is very important for us.
Maybe Internet must be available for all.  If Internet is available for all, it will be, it will not be a problem for us to be connectible from home to make job, to have our health good, and make everything.  This disease, COVID‑19, showed us how Government should do for people to let them have information, good information in the best time.
The operators like Microsoft, like Google, like Facebook, can also help our countries.  Their business is data.  They must use our data every time if we are not also ready and to help us to be every time data producer.  It is important for them to help us to get Internet everywhere, especially in rural area in Africa and especially in my country, Benin.  Thank you, everybody, it is pleasure to be here.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you very much, Kossi so I think you are endorsing the UN Secretariat's strategy when he says that he is looking for a common ethical approach for the ICT and the digital world, and when he says that access for everybody has to be one of the sustainable goals to be inscribed in the list.  So thank you very much to all participants.  I think that there is a lot of interesting food for thought that has been provided.  I thank you, the panelists, and thank you the attendees that were so passionate with us.  And I wish you a nice rest of the IGF.  Have a nice day all of you.  Ciao.
>> OLGA CAVALLI:  Thank you everyone, stay safe.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-of13-trust-building-in-cyberspace-on-public-health-emergencies^^

>> MODERATOR: Dear friends, colleagues.  Thank you for being here.  I'm Vice President of Chinese Academy of Cyberspace Studies, secretary again.  Welcome.
Our speakers, they're ‑‑ please, shake hand, say hello to everyone here.  Okay.  Thank you!  Thank you all!  The theme of this forum is Trust Building in Cyberspace on Public Health Emergencies it is the thematic track of trust of IGF's forum proceeding from the COVID‑19 pandemic.  The forum is a representative of governments, international organizations and technical communities and same time from across the world to discuss about the trust building mechanism in the cyberspace of the international public health emergencies.  In 2020 this year the pandemic surrounded the world and posed a huge and food and health and public security, it is a tragedy of mankind, we have witnessed the ever‑depending application of new internet technologies such as artificial intelligence, Cloud computing, block chain and Big Data in academic and control as well as work and production.
Moreover, we see emerging internet‑based business such as online services and consumption and the smart manufacturing flourish.
Global risk, and the challenges entail a strong global response, the achievement and value of the internet innovation against the backdrop of the pandemic have been further recognized doing a good job in utilizing, developing, counting on the internet is conducive to the huge impact of academic, promoting economic recovery and realizing the future dream of mankind.
Now, let's start our forum.  First of all, let's welcome Ms. Zi Xiaoxia, Director General, Bureau of International Cooperation, Cyberspace Administration of China to give us a video speech.
>> QI XIAOXIA: Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, It is my great pleasure to join you in this open forum.  First I would like to extend on behalf of the Director General, Bureau of International Cooperation, Cyberspace Administration of China warm congratulations for the opening of this forum and a warm welcome to all honored guests attending this meeting.
As we speak, the pandemic of COVID‑19 is continuously spreading, taking a heavy toll on countries around the world.  In the face of this challenge, strength and unity and coordination on the basis of mutual trust is the only way for the international community to defeat the common enemy of mankind.  Against this backdrop, it is highly relevant to hold this open forum at IGF and to discuss on building a trust mechanism in cyberspace.  Here I would like to share with you my observations in building mechanism of trust in cyberspace and striving to foster synergies.
First, we need to foster synergy in liberating digital technologies to fight the pandemic.  New generation digital technologies suggest 5G and other things have played an important role in academic monitoring, virus tracking, prevention control and treatment as well as resource allocation.  It shows that the digital technologies has not only transformed the way of production and life and also effectively enhanced social governance and I look forward to enhanced experience sharing and cooperation in the international community on the use of digital technologies in response to COVID for improving the effect of the global pandemic prevention and control.
Second, we need to foster synergy in amplifying the effects of digital economy and promoting economic recovery.  The pandemic has inflicted severe impact on the global economy and it is imperative for countries to restore economic growth and to boost confidence in economic development.  As COVID spreads, new business forms such as eCommerce, online education, commuting, it has played a critical role in keeping the society running and encountering the downward pressure on the economy.  Digital economy is providing more opportunities for global economic recovery.
I look forward to enhanced cooperation on digital economy in the international community amplifying the positive role of new drivers of economic growth and further facilitating global economy recovery.
Third, we need to foster synergy in advancing dialogue and cooperation for maintaining cybersecurity.  Many daily activities, life, work, education, they have been shifted online while providing convenience to our life, the ever‑increasing online activities have caused new problems concerning cybersecurity as well.  In the face of this new problem, the international community should adhere to the philosophy of cybersecurity with openness and cooperation, enhanced strategic trust in cyberspace and effectively copy with emerging cybersecurity risks and challenges through deepened dialogue and cooperation providing a firm guarantee for advancing the prevention and control of COVID‑19, the economic recovery, as well as maintaining social stability.
Fourth, we need to foster synergy in a multilateral, multiparty participation and enhancing governance capacity.  Since the outbreak of COVID‑19 the international community has been intensifying exchanges on governance in cyberspace at relevant mechanism and a platform such as the UN APEC and G20 with a view to enhancing global governance and making positive contributions to advancing better use of internet in fighting this.
Meanwhile, many things cropped up posing new requirements to our current capacity for governance in cyberspace.  The international community should pay close attention to the new problems from global governance in cyberspace and to further support the role of the UN as the main channel with active participation of international organizations, internet‑based companies, technical communities, social organizations, Civil Society, and individuals to close off loopholes in governance for advancing the building of more just, equitable global internet governance system.
Fifth, we need to foster synergy in bridging thing digital divide and achieving inclusiveness for recall.  The practice in fighting the pandemic has proved that internet has become a platform for human society to respond to public health emergencies, what cannot be ignored, however, is that the weakness of a formation and communication infrastructure in developing countries and the lack of digital skills of vulnerable groups, such as the elderly, Persons with Disabilities, women and children which haven hindered mankind from better sharing the benefits of internet development.  In the face of this problem, the international community should step up cooperation and adopt multipolicy measures to improve internet access in Developing Countries and strengthen support and assistance to the vulnerable groups in an effort to further bridge the digital divide and promote inclusive development of the internet for all.
Ladies and gentlemen, dear friends, the world is undergoing profound changes unseen in a century, and the unity and cooperation is the only way for us to address the emerging risks and challenges in cyberspace.  The international community needs to enhance mutual trust, work together to address challenges and build an even closer community with a shared future in cyberspace and ushering in an even better future for mankind.  In conclusion, I wish the forum a full success.  
Thank you.  
>> MODERATOR:  Everybody please control your time in the forum.  Next, welcome Professor Werner Zorn, Father of the German Internet, Inductee of the Internet Hall of Fame.  Please. 
>> WERNER ZORN: Ladies and gentlemen, life in national and personal areas, it is currently highly influenced by the coronavirus and how it spreads beyond any borders and limits which we may have set.  Since its breakout in February this year, we were in the first wave lasting 5 months with 40 million infected people and a death toll of more than 1 million.
After a short pause this summer, the second wave is just on the way with even more infections per day.  The governments in different countries seem to be helpless.  If we look at the data currently collected and visualized by Johns Hopkins University on a daily basis, we can observe two characteristics:  First, the figures inform over time differ highly from country to country; and secondly, the different curves show steadiness but for singular cases due to data collection delays.  The public, in the different countries of the world, it is informed several times a day with death, to recovery rate, reproduction number, seven‑day incidents and others, which is useful but absolutely insufficient to withstand the virus as it spreads to different regions.
What is currently missing, it is a quantitative model that allows predictions of the behavior of various parameters, including human behavior which differs from nation to nation.  Quantitative modeling is a classic discipline in computer science, often used for system optimization in many occasions and fields, based on solid theory, powerful tools, a lot of expertise.  A well‑known example is when we remember the quality of the model with short, medium, long‑term predictions have considerably improved over the years.  This development was determined by three factors, gigantic increase of computer power, increase of density of measurement stations around the globe, and third, improvement of the models implemented in software.
The world is showing several similarities, complexity, physical, chemical complexity, periodically changing environments, randomness, and issues concerning the power of the model and the quality of data with iron rule of garbage in, garbage out which forest an improvement on the intelligence and measurements of the preprocessing.  Even though we can currently greatly profit from the worldwide data acquisitions system with high resolution in time and space, there is however a specific pandemic problem, how to discover and follow the individual structure, infection processes as early and completely as possible.  This requires the use of measurement tools for every individual person and the partial sacrifice of privacy which is however not possible everywhere.  Approximation may be the means of choice for many countries.
Appropriate software packages for predicting, preventing the current pandemic spread of the coronavirus is a global challenge with common efforts and long‑term experiences needed.  Once developed, it could be the basis for further improvement and specific adaptations.  Let us start and look at how this can be achieved in an international cooperation?  Possible.  Half a dozen solutions have just been submitted from different Chinese research institutes to the world internet conference Committee, a promising first step.
Thank you for your attention.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  We know everyone across the world is thinking about the pandemic, the economic recovery, the use of in this case technology to deal with different kinds of problems.
Next, let's go to the second part of this forum, keynote speeches.  Based on the opinions solicitated from expert scholars and other institutions we have decided on three topics. 
I remind you, each speaker shall speak no more than 5 minutes again.
Thank you.
The first topic, impact of international public health emergencies represented by the COVID‑19 on global cyberspace governance and the trust relationships.  First, let's welcome Mr. Paul Wilson, Director General, Asia Pacific Network Information Center. 
>> PAUL WILSON: I'm happy to be here and APNIC to be a part of the IGF online this year.
You may know, APNIC supported IGF for its lifetime.  We think it is a vital space for better understanding among so many different communities.  We're multistakeholder corporation and will continue to improve internet governance, cyberspace governance around the world.
APNIC is one of the five internet address registries in the world and we serve 18,000 networks in our region, those are the ones that make up the internet in the Asia‑Pacific.  With IP addresses whose proper management is essential to our vision of global open, stable, secure internet.  APNIC's work is one part of the internet governance ever a trusted cyberspace where we think multistakeholder is essential, it is not possible to believe have a single authority with trust on the internet or cyberspace regionally or nationally, that requires collaboration of all stakeholders and cooperation that exceeds national jurisdictions and many traditional responsibilities.
As for trust in cyberspace governance right now during this global health emergency, there are two perspectives to consider I think.  The first, predictably, it is one of increased anxiety to protect ourselves, to secure critical infrastructure and cyber infrastructure in particular.  There is, I think, higher risks being perceived, geopolitical stresses in a time when we should be seeing cooperation by the way.  Online, I think that there is reported increases in opportunism and abuse in social media behavior which reinforces anxiety, from that perspective, I think COVID is just an additional stress that does threaten our security and our sense of trust and it will turn to increase the call on governments to take stronger action to build on that security and trust.  That's predictable under the first perspective.
The second perspective, more optimistic, and I think that is that even in the midst of this pandemic there is something we can celebrate, that's how the internet has performed during these times.  In so many parts of the world, it is in duo manned like never before, entirely taken for granted as a critical part of your response, that's significant because with the pandemic, the internet is now being described as the glue that's holding societies and economies together like nothing else has.  Without the internet, the impact of this pandemic on all of our lives would be so very much worse.  That really is something I think to see that the internet is delivered like never before, it has been there and served us well.  I think surprisingly by the way is that we didn't plan for this scenario in operational cyber drills for instance, even though we should have, because this kind of emergency has always been possible and there are serious impacts.  Among those impacts, we see ‑‑ we have seen huge changes in internet traffic patterns and types, we have seen great increased volumes of 30 to 50% of many internet exchange points, increases in mobile and other traffic and it is clear why, it is because of what we're all doing now, using online realtime video and that requires the internet to work very well realtime end‑to‑end symmetrical bandwidth.
In this perspective, with the unexpected changes and impacts, the thing is there haven't been widespread problems or outages, that's not to say that there is not work needed by operators, there has been, for instance, in provisioning extra bandwidth and needed connections, so forth.  That's also a feature of the decentralized internet, even with an unprecedented, unexpected global stress, we can adapt, respond to the local bands to do what we need to do when that's needed and by doing so, we work collectively, cooperating, cooperating, alongside each other to keep the internet running.  That's the original model of the internet, decentralized, global, symmetrical, end‑to‑end infrastructure and COVID showed us how much we rely on those features, global end‑to‑end internet, how much we rely on bandwidth, broadband in both directions, upwards and downloads for the customer, and so I think we're going to hear more about the success into the future, how the internet did perform during the pandemic, how it did what we asked of it.  There are lessons for sure, I think we can take ‑‑ when we can take the interrupt for granted, as we have done at this time, I think that's ‑‑ there is no better validation of the current model of internet technology, organization operation and governments and of the internet as a central component of the trusted cyberspace.  
That's all for me for now.  Thank you.  
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Paul.  Thank you for sharing.
Let's go to Zhou Xiahohua, Zhou Xiahohua. 
>> ZHOU XIAOHUA: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, greetings from Beijing.  Good evening.
We have entered the post truth era, in certain circumstances objective statements of the fact is often less likely to affect public opinion than appealing to emotions.  In my opinion, when we want to learn about the truth, reach mutual trust one thing that we can avoid, it is data.  Data is supposed to be transparent for communication and less likely to be misused, however actually that's not the case in the real world.
The famous British novelist and the former Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli once said there are three kind of lies in the world, lie, lie, then lie and statistics.  In 1955 American writer Darrell Huff published a book How To Lie with Statistics.  In the era of Big Data, there are many more and more traps contained in the data, particularly use of new technology resulting in the likelihood that the data is Pampered with every link from collection to processing, from visualization to information presentations, with a combination of fake news and fake numbers.  We hear this a lot in the U.S. 
It is difficult for the people to distinguish right from wrong.  Currently my team is working on the project funded by the national science foundation of China, it is the trend and pattern of COVID‑19 based on new mathematical and statistical models.  We try to use mathematical statistical model to discover the truth in COVID‑19 in terms of the trends and patterns.  There we will use different types of data, including epidemiology, genetic and viral genetic data, we try to answer the question of what is transmission rate among the people, does the policy really work?  We'll hopefully have more results in the future.
Anyway, I believe that mathematics and statistics can play a very important role in distinguishing truth from forced information on the internet age in following different ways.  So first, the security and privacy of data, so data security can be ensured, for example, a trusted data service assistance can be established based on block chain technologies, also regarding the data, we can protect it with new technology both mathematics and statistical and other high technologies.  Without the data privacy, it is hard to make sure that the data is trust.
Second, I think that authenticity, reliability of data is very important.  How can we trust the data we saw on the internet is really trustworthy?  The trust of the data is a foundation of the decision making, without such trust, we cannot believe what we see on the news.  Statistical methods may help us to determine reliability of the data sources and verify whether the data is true or not so we can discover the fake news from the true news.
Third, the reliability of the data analysis results.  So we have the credible results, statistic and mathematical results, we get the reliable results.  As we know, all of the statistical model has assumptions.  How do we know that certain results based on certain statistical model assumption is satisfied?  We want to make sure that that the analysis behind the results we see on the news actually are satisfied to certain conditions which are required for the methods.  Without those kinds of guarantees, we cannot trust the results we see on the news.
I think as a statistician in my opinion, we can play an important role in making the data more trustworthy in the current stage.  However, in order to create such atmosphere we need the teamwork including people from different discipline, statistics, computer science, I see one of the speakers before me mentioned that, and also social science and then policymakers.  As a team, we can work together and then really make internet a safe place to trust so that the people can rely on the internet for their informations.
Thank you very much. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
I'm very interested on your research.  I think that everyone needs to collect data and I hope that your research can get everyone's benefit.  I think it is also very hard, although it is enough available.
Thank you again.
Next, let's welcome Professor David Robertson, Vice Principal and Head of College of Science and Engineering, University of Edinburgh.
>> DAVID ROBERTSON: Yes.  As Paul Wilson said earlier on, COVID‑19 has deeply demonstrated how we depend on large scale data driven information for our social fabric, in that way, computation is an enormous help.  We have yet to take advantage of that infrastructure to understand COVID‑19 itself to support decision making on public health or to enable well‑informed action to combat the disease.  In that sense, pandemics make basic functional tis of the computational systems, it becomes a global challenge.  I'm not a computer scientist but I work in healthcare n comes from that background.
That basic functionality that people likely need, here are four examples, to fit into the time, we need to build the evidence‑base more systematically, the interaction between the types of treatment, it is complex, prognosis for sufferers depends on a complex combination of factors and December presents itself in very subtle forms, there is no model that describes that network of correlations, we must apply computational demanding statistical methods across a variety of data, very wide variety actually, with the aim of identifying key be features and relationships, and we need to build those national computational facilities rapidly.  That's happening.  The U.K. is a good example of where we're doing that.
The second point, is we need large scale data with local control with COVID‑19 the relevant datasets are across thousands of different data controllers in the U.K. alone, hospitals, laboratories, regional data centers, national repository, some of it ‑‑ very little of it but some worldwide ‑‑ each controller has the way to balance privacy against individuals, as everybody on this call know, it is a global issue now, because the scientists capable of getting deep insight in this complexity of disease through computation, they are not conveniently located in the national jurisdictions that control the relevant data.  We have to get the agreement for the controlled, auditable, ethical sharing of derived knowledge, not necessarily the data, but the derived knowledge internationally based on mutually accepted protocols and standards.  That's yet to be defined.
We need trustworthy disease models, because to act decisively we need to have new knowledge from the evidence‑based, crucially as the data changes and that raises the issue of trust in the model it's, correct model, not the trust in the implementation, have they been built correctly.  That's a global issue because we want to use models derived and we want to compare the strategies in close to realtime against the evidence pertaining crucially at that time.  
Which takes me to the fourth and final point:  We need to understand the limits of trust for these systems.  Remarkably small proportion of the evidence‑based pandemic modeling or disease characterization, it can safely be assumed to be true at time of collection.  It is commonly delays of weeks or months, in the U.K., data encoding even, and even when it is encoded there is a human error systematic differences in the data encoding, fully automatic data acquisition, it adds other issues, reliability, the standardization of the recording devices and on top of that, data acquired from the broad population makes data quality difficult to estimate and control.  All of the things that are difficult in data are there and these problems, we have to live with them.
So those are the four items to throw in.  They're encouraging signs, the biggest organizations in the world are turning attention to this, governments are creating national infrastructures for this, U.K. is an example, multinational cooperations are coming to terms on constraints on dealing with this sort of data while preserving individual rights.  Individuals crucially are aware of the value of the data, personally and for the common good the challenge is to protect all national populations through the development of global knowledge sharing in medicine and it is one which I think all nations should and probably do subscribe.  On the obstacles, they're complex, technical, social, ethical, they don't seem unsurmountable but they have to be solved together and that requires common practice across nations.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
I really appreciate your points.  More and more people realize these four points, it is very important and I hope that you can share more with us.
Let's welcome Professor Ayad Al‑Ani, Einstein Center Digital Future.
>> AYAD AL-ANI: I would like to talk in the next couple of minutes about the effects of transparent societies on trust.  My sums is that sooner or later the models that have been described before will come into effect and they will lead to more or less transparent societies and this will be done by using machine learning as kind of a time machine.  The question is, what can be done then?  I will talk briefly about the possibilities of counter organizations and also about the positive effects of international cooperation.
Among the many affects that the pandemic had on our societies, I think the usage of technology and data to solve society's problems are the most obvious and grave.  The centralized recording of the human movements, contacts, health status is a decisive stroke in the development of achieving unprecedented levels of transparency across all societies.  I think it becomes observable in this situation that artificial intelligence, machine learning, rather, will be used in this context as a kind of time machine, data will allow for moving back in time to unravel infection histories and change, but fast forward in the forms of models predicting certain situations that we'll see an increased likelihood of another outbreak.  We have focused more on historical data, but I think we'll also move forward to a future kind of predictions.
There is a problem, however, if we proceed in that direction and I think that we will because there is no really other choice than that.  Complete transparent societies become very conservative and restrictive.  From the evidence we have from other pandemics, you turn inwards to the point of becoming hostile to outsiders and it is interesting to see that the individuals in those societies steps back from its ambitions and is under constant threat of misbehaving, in this situation, mistrust is created, rather than trust.  Individuals seem to behave as if driven by someone else.
What can be done in situation?  There are societies which have achieved both high‑levels of transparency and high‑levels of trust and I would like to call this the Swedish model.  The Swedish model says or makes us learn that the more the government system itself adheres to the notions of transparency and also fair, the more data is being donated by citizens.  However, the Swedish model informs us that such trust building takes a lot of time.  The freedom of press act of Sweden, from 1766 and I assume that countries for instance like Germany which have experienced two dictatorships in recent histories, there is a situation where citizens will be very reluctant to donate their data, this kind of situation.  We'll take lots of time.  We don't have the time.  So what to do in this situation?
I think there are two strong measure, one, that governments and societies that are embarking down the road to transparency, they may consider upgrading, developing, supporting equally strong counter forces, these could be derived from organizations that tried to inhibit the unrestricted usage, misusage of data like ethical Committee, data protection agents, et cetera, et cetera.  As transparency grows we assume that the avenues and strategies of the entity, in order to be effective will need to outgrow the predictive path and link to other unpredictable actions.  The more transparent societies we create, the more predictable behaviors that we can model, the more we need to create counter organizations that behave in a rather irregular way in order to counter balance that.  
Finally, I think what we see in all societies, it is the rise and usage of social conscious, and because this is much more cheaper than forcing people to   behave in a certain situation.  This in turn could further enhance the conservative behaviors, the individual steps back from its individual goals and acts in a manner that's expected from him or her.  This kind of intervention is quite subtle, perhaps even unrecognizable for the individual making it very difficult to counteract in this situation.  Here, I think, globalization, multilateral cooperation is a way to balance the power of social conscience built by societies, conscience must verify itself on other facts, experiences, opinion, and in open, reflective system, ideas and experiences will spill over, some are de tested by existing social conscience, others may become part of a constructive debate.  Thus, the more self‑conscious is effective, the possibilities to question and review traits of the pressure by comparing experiences of other societies becomes desirable or even necessary.
Thank you very much for your attention.  Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for your interesting transparency model on the data and such serious research.  It is very interesting.
The academics have highlighted the technology innovation and the new   internet technologies is becoming apparent in people's live, new applications such as distant education, smartphones, they have rewritten and reconstructed life, production and the social management and is reaching a brand‑new development and operational model for global development, but now comes to the second topic, the role of internet technology innovation in responding to international public health emergencies.
First, let's welcome Professor Kilnam Chon, Father of the Korean Internet, Inductee of the Internet Hall of Fame. 
>> KILNAM CHON: Let me talk with the PowerPoint. 
Can you see that file? 
I'm Kilnam Chon, computer professor.  I want to talk on the internet technology.  This coronavirus, for us, internet has been challenged, even though some of us are not ready but we don't have any choice this year.  By looking at nine, ten months, I guess we met the challenge with acceptable performance ‑‑ not perfect ‑‑ but we didn't fail.  We did a pretty good job.  Looking at the detail, network infrastructure has been done surprisingly well globally, even among the Developing Countries.  I saw many in Developing Countries, they could participate in remote conferences without much problem.  Back three, four years ago, even the developed countries participation through the remote conferencing with video, it was very easy.  After several years, we have a close‑up look at the improvement.
So network infrastructure wise, I guess we did pretty good or shall I say a B plus or an A minus.
The remote meeting system, like Zoom we're using today.
Very quickly, I was so surprised, back in three, four years ago, this Zoom was not in person, or other web conference systems, this year, video this year, we worry about the security, and I guess video, it is okay, people reasonably are happy.  That's good.
Let's look into some of the issues.
Appointments I said, audiovisual communication around the world, it is good enough to offer the realtime audio and the videoconferencing.  A reason, videoconferencing, it is pretty intelligent, if the bandwidth is not too good, they cut down the video, just use only audio, it is very intelligent.  On the information dissemination, it is something that the internet does very well.  We have very good information dissemination in the last ten months.  Unfortunately, we also have had a lot of abuse, like all of us have experienced fake news, misleading information and such.  This is something that we have to think about in the future.
This is important to the application system, online education, success is limited, we may be ‑‑ people think online education is second class, face‑to‑face education is first class and this should not be the way.  If we work enough, we can make the hybrid education system and that takes many years for development.  The remote work, I guess that's different than online education, many people are ‑‑ many of those Developing Countries, they're moving on to the remote work as normal.  Such as global, Facebook, other companies, and digital divides, some people comment, yes, we do have a digital divide and first of all, many people, they still can't access the internet or can't access the internet properly.  And application wise, yes, financially, we have to work on that, that's our future homework.
If we have time at the end, I would like some of those issues to be discussed, including usability.  The applications are not that user friendly.  I guess I stop here. 
Let's move to the next speakers.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for the discussion of the challenge of the internet with COVID‑19.  I think everyone is thinking about it.  It is very important to make more and more people use the internet to access it and to improve our ability to make the applications more usable for us..  Next, let's welcome Li Qian, Executive Expert of Legal and Policy Research Department, Alibaba Group. 
>> LI QIAN: Many thanks to the organizer for the invitation to attend this forum and to address the digital technologies with my observations.  I would like to share with you actually the significant meaning to us here at Alibaba, we have experienced two pandemic, when the SARS outbreak took place, it was four years for us, and by that time, the only way that we could get out is to isolate all of the people in our company at home.  At that time, exactly that time, internet was launched, and the second, it was the year 2020, COVID‑19, and Alibaba has grown up.  We're the grownup company with sophisticated technologies and also solutions to help the country and people.  We generate all kinds of resources and power to guarantee the supply in terms of technology supply, resources supply and also the funding supply to the SMEs and many people.  We have seen the differences.  The first one is the difference of the companies, we have made a lot of efforts, a lot of efforts in the first epidemic, to help us out, the second, it is to ‑‑ second thing, it is to help on the part people and to help the nation.  The second difference, we have seen that the digital technologies played a significant role and in this epidemic, in the control and the prevention and control, the digital technology has played a significant role.  I want to share with you some of our experiences.
The first one, it is that in January we started outsourcing and purchasing of resources and established a platform of outsourcing of the materials online and we rely on our eCommerce platform and we look for the reliable medical supplies and resources around the globe.
Second, we rely on our Cloud to monitor and to provide the services to the communities and for covering 4 million people, providing the timely information of information to the people and we established network for the public health, we set up the public health management and governance platform for the government and also we also relieved the stress for the frontline doctors and nurses and AI accelerated and we opened our preparatory Cloud computing platform in February and also we opened AI algorithm to the stakeholders free of charge and we also provide the Big Data development platform and opened the repositories of the data of the epidemics to the people free of charge as well.
The wide application of the digital technologies as enhanced figures of curbing the epidemics and the people in China, in this epidemic, they have experienced the trend and trajectory and the power of digital technologies.
We think that the core change of the digital technology is to serve the people and in the face of the public health emergencies, no country can set aside, just like saying no snowflake is invisible when the avalanche took place.  So we think around the globe we have to look for actively the paradigm of the internet management and the governance and also to have the exchange of the data and sharing the data and also to set up the rules reliable for the people for use in the future.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for that perspective.
Let's welcome the last speaker ever this topic, Koh King Kee, President of Centre for New Inclusive Asia.
>> KOH KING KEE: Thank you.  Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, the COVID‑19 pandemic has changed our lifestyle, the way we work, the way we study.  It is also dealing a devastating blow, especially to tourism and hospitality industry.  No pandemic has so profoundly impacted human kind socially and economically as COVID‑19 since the flu pandemic.  Fortunately, advancement in technology, the internet technology, it has really helped to prevent COVID‑19 from becoming a catastrophe, the scale of the 1918 flue pandemic.  WHO declared the outbreak of and constituted a public health emergency of international concern on January 30th, and subsequently categorized it as a pandemic on March 11 as a virus and have impacted so many with more than 4,000 death, total number of COVID cases worldwide has skyrocketed to 46 million with 1.2 million deaths as of November 1st.  This shows how rapidly COVID‑19 could spread and COVID‑19 is highly transmissible from human to human, battling the pandemic is a race with time.  
The internet is providing realtime data and information to play a vital role in mitigating the spread of virus.  To win the battle against the pandemic, governments must first win the heart and cooperation of the people.  Public trust and cooperation are prerequisites for a successful implementation of any preventive measure in a fight against the virus.  With 57% of the developed population not having access to mobile devices such as Facebook, Twitter, messaging apps, such as WhatsApp have no doubt become the fastest and most effective means of communication in disseminating, handling and the transparent information concerning the virus to the public.  Social media are indispensable platforms for educating the public and debunking misinformation and fake news.  There is no effective developed vaccine or therapy, the infection clusters and isolation of infected individuals through active surveillance, contact tracing, that is the primary measures to mitigate and containing the spread of the virus in this regard.  Internet technology innovations has helped tremendously in translating early detection and rapid identification of the cases as well as ensuring strict adherence to current conditions.  
Big Data and AI could help check infection transmission in place time and person and identify respecters for the diseases to get effective intervention such as migration maps which is used, mobile phone, records, mobile payment applications and social media to collect realtime data on locations of people and helping health authorities to track the movement of the people.
To identify emerging hot spots and clusters of infection, thermal sensor, other thermometers are set up in entrances of workshop, schools and public hot spots to detect people and shopping malls, train stations, capturing the personal details.  Realtime records, information from vehicles and mobile phones will show travel and will show the rapid identification and emergency texts allows people that have been in contact with infected individuals with instruction to testing centers and to self-isolate.  The case identification and the isolation, quarantine of context, it is needed to prevent further transmission.  Digital technology enables authorities to enforce strict quarantine for individuals who have been exposed to or infected with the virus.  For people to have been infected area, tracking the devices such as mobile phones app, digital links through technology, if quarantine is needed.
Apart from technology, public health emergency response, public cooperation, this is a fight against individual freedom and privacy for the larger safety of the community is key.
Internet technology innovations complement but are no replacement tore the conventional measures such as good personal hygiene, mask wearing and social distancing.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  The information in knowledge and application of innovation, it has brought us a lot of information.  It is urgent to think about how to look at the human survival with a trust mechanism, let's come to the third topic, methods and paths for building trust mechanisms in cyberspace against the backdrop of international public health emergencies.  Let's welcome Jian Yang, Director of the Institutional Governance, Chinese Academy of Cyberspace Studies.
>> JIANG YANG: Dear colleagues, trust in cyberspace is protection and understanding the trust in the cyberspace from the real world and it has a commonality and characteristics on the issues of information security, transparency and confidence building measures as an important task in establishing the view in cyberspace and proposed measures in terms of the availability, cooperation and transparency.  It is focused mostly on military and the cybersecurity response and with the popularization of new technologies and applications, especially with the COVID‑19 pandemic people spend more time online, cybercrime acts have increased sharply and that information has been spending and it is important to explore building trust mechanisms in cyberspace under new circumstances.  The mechanism in cyberspace, it should have many factors.  This mechanism should be focused on building a community with a safe future in cyberspace and it should be established by the three roots, a base and responsibility, transparency, respect, understanding and cooperation with actors such as government, international organizations, others.
This is essential.  Laws, regulation, standards, norms, IT capability, social, ethics, supervision and self‑discipline, it is a multidimension for the system and now I would like to focus three roots as an example.
Technologies, first we should use technologies to build trust.  New technologies such as block chain play a very important role in building trust.  We should continue to use this for credibility and transparency of the cyberspace.
Second, we should look at the digital gap and trust in cyberspace between countries, looking at the ITU compatibility and the ability to access internet directly jeopardizes the ability to save lives and maintain and effect ability of governments to respond to global emergencies quickly.  Measures should be taken to help under developed countries improve their digital infrastructure capabilities.
Third, we should oppose the politicization of technologies.  Applications, the application, it is the data security, we should adopt methods to enhance legal compatibility and interoperabilities among countries.  Second, international organizations and government should drive communication and cooperation to establish in an orderly, non‑discriminatory framework for corresponding data and establish the data accountability and a relief mechanisms.
Third, the formulation of industry standards and norms should be facilitated.
Legal and social matters, actors should be forming their respectful duties and assume the responsibilities of controlling false and harmful information and malicious acts.  First, government should establish sound laws and regulation to increase cost of illegal acts.
Second, companies should take the initiative to assume social responsibilities with domestic and international laws.
Third, internet literacy of citizens should be improved with assets for self-explaining the laws and the punishment and to choose that the trust, it is the best bounty agent in international relations and we should look at this through mutual consultation and mutual understanding germinated from the foundation, the father of the European Union said cooperation is not possible without trust.  Cooperation is not durable without that mechanism, the transparent societies lies in the heart to heart connection between different races and the technique of trust building lays in sincere cooperation.
Thank you for your attention. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for your speech.
Finally, let's welcome Professor Luca Belli, Professor of Internet Governance and Regulation, Getulio Vargas Foundation from Brazil.  Thank you. 
>> LUCA BELLI: Thank you.  I absolute the efforts for organizing that timely debate which is essential in the situation that we're in, it is key, thank you, this is essential I think to build this agenda on how we could build trust.
Let me share quickly the presentation that I want to share with you.
I wanted to tackle the issue of trust from the angle of mass production and cybersecurity, one of the main areas as well as the professor of law school and another project.
Now, for those that know this, this is a main academic institution and it is the fifth influential think tank globally out of 10,000 and this project I mentioned before, it is a unique project analyzing digital policies in Brazil, Russia, Africa, others, from a team from the countries hosted by the law school.  Why is this very relevant not only for the trust discussion we're having today but in general for just policies, well, because the policies, those are adopted by the five countries are impacting more than 1.6 billion internet users and will impact 3.2 billion individuals, more than 40% of the world population and the kids and the companies, they want to utilize technology produced by the countries, which is increasing wide share of the world population.  Now, we have understood, although it is a very low profile group, there is a lot of interesting things happening in this grouping and we have understood more than three years ago the value of cooperation within cybersecurity and the declaration from 2017 and since then, there is incredible upgrades and updates in data protection frameworks of the countries which have been developing these, maybe in some cases from scratch over the last couple of years.  Cooperation in digital governance, it is a key issue for enhancement of the grow growing population that's been reiterated and reaffirming the commitment to cooperation and also underscoring the importance of effective protection of personal data which is key in the overall trust building process.
Let me just provide you an overview of the last six months regarding the data protection.  Brazil has just adopted and entered into force a month ago the new general protection law and it is creating a new authority for the protection of personal data.  Russia is deploying its artificial intelligence strategy and adopting a wide range of data intensive technologies to combat COVID‑19, India has finalized the new data protection deal and proposed a very interesting data empowerment and protection ark temperature, it is a technical way of management of consent for individuals whose data are collected.  
China has just released two weeks ago the Draft Data Protection Law and is spearheading an initiative, a Global Initiative on Data Security and South Africa has Protection of Personal Information Act and entry into force.  Although it is in a grace period, this is only what happened in the last six months.  Now, to have a better understanding of framework, we have often operated this tool that you can find on BRICS, comparing the data protection of the BRICS countries, everything is in access, and all of the analysis and we have collaborated over the last year and a half, over 100 internet access points and something that we also aim at doing, it is lobbying for positive change and I'm very happy to share also with you that last year, during the BRICS summit in Brazil, I had a pleasure to call for a strong, efficient cybersecurity governance and stronger, more solid data protection frameworks to enhance cooperation amongst BRICS countries and to fully enjoy and explore the potential of Sustainable Development Goals within the BRICS countries but also globally I would say.
Now, I'm very happy to hear over the past year, this has been well received and integrated by BRICS colleagues and I would like to offer further elements for the debate, we're publishing this book, this is the first one analyzing cybersecurity regulation in the BRICS countries, including data protection.  It will be released in one month, in December, but you can already access a free access, the content, it is all there on the website or using this URL, bit.ly/BRICSbook.  Everything is in free access and we'll also discuss this as a way to enhance data information, if you have any questions on this, please, I would be happy to answer during the debate or feel free to reach out if we can't talk today.
Thank you for your attention.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Professor Luca Belli.  I think that your introduction to the BRICS countries on data protection is interesting for every country.  I hope ‑‑ nonetheless, for all countries and the world, this will be useful.
Our agenda, the discussion part, but for time reasons, as we all know, I know there are some in the Q&A room, there are some problems.  I can only imagine some people attending, they want to share some of theirs.
First, I want to welcome Karim Alwadi, a Research Fellow from the University of China. 
>> KARIM ALWADI:  Thank you for the invitation.  I'm not an expert.  Let me share my views on my backgrounds.  
I'm a businessman, I'm in the business, we have a beltway group, we're happily involved in infrastructure investment which makes us also involved with the road initiatives and my academic background, the international information.
On the first observation today, I would say that we started the year with a very pessimistic view on our operations on the related projects.  However, having now in November, we can share that this has moved to real digital built and road, I'm still in Beijing and we have operations elsewhere internet has helped us in a way that we could not have anticipated to move out this project which is heavily related to people to people kind of operations and that kind of operation requests a lot of trust and I would say business wise, trust is there, which is very interesting of an observation.
On the other side, on the personal/academic, I would say that sitting here, living in Beijing since the beginning, I have been here in Beijing since the beginning of the COVID‑19, I would say that the experience, the personal experience I have, basically the China experience is dealing with COVID‑19, it is worth sharing.  On related to the internet space, I would say that the successful experience that was based on the capacity of data collection as well as with the quantum computing, added with AI, that actually is worth sharing experience and in my view, trust is the vehicle of sharing this kind of experience.
Today, having this forum now in Beijing, it kind of sent a very strong signal on the challenge and the China willingness to share this very needed now apparently successful experience with the rest of the world.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Karim Alwadi.
Let's welcome Mr. Oleg Abdurashitov, Head of CEO Office, Kaspersky.
>> OLEG ABDURASHITOV: Since the beginning, we realized that this will take place in the cyber domain as much as the physical and biological one, we have detected more than 400,000 new malicious objects every single day, up 25% spike compared to last year.  A lot those malicious examples, they're built around the COVID issue, you have the special offers, most of those, they are ‑‑ some of those are very malicious.  And we have talked about the experience, businesses, sending people home, you know, capital organizations functioning but at the same time, the cyber criminals discovered a new expanding threat landscape for themselves, the new targets and people discovered, you know, they cannot protect the users at home with the same level of security that is available in their offices.
For instance, healthcare organizations, critical infrastructure, we thought should have been well‑protected.  We found out that they were not, and we all heard of ransomware taking down hospitals and other consequences of these events.  What we don't hear about, it is we hear of those horrible stories, we don't hear about the success stories of institutional collaboration.
For instance, together with Interpol this year, we're able to clean up the infected network of an entire hospital and to create the lost files in another one, and the fact is, neither Interpol or Kaspersky had to do that, they're helping the police agencies and hospitals, and we're helping clients, not just every other organization.  Because of that institutional trust that we're acquiring over the years of working together when we got this distress call, we put all of our resources into helping them rather than into deciding how we actually framework allowing us to do that, more examples of trust, platform helping people to make cyberspace safer but ultimately, the trust is critical, colleagues from the Chinese Cyberspace Institute highlighted some of the ways to enhance the trust.  As a company, we can only work on a technological level and we do that, we open up our source code, invite people to look into that, teach people do that, but if we are seriously considering achieving a breakthrough, a breakthrough that's really needed in the current environment, they should have more participants and more willingness to do that.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
Now I want to answer the questions from Professor Robertson.  There are 27 people in the room now.  Okay.  So this is the end of the discussion.  Thank you for all of your presented ideas.
For all of the speakers, for your speeches, we know that cyberspace mutual trust is the basics for increasing the overall availability to mankind, even the existing international country's responses and the combination mechanism of cyberspace yet to be improved, it is urgent for all entities of cyberspace to streamline communication and cooperation and to build and implement the trust mechanism in cyberspace.  It is important that the ecological governance of cyberspace, and there is a critical use of emerging technologies and the response to the global risk and the challenges.  Today we have started this talk and there are guests from the world hearing from constructive stories and suggestions.  This is magnificent.  I believe that the cyberspace mutual trust between countries and maintaining confidence in the positive side of the internet will help serve a dynamic economic recovery to maintain collaboration in a physically isolated world.  The forum has to end here due to time reasons.
I hope that everyone, if you want to share, please use that and put answers in the Q&A room.
You're welcome to share within this IGF forum.
Thank you all.  Thank you, again, for your participation.  Thank you. 
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-of14-copyright-and-inclusion^^

>> MODERATOR: Good morning, good afternoon, good evening.  Depending on your time zone, welcome to the WIPO Open Forum on Copyright and Inclusion.  
My name is Paolo Lanteri and I'm your moderator today.  It is good to be once again back participating at the IGF and seeing many old friends and colleagues of the IGF community.  Certainly for most of you, the World Intellectual Property Organization, it is best known as the place, the organization where you would go if you need to protect an invention and you want to get a Patent or you want to register the trademark.  This is our core mandate and maintaining this system.  In parallel, as a complement to that mandate, WIPO, together with its Member States has also developed over the years initiatives and areas of work that are focusing on specifically facilitating access to content and information to the widest possible audience.  Today we're going to talk about, of course, access, notably for Persons with Disabilities.  The objective of this open forum, it is precisely to present and share with you information about the work of the organization in this area, related to inclusion which sometimes is less known to the general public and to the international community in general.  We're going to cover three main topic, first, of course, the Marrakesh Treaty, facilitating access to published works for persons who are blind, visually impaired or otherwise print disabled.  It was adopted in 2013 and has experienced the process of ratification and accession with the unprecedented speed.  In less than ten year, we have 75 contracting parties that cover over 100 countries of the world.  This is perhaps one of the best examples of an ambitious, pragmatic, impactful multilateral treaty that international community was able to agree upon in recent years.  Then we'll talk about the accessible book consortium, ABC, and all of the ambitious activities, it is a story of cooperation, solidarity, impact already changing the lives of thousands of people that have visual impairment involving developing and developed countries.
Finally we'll cover a more general topic about the challenges and technical solutions to solve the challenges for enabling access to content and information by Persons with Disabilities in general.  As you know well, the motto of IGF 2020 is internet for human resilience and solidarity virtually together.  When we would have known about this motto when we prepared the proposal, we didn't know what COVID ‑‑ the impact of COVID on our world, but we believe the motto reflects very well the values and principles that are inspiring the work and initiatives that we're going to present to you today.
Without further ado, I'll now give the floor to Scott Labarre who is joining us from Denver, Colorado, so very early in the morning.  Scott is a true champion of the Marrakesh Treaty in the World Blind Union and I'll leave Scott to tell you about his experience and impact of the Marrakesh Treaty.
The Scott, the floor is yours.
>> SCOTT LABARRE: Good morning.  
Hopefully you can hear and see me okay.  I join you from Centennial, Colorado, a suburb of Denver.  I'm a bit sleepy, I must admit this morning, I was up here until past 2:00 a.m. local time.  It is now a little after 5:00 a.m. following, of course, our election.  The election stands exactly where it was when I tried to get a couple of hours of sleep.  In other words, there are 7 states right now that are undetermined, undecided, and I have noted since I did go asleep, that the lead has changed in some of those states and flip‑flopped back and forth.  When some of the experts were saying here it is not election night, it will be election week, I believe that.  All I can say from the United States is stay tuned.  It is absolutely insane that we are going through this again, but that appears to be the nature of our politics here in the United States.
Regardless of the politics of the United States, and I want to talk about the Marrakesh Treaty very briefly, I have about 10 minutes, and I won't do the topic much just in such a short period of time, but I will do what I can.  Of course, if anybody on the webinar is interested in more information they certainly know how to get ahold of WIPO and know how to get in touch with the folks in Geneva who know exactly how to get in touch with me and I don't know how much information is shared through this platform, through the profiles, but please feel free to get in touch with me.
For me, you know, the whole Marrakesh Treaty is personal.  I am a blind person.  I went blind at age 10 in 1978 and one of the things I very much enjoyed to do before I lost my vision was read.  I was very fond of going into my school's library and reading books and when I went blind the assumption I made, now, you know, as a young child, but the assumption I made, it was that I wouldn't be able to read any more because I assumed that to read meant you had to read print.  I had heard of braille, I had never thought that it really was much of a thing, that it was used very much.  When I did go blind, after I adjusted to going blind, I learned, well, there were books in what we called in the United States at the time a specialized format.  In that time period, it meant really one of two things, you could get books in braille, that were produced in what we call hard copy braille, they were bound books, pretty big items that came to you in the mail, and we had one major source for accessible books in the United States, the National Library Service, and at that time we called it the National Library Service for the Blind and Print Handicapped.
So you could get books in braille.  Now, it took a long time for them to produce these books.  Why?  Well, that's the very topic that we're discussing here.  
First of all, before they even thought about putting the book into braille, and I'll talk about the other format in a minute, they had to go off, get the permission of the copyright holder, because technically you were making a copy of the book and if you didn't get permission, you were making a copy of the book without permission.
Getting that permission from the copyright holder wasn't always easy, either the copyright holder didn't want to give it or it just would take a huge long time.  I remember very much that if my friend were reading a new book, it would take a couple of year, literally, for me to be able to get that new book in braille. 
The other format produced in that time period, 40 plus years ago, it was books on record.  Yes!  Record!  A vinyl record that spun around and round.  You had to have a special record player.  These books were recorded at a much slower speed on the record player.  If you tried to take one of these National Library Service records and put them on a regular turntable, it sounded like the chipmunks.  It was so fast.  Standard Blums ‑‑ standard albums in the united they were recorded at a different evolution a minute and these books were 8RPMs per minute, you had to have a specialized record player from the talking book Library of That was one of two ways to get access to books.  It was great!  I thought it was great at the time!  It meant I could still read.
Later, you know, soon after I became blind they switched to tapes, cassette tapes.  Again, they recorded them in a specialized manner.  I won't go into all of that.  Here's the point, that system really meant that I had to wait years, literally speaking, to read the same book that my cited friends and colleagues were reading and in 1996, the organization to which I'm actually general legal counsel to, the National Federation of the Blind here, and it is part of the World Blind Union, by the way, and that's on whose behalf I'm speaking this morning afternoon, evening, wherever you are.  
Anyway, in 1996 the NFB worked in partnership with the Association of American Publishers and we got into law something called the Chafee Amendment, it was named after the politician who sponsored the amendment.  It was an amendment to our copyright law, 17 United States Code and it turned out to be Section 121 and what we did with 17USC121, we said if you're reproducing a book into a specialized format on a non‑profit basis you can do that without getting the permission of the copyright holder.
This ended up being a big deal.
NLS, leading source of our books in the U.S., they could start recording a book into audio right away, producing it into braille right away, and our wait time decreased substantially, this was a huge victory.  That effort in the United States, later, there is a lot of history to this, I don't have the time to tell you, the short story in 2008 ultimately, a bunch of organizations led by the World Blind Union got together here in the United States in Washington D.C. matter of fact, saying, you know what, we ought to have a treaty that does what we did in the United States and some other nations, we ought to have a treaty that not only makes sure that you can have this exception to copyright law to reproduce books into accessible formats but not only that, but that we can share them across international borders because that really wasn't permitted and it was unclear in most cases whether you could share these books across international borders.  What was happening, Canada would reproduce the same book as the United States, Australia, New Zealand, all of these English speaking countries, the Spanish countries would do the same thing and we ought to have a treaty.  That treaty was formally tabled before the World Intellectual Property Organization Standing Committee on Copyright and Related Rights in 2009, it was brought by originally Brazil, Ecuador and Paraguay.  Later joined by Mexico, then we got into four very, very intense years of negotiations.  This was the first time that a copyright treaty, a proposed copyright treaty was creating rights for non‑right holders exclusively.  Other treaties that addressed copyright would give rights to non‑right holders, but only when rights were expanded or granted to right holders and creators.  People were very scared of this treaty.  Ultimately, what happened, through a period of lots and lots and lots of hours, you know, I literally spent ‑‑ I don't know, I couldn't even tell you how many thousands of hours in the halls of WIPO there in Geneva, and in the halls of the meeting forms in Marrakech, negotiating this treaty.  There was a lot of technical detail.  The bottom line is, on June 28th, 2013, the Marrakesh Treaty was adopted by WIPO and has since met as referred to, historic, rapid adoption by the world community.  Right now it is adopted by ‑‑ ratified and acceded to by some 75 different countries and Unions which applies currently to 101 nations, among them is the United States, which we got our ratification done a couple of years ago which became effective in 2019.  Immediately prior to the U.S., the European Union, and why are those two entities important?  They are because millions of accessible titles live in the United States and in the E.U.  When the U.S. and the E.U. adopted, ratified the treaty they not only did so in terms of a pure ratification, but passed implementing legislation so that there was a way to implement the provisions of the Marrakesh Treaty.  Work has already begun in earnest and quite prolifically in exchanging books between the United States and the E.U. and other Marrakesh Treaty countries, Monica can address that to some degree with respect to what ABC is doing with the E.U. and U.S. ratifications.  
Actually implementing the treaty into law is a key step.  I'm afraid to say one of the things that we haven't done quite as well yet, it is getting countries who have ratified or acceded to the Marrakesh Treaty, getting them to implement provisions of the treaty into domestic laws.  We have a lot of work to do in that.  The U.S. and the E.U. have done that at least.  I think I probably am out of time.  I will stop here.  I will wait later for question, whatever, and there is so much to be said about the Marrakesh Treaty.  I could literally talk for days I suppose.  Obviously I'm able to even talk about it at 5:30 in the morning somehow.  I do have a big cup of coffee here.  I guess I'm okay!  Thank you! 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I will ask you to mute.  Okay.  Great.
Without transition, I will give the floor to Monica Halil to tell us about how the promise of the Marrakesh Treaty is actually becoming a reality.
The floor is yours.
>> MONICA HALIL: Good morning, hello, everybody.  I want to make sure, you can see my screen?  Hello?
>> MODERATOR: Yes.  We can.  Very well.
>> MONICA HALIL: Thank you.
I'm here to talk about the Accessible Books Consortium.  I'm head of ABC, and I would like to talk about how technology can be a gateway to inclusivity.
Following with what Scott said, in terms of the Marrakesh Treaty, ABC as it is known, is a public private partnership led by the World Intellectual Property Organization including the World Blind Union, the DAISY Consortium, the International Consortium of Education of People with Visual Impairment, International Federation of Library Associations and the International Authors Forum, Publisher's Association and the International Federation of Reproduction Right Organizations.  It brings together all of the key players in the let's say supply chain of making an accessible format book.  It was established in June, 2014 in front of the Member States of WIPO.  Its purpose. 
Scott spoke to you about the legal framework of how, you know, important Marrakesh Treaty is for getting books into the hands of people who are print disabled.  It is a landmark historic treaty, as he very clearly explained.  It setup the legal framework.  It doesn't actually move books from country X to country Y.  What ABC seeks to do is implement the objectives of the treaty at an operational level.  We're the practical arm, if you will.  We're one initiative of many.  We're not, you know ‑‑ we don't ‑‑ we're not a monopoly.  We do seek to get books into the hands of people who are print disabled.
Now, to give a bit of context, Scott spoke about his personal story, unfortunately his is not unique.  There are 253 million people around the world that are blind or have low vision, it was a World Health Organization estimate, and it is estimated that less than 10% of all published works are in accessible formats.  Those are pretty ‑‑ you know, those are big numbers.  This is an issue that impacts a lot of people. 
We have the global book service, capacity building, we provide training and technical assistance to non‑profit organizations in developing or least developed country, and we have something called accessible publishing where there is more inclusive publishing techniques with publishers and I will take out each one of these in term.
First, the ABC global book service, what is this?  This is a technical platform ran by WIPO, funded by WIPO, whereby we have a global catalog of titles in accessible formats.  It is a membership only service and the members are libraries for the blind, they're known as authorized entity, the terminology used in the Marrakech Treaty, and this service allows members, the library, the authorized entities to search, request, then deliver, get the delivery of the accessible titles from around the world.  Scott had mentioned, for example, the national library services of the United States, they're one of our early members of the ABC global book service as are actually 22 of 27 Member States of the European Union.  We have really quite a large number of ‑‑ we have a large number of libraries.  In fact, we have 94 from around the world, we're soon going to hit about 100 members by the end of the year.  We have 640,000 accessible titles in 80 languages, of which, 585,000 titles are available for cross‑border exchange without the need to request permission from the copyright owner.  Again, referencing to what Scott was saying, with the Marrakesh Treaty the key provision, there are two key provision, one, you produce works in accessible formats without the reason to request permission from the copyright own, and the second key element, it is that you can ‑‑ you can conduct cross‑border exchanges of the work between countries that have ratified and implemented the provisions of the treaty.  ABC has 585,000 titles that meet those requirements where we can do the cross‑border exchanges, which really is a very substantive catalog.
Main languages, it is a screen up here with the main language, I said we have 80 but just giving an indication, I'll just sort of say a few that are common play spoken, English, we have 156,000, French, we have 103,000, we have the largest French titles in the world all in one place, Spanish, for example, 44,000 title, again, Latin America, it is critical, many countries, German, 19,000, Hebrew, 18,000, Hindi, 4,000, Russian, we'll have more titles, they have just joined us, that's an idea of the number of titles we have in the catalog.
What are the benefits of our service?  Firstly, it is free.  So if you're a library for the blind and you want to join, there is no cost.  You have a secure exchange of digital files, you know, this is a secure sort of technical platform.  You get all of the titles in one place so it is also efficient to look into one place.  If you're a library for the blind, rather than ‑‑ for example, if you are sitting in the U.K., you want to have the latest ‑‑ I don't know, top best seller for the New York Times rather than producing the work yourself, you can look and see in the ABC catalog, may, did the national library services of the United States, did they produce that title?  Then I could request it rather than, you know, producing it myself.  It is an efficient way of saving money, it is economical for libraries of the blind that are on limited budgets.
Of course, the other thing is, this is ran by WIPO and so libraries for the blind are authorized entities as we call them, they can just review one exchange contract, you have to sign a contract with WIPO if you want to join the service but that saves you time from setting up bilateral agreements with various libraries from around the world.
That's ABC, global book service.
I'll just turn quickly to capacity building, it is our second main activity where we provide ABC provides training to non‑governmental organizations, generally not‑for‑profits who serve people who are print disabled in developing countries.  We provide training in the latest accessible book production techniques, previously in the past, we would go on, you know, into the country, we would do training for a week with staff of the NGO, our partner NGOs and of course with the COVID pandemic, this is not possible with the travel revisions.  We're in the process of providing an online course, actually it should be completed next week whereby our NGO partners from the partner organizations, they could take this online training to produce accessible format works.  WIPO, ABC, they provide funding to that NGO partner to produce educational materials in national languages, all in accessible formats.
We're very proud of our capacity building program.  Here we have just a picture of a training session when it was on site from a couple of years ago, in Vietnam, we sent in trainers to do a training and how to produce books in epub3, accessible format, and unfortunately we're in the able to travel any more.  Again, with our online course, we're very hopeful that we'll continue the capacity building program.
What are our results in capacity building, we have produced over 13,000 educational book, all accessible in national languages in five year, and it also brings together all of the key players in a country because we introduce ‑‑ usually ABC introduces the players together, the NGO, the mystery of education, the publishers, I'll be very quick, I think I'm running out of time.  Our last activity, it is inclusive publishing, where we promote inclusive publishing practices to commercial publishers, we ask that books ‑‑ all book, print books start from a digital file, there is no reason why that digital file should not be made accessible and so we promote accessibility from the start, it is called born accessible, when you release a new print book on the market the eBooks should be accessible so that a sighted person can read the print or an eBook, but also visually impaired person can get the book at the same time and in an accessible form.  We would like to include accessibility descriptions of the books so that they can be provided to distributors and retailers, so that people that are print disabled, they can actually find the works and know that they're actually accessible.
I'll stop there.
Just very quickly, leaving you, if you have any question, you can look at our website at www.accessiblebooksconsortium.org. 
The next speaker has ‑‑ I'll stop there.
I hope we'll have questions at the end of the session.  The next speaker, Aria Indrawati, Mitra Netra Foundation ‑ "WIPO ABC Capacity building programs: the experience of Indonesia," she'll talk about partnering with ABC, we established a partnership with them in Indonesia which was funded by actually the Government of Australia.
With that I'll hand over ‑‑ she sent a video.  You will see that via the medium of a video.
Thank you very much. 
>> MODERATOR: The video should be shared from your screen.
>> Yes.  We'll ‑‑ we'll start playing it shortly.
>> MODERATOR: While waiting for the video to be screened from Jorge's screen. 
A reminder, we'll be trying to leave a space for answering your questions.  It would be great if you can drop them in the Q&A box that we have on the screen so we can collect them and direct them to the right speaker.  And you're welcome to pose them on any of the topic that you have been listening to during the presentation.
The floor is yours. 
>> (Video). 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much to Aria, we send greetings, it is late at night in Indonesia.  Congratulations on your excellent work.
I now pass the floor to my colleague Rafael Ferraz and the other speaker, Dr. Christian Vogler who will talk about the last topic of access to content for Persons with Disabilities.  I'll leave you to introduce yourself, Christian Vogler and the topic.
>> RAFAEL FERRAZ: It is a pleasure to be here.
I will spend a few minutes to highlight something that we usually hear whenever we go around the world when we used to go around the world, working on the Marrakesh Treaty, that is what about the other disabilities that are not explicitly covered in the Marrakesh Treaty.  Marrakesh Treaty is focused on persons with print disability and therefore we usually hear about Persons with Disabilities and organizations working with those people, what about the other disabilities.
Of course, WIPO is fully aware that the work does not stop at the boundary of the Marrakesh Treaty and for persons with print disability, and simply the discussions, namely in the Standing Committee on Copyright and Related Rights of the WIPO continues on the topic of disabilities, usually referred to as other disabilities, understood that those disabilities beyond print disability, so this also includes visual impairment for works that are not in printed formats and more recently in 2019 we published a study, a scoping study on the national legislation around the world so we surveyed 194 Member States of WIPO to check what was the status of their corporate legislation with regard to limitation exception for Persons with Disabilities.  This also covered print disability, the object of the Marrakesh Treaty, but we would like to further investigate other disabilities that went beyond the Marrakesh Treaty.  The results of the study were very interesting, I'm projecting now in my PowerPoint some numbers of how many countries recognize a limitation, exceptional provision in the copyright legislation, and I do want to highlight that the WIPO still in the standing Committee in 2006 undertook a similar exercise of studying and evaluating national legislation and at a later time, in 2006, the result, it was that only 57 countries had an exception related to disability in their copyright laws.  You see now the findings are a bit better.  For example, we see that countries that cover all disabilities in the legislation, it comes to a number of 28 countries and these, of course, including other disabilities, community disability, physical disabilities ‑‑ cognitive ‑‑ visual disabilities for printed works, this is closely related to the Marrakesh Treaty, but also we found out a large number of legislation that has an exception on limitation for vision disabilities, beyond printed materials and also a small number have a general provision of limitation, exception, it is applicable to Persons with Disabilities, it could be applied to the exception, the discussion continues to be in the agenda of the standing Committee and is yet to see the further results, but one thing we could certainly witness, it is that the countries that were undertaking that important work, mentioned by Scott in the beginning of implementing legislation, we think that the framework of the Marrakesh Treaty, some of the countries, it also took the opportunity to cover other disabilities and many of them, we saw 28 covered all disabilities within appropriate legislation.  WIPO is aware of the fact that the challenge exists also for Persons with Disabilities that goes beyond the access of printed works, and further discussion between the Member States has taken place just this year.
I thank you very much for this brief opportunity and I would like to invite the next speaker, Christian Vogler, who will give some examples on the interaction between technologies and some of those disabilities.
Thank you very much.  Christian, the floor is yours. 
>> CHRISTIAN VOGLER: Hello, everyone.  Thank you for the introduction.
Let me share my screen with my slides.  Give me one moment.
I'm a professor at Gallaudet University.  It is a University for accessibility for Deaf and hard of hearing people in Washington D.C. and I am head of research for the accessible communication technologies for the Deaf and hard of hearing center.
In this talk, I'll give you an overview of how Deaf and hard of hearing and how deafblind people access content and close with some challenges that we face in making content universally accessible and how that relates to the work of WIPO.
First, I need to show you that there are three images on the screen, a deaf woman signing, a deaf person speaking and wearing a headset and a deafblind person using a braille writer.  To emphasize that there are ‑‑ there is no one way to be deaf, we're diverse.  So many people use different modalities to communicate, depending on the situation.  For example, I sign and sometimes speak and listen depending on the situation.  So that diversity means we also have diversity ‑‑ diverse methods of accessing content, that there isn't just one way, we need multiple modalities..
This is a few examples of how deaf and hard of hearing people access content.  In this image, you see an electronic book with overlaid text as well as an African‑American women signing the content..
This is an example of Gallaudet's method, we have a center called visual language and visual learning, this is an example of how you have an eBook that can be downloaded if you want to look at that time for yourself, but the content, it is shown bilingually in American Sign Language and printed English..  Giving access to both languages, where they both reinforce one another.
It is not only limited to America, it could be applied to other sign languages, of course.  I would emphasize, this is a custom application developed for sign languages specifically and also theoretically epub could support a similar setup, but at present, the software is not ready to do that but it could be customized to do so.
The next example, it is in watching videos.
There are several ways to have captions done, and that's ‑‑ you're familiar with those.
However, it is important to recognize that every country, every type of disability may require adapted captioning.  For example, in the United States, deaf and hard of hearing people have requested verbatim captioning but often people speak too quickly at 180 to over 200 words per minute, they speak very quickly, many people can't actually read that fast.  Internationally, recommendations are about 140 words per minute.  If a person is speaking, that means that you have to do some summary of content.  It really is dependent on meeting the individual's needs.
We need more than one way to provide captions.
On this image ‑‑ on this slide there is a presentation of different users of sign language providing presentations, many people prefer to look at the signer as seeing it more accessible than captioning, but it does depend on the individual.  If you provide sign language, it is important to make the video as big as possible, at least a third of the screen.  Of course, you may want to have access to the captions at the same time, because that provides accessibility that's individually dependent.
On the next slide, you have video transcripts where you see someone signing as well as side by side transcript and someone can access that transcript using a braille reader.  Many videos are providing transcripts, more and more, and that provides better access for deafblind people, blind people and low vision people and neurodiverse individuals because sometimes it is easier to read the full transcript.  Often the transcripts are added, providing additional information as visual descriptions.
One problem with transcripts, it is they're not integrated with the video.  So if the shares the video, the transcript often is lost because they're not tied to each other.
Another way to consume media is to listen to podcasts.  Podcasts, it is really a big challenge for deaf and hard of hearing people and deafblind people right now.  They're generally not accessible.
If a person can hear okay then they may be able to access it but they may need support from captions sometimes.  Right now the only option available is automated speech recognition, and that's an example on an iPhone, you can get ‑‑ on an Android phone you can get automated speech recognition, but quite often that recognition, it is full of errors.  The best way for podcasts to be accessible generally is to provide full well edited transcripts.  That provides more access in general for any one listening to a podcast, including individuals who are deafblind using it for braille readers, as well as people who have oral disabilities and can listen to only a part of the podcast.  Those are all of the examples.
Now let's talk through some of the challenges.
There are many different ways to access content.  That requires a lot of different formats.  Many software tools don't support all formats.  Both for content accreditations, as well as for consuming content, generally.  Publishers, they're not necessarily invested in producing those other contents the same way they are for blind people.  So often somebody needs to take responsibility for creating that access, which mean there is are barriers through copyright and digital rights management as well.
There's nothing comparable to the Marrakesh Treaty for these formats.  There's some promise of artificial intelligence to provide access, specifically through automated speech recognition, but I'll tell you right now, it is not a ready technology.
It sometimes works, but sometimes it doesn't and bad things can happen if ASR fails and I have an example of that.
This is a video of a cooking show, and the presenter is thanking the guest but it seems to be that AI misinterpreted it to say that God hates Muslims.  It is a horrible mistake.  That's not what was actually said.
The AI was not able to recognize that mistake.
You have to be careful when using that technology.
To wrap up, there are many issues and things not included in the Marrakesh Treaty as Rafael looked at in the study, how do we add all of the other disabilities into creating accessible content?  Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Christian, Rafael, of course, Monica, Aria, and Scott before.  I think we covered a large set of issues.
We have two questions.  We don't have a lot of time.  I'll start with the question through the box, both are for ABC and then a follow‑up question regarding Christian's presentation.
Monica, we have the first question, it comes from a good friend of ours, former ABC colleague, Nicolia, I understand he's based in Chile right now, he would like to say to us whether ABC has seen an increase in downloads of accessible books since the beginning of the pandemic?  That's the first question.
The other question, it comes from Camila, it would be good to know which country she's coming from, and she's asking what are the means of ABC to work with NGOs, so countries that have not signed yet the treaty to speed up the process to educate, training, with NGOs.  She's from Romania, a member of the treaty I guess. ‑‑ no.  Not yet.
Okay.  Monica, if you could tackle those two questions as quickly as you can. 
>> MONICA HALIL: Sure.  Of course.  Nick, nice to get your question.
In terms of your question about whether we saw an increase in the number of downloads, remember we're a library to library platform so, unfortunately, I cannot ‑‑ we kept steady, I can't say we saw an increase, we saw a big increase in 2019 before the pandemic, actually I have to say it slowed down a bit during the pandemic, during the actual close down, if we say March to June, that was slow down.  Many of the libraries actually closed. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-of16-internet-governance-with-and-for-the-citizens^^

>> MODERATOR: We have an hour to discuss the preliminary results with internet, it is not enough, of course.  But it is a preliminary round.  I welcome you, I'm working with Missions Publiques and a part of this project.  Welcome for being here today, many are here from our national partners, our strategic partner, from friends and families, thank you for being here with us today to this presentation.
We have a very nice line‑up of speakers today, I will present you shortly now, and then we'll have the capacity and the possibility to answer, to react.
First of all, Vint Cerf, hello, Vint Cerf, the Vice President of Google, thank you for being with us this morning on your side.  Also because it is especially early in the U.S. and you're quite busy with other projects.
We have Concettina Cassa, we know each other for three year, working with the Office of The Prime Minister in Italy, also Co‑Chair of the Best Practice Forum and Data and you are active as a team for the national dialogue in Italy of the citizens there.
Raqual Gatto, we know each other since a couple of year, you are now active in the Internet Society in Brazil, national partner for Brazil, together with another partner in the country.
We then have Simon Kreye, you are working with the German government, the office there, a stronger supporter of the process.  Thank you for being with us today.  Thank you for your support.
We have Livia Walpen, working nearby, you are engaged in the internet and thank you for being in that space and reacting with us.
We have Olga Kyryliuk, hello, a CEO and founder of the platform based in the Ukraine and you have been our partner and you're active at the regional internet governance forum, and thank you for being with us today.
Next, will be Erlingur Erlingsson, and hello, you are working at Facebook and global policy team and have been supporting us for over two year, we have been discussing a lot on this topic and this process and I'm really, really happy to have you here today.
Last but not least, Lynn St. Amour, hello, you are the Chair of our Advisory Board and you are an engineer with internet governance, you have the former Chair of IGF MAD and the difficult responsibility to say the closing words today of our hour.  Thank you very much for being there.  
The people we don't see necessarily, they're all of our national partners, thank you for being there, all of the participants and those that are here.
Why are we here today?  We here at Missions Publiques have a deep conviction we want to test, improve, institutionalize the internet governance with and for the citizens.  We imagine doing that as a process of deliberation.  We want to engage ordinary citizens and stakeholders into that discussion on the future of internet by giving them some tools and those tools, they're first of all occasions to come together, to discuss the future of internet, and also some balancing information to be able to make up their mind on this discussion and we want to have impact on policy.
So this is why we want to use that kind of format, that deliberate format.
The timing of the project, as a remind, we started to work on it in 2017, we have had some preliminary discussion in 2018 and 2019 and in 2020 we have been scaling the process in the frame of the COVID outbreaks so it has brought a lot of opportunities and a lot of challenges, but we're happy that in October we were able to deploy the deliberation in over 70 countries of the world, although some of them, they're still in preparation, we know some partner, they're going to have it in the middle of November.  We think about that.  Now we're going to present the first preliminary results and then we're going to the aim is 2025, that's the long‑term for us and there is more information coming out in 2025 at the next Information Society.
Some key figures about the process, so the stakeholder, the entities and the dialogue, it does involve participants in more than 80 countries and partners in all the countries and over 5,000 participants.
Now I would like to share with you feedback in the video of how it has been for the people, we have fresh feedback from the ground.  I will share that with you and we're going to have 5 minutes with the participants from all over the world.
>> (Video with captions). 
>> MODERATOR: These are some impressions from the ground.  I hope that you have gotten a good idea of what's happening there.
Let's dive into the discussion.  Before we do, this is a disclaim, these are preliminary results, mostly based on the qualitative data, that data, it is still to be evaluated and I would like to remind ourselves that these answers, they're the product of a discussion and information.  It is not an opinion poll, it is the answer that people give after they have been discussing the topic and after they have gotten some information on it.  In terms of participants, I would like to show you the diversity that we have had and we aimed at.  We aimed at having people from all walks of life for the citizens dialogue and we have reach that had in terms of diversity of age, diversity in terms of gender, balance and in terms of gender but also in terms of their occupation, having people from all sectors of society.
We're now going to go into the first topic, the question of data.  This is the question, the first question we have asked the citizens, the first topic we have addressed, it is today we're a society in which we produce data, with the produce data as person but also as a society.
For us, a key question concerning the future of internet, it is how should we handle that data that we produce as a society and as individuals.  I'm going to present you some reasons and ask the panelists to react to those questions and before that, I would like to give you an opportunity or so to join the discussion and to answer the question as citizens.  You can join us at slido.com #of16 or scan the code you're seeing on the screen or in the chat.  The link is in the chat.  You can also answer the question we asked the citizens, a key question we asked, if you think about the advantages and the drawbacks of the fact that we as a society collect and use more and more data, I would like your view on that and we can compare the citizens participating in the dialogue and how you are thinking, it is a way of having an interaction on the topic.  I see that answers are coming.
I'll now present some of the reasons.
For the citizens of the world, 50% of them see that it is equally an opportunity and a threat and 25% of them, they think that it is more an opportunity than a threat.  Globally, positive or neutral position, on data.
Also, if we ask them who should control the collection, access and the use of digital data, we have a strong support for persons of responsibility or the responsibility of the people, that people want to have the control and want to make the decision by themselves, including the decision to sell the data and also support for the right to access and to use the data.  Interestingly, we also have quite a lot of people that say that we should stop collecting data in the first place but not the majority of them.
We have asked the citizens after the discussion how they feel about data, they're answering for the majority that their understanding of data has improved.  This is clear effect of the discussion and the deliberate process as I mentioned before.
Also, if we ask them how they will behave after the dialogue, the kind of conclusion that they draw it, a huge majority, a majority of them said that it will act differently, they'll share less data, the majority, but also some of them, they would share more data and I'm happy to see reaction of our panelists on that point.    
As a remind, I see the Slido is open and people are using that to answer.  That's very good.
I would like to give the floor to Vint Cerf.  What is your reaction to those results?
>> VINT CERF: Thank you very much, Antoine.
I have to tell you, this idea to go and ask the world its opinion of the internet, it remind me a little bit of Sergey Brin and Brandon Page when still students at Stanford and said why don't we download the entire worldwide web and index it, and my first reaction to this is you must be out of your mind.  I had a similar reaction when Antoine said let's ask the world what they think about the internet.  It was not crazy, in fact, it sort of is a simplistic concept, you know, if you wonder what people are think, why don't you ask them.
That's exactly what Antoine and Missions Publiques has done with the internet effort.  I was asked specifically to respond on the data side.  I will start off by observing that transparency, it is a critical element here.
It is impossible to offer certain services without having some personal information.  If you want me to ship an item to you, I have to know where to ship it to.  If you need me to call you on the phone, send you a text mail to alert you to the arrival of something, I need to know what the mobile number is.  There are a set of things that are necessary even though we also think of them as being personal information, but of course the users should have the knowledge of what information is needed and they should be able to decide whether they're going to share it or not and so that's the first point, transparency and decision making, it is very important.
The second issue has to do with what happens to that information.  It might be necessary to supply a particular service, but it might also be used by the company that's offering the service for other purposes, and again transparency is very important here, information about what happens to that information, is it shared with anyone or not, if it is shared, for what purpose is it shared, with whom?  So once again, I think transparency, it is very important here.  It is probably not the case, however, that each of us wants to have direct and immediate control over every instance of sharing of our data.  Can you imagine, just for a moment, all of the various products and services that you use in an online environment, being interrupted on a continuous basis with the question, is it okay for me to send this information to that party?  We would probably go crazy.
We would need, if we want to have some kind of authorization mechanism, we probably need to establish frameworks that will allow us to express what our preferences are and have those frameworks be the drivers for what is done with the information that's accumulated in the course of business or in the course of interaction.
I would note, it is not just business that needs this kind of information, almost anything that you do on the internet ultimately requires some kind of information, for example, getting access to the internet, assuming it is not free, you may need to have an account.  The party that is providing you with access to the internet needs to know where to send the billing information, for example or may need to have ways of reaching you with your email or mobile number or something in case something goes wrong, in case there is a question.
The issue here is not whether data is needed in many instances, I think that the answer is, yes, it is.  The real question is what happens to it and are the users adequately informed so that they can make informed decisions about what to do.
Finally, I think that we're discovering that there is information which is accumulated and used but this is not necessarily reported.  You could see a trend in some places looking for regulatory constraint or auditing and reporting from companies, Google for example, we do a considerable amount of reporting about governments asking for information, for example, we provide statistical information about that.  With regard to privacy, we have a privacy dashboard that lets you control and remove information that's been accumulated.
These are the kinds of things I believe the polling, the discussion has revealed.
I wanted to make one other comment, if I might, and it is a point about what you have accomplished.  It is not just a question of getting information back from the users, which you have done, but this is an informing process, people are learning about how things work and what issues arise, what policies need to be debated so the tool you're using to get information back, it is also putting information out into the hands of the general public.  I think that is as valuable of a contribution as getting the information back.
I'll stop there, I'm sure that other also have some observations to make on this topic.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Vint.  Thank you for the complement on the work.
We're also really proud that we made it, also made it in this year, it was quite a challenge also.
I would like to give the floor to Concettina Cassa.  Your reaction?
>> CONCETTINA CASSA: Okay.  Thank you.
I want to give some information about myself.  What we have done in Italy, as you know, we are part of ‑‑ partners with Missions Publiques on this public, and we have discussed this on the 5th of October, I was a moderator to that path, related to data.  What we have had, we have particular interests from citizens, from participants on this theme, on the way that data is collected and shared from the social platform and also from artificial intelligence tools and other platforms.
What we noted, we had several comments on transparency and you are right, so there were several requests and comments asking for a more transparent process on how data is collected and used and also on asking for respecting Human Rights in using data, data from user.
Several participants also shared comments and thoughts on the need to have more literacy and education so that people can have more awareness about how the data are used.
This is not enough because even if there is education, the important part, it is the framework and the legislation, that it could not be related to local level, but should be more global, at least legislation should be handled at the regional level, so should go beyond the national ‑‑ the national borders.
Several comments were related to GPR, we're in Europe, so there was a need ‑‑ there was an ask for updating the GPR to include the perspective of the citizen, but also to include the new issues that are brought up from artificial intelligence.  There was also a lot of discussion about data because several participants said that there could be a kind of separation between data related to the digital identity intended as information that identifies a person and also in this kind of data, maybe it could be centralized and handled by the central agency but the people, they want to know the difference between this kind of data and the more sensitive data that's collected.  The second group of data, it should be owned by people, they should ‑‑ the ‑‑ some of these ‑‑ somebody said that ‑‑ they should never be collected ‑‑ there is some data that's so sensitive that should be kept in the hands of the users.  I don't want to take too much time, but I want to use this opportunity also to mention the Best Practice forum on the new technologies that I'm coordinator, as Antoine specified before, it is honoring the same kind of topics.  I think that the results that have been elected by Missions Publiques maybe could be put and shared with the Best Practice forum and maybe this could be more linked also with participation to the session of the new technology discussion that we'll have next week.
That's all.  Thank you for inviting me.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  U. thank you.  Indeed, I think there is an energy and a lot to learn from your work and to input in the discussion on data.  It was personally one of my breakthroughs in the process to understand that the balance between what's personal data and what is data as a society and that indeed we all have to learn that new state, that new stage of society working with data, handling data together and individually.  It was a pleasure for me, a learning process that I had.
I would like to give you a short feedback on the questions on the Slido.
If we see, people that have joined us, today we have also quite something similar as the citizens, what they said, that it is equal an opportunity and a threat, for me it reflects this need to understand better and to learn what is data and how to handle that.  We're not at the end of the discussion.
Thank you very much.
Vint, thank you very much, Concettina Cassa.
I would like now to go to the next session, which is on the digital public sphere.  That's the second topic discussed during the dialogue.  Why this question, it is because of course the traditional channels of information and the way citizens are making up their mind has dramatically changed in the course of the last ten years with the emergence and surge of social media.  We may all produce information and receive information, and it has a long list of consequences on how we discuss and how we together shape our opinions and discuss online, but also offline.  The question for us, what does it take to have a healthy discussion online and what is it with one of the main challenges around that, which is disinformation and that's the topic we wanted to address with citizens.
On that specifically, I also again would like to ask you a question, where do you draw the line on free expression, this is a question we asked to the citizens.  I see that some of you already have started to answer.  Let's look at what citizens and participants said around the world.
What they said, it is that they see a necessity to regulate, to at least to control, to act on freedom of speech and the answer that comes first, speech should be controlled so that people are not harmed.  So the goal being for people to be protected and it is the same in public and private spaces.  That's the majority of opinion and views of the citizens.  What they don't like, it is that freedom of speech should be controlled completely, it is 10% of the participants, there is no restriction at all on freedom of speech is another.
We asked about the level of exposure to disinformation and what they feel, how they feel exposed or not, how they feel, the people in the country exposed or not, and the people around the world.  What we see, it is that they have the feeling that they're much less exposed than the people in the country and that people elsewhere in the world will be more concerned and exposed to the disinformation.  There is a relative subjective view to the exposure of the disinformation.  We asked after the discussion the same for data, if they will change their behavior, if they will act differently.
When you say this is a learning process for the participants, indeed, in that case also, almost 80% of the participants told that yes, they would be more cautious on what they see, read and observe online.  That was the more individual part of the views of the citizens.  We also asked them as group, you see people seated at table, and we asked each of the tables, all over the world, virtual table, to work on assessing different tools for fighting disinformation.  We asked them to assess the role of different actor, so we asked them what should public bodies do, what should private sector do, what should Civil Society at large do and we proposed them categories of actions to fight against disinformation going from education and employment up to law and legal instruments, going through making sure that content is of high quality.  Citizens had the time to work on the different tools and the different type of actors and to assess the emergency and usefulness of different tools.  What we have, it is that people saw that the number one priority both in terms of emergencies, it is important to act now, and it is going to have a good ‑‑ a big impact, it is education.  That's true for them for public bodies and public bodies, there is an emergency for them to act on education and it is also something that will have impact.
The same goes for Civil Society, so huge support and where they see that Civil Society should invest in education and there was a strong support for actors of the private sector that should also put a priority on education both in terms of impact, because it will have an impact and because it is urgent to do so.
We marginalize, we ask who should take the lead, who should be leading the efforts against disinformation, what we see, it is that there is very high support for multistakeholder process, where all actors in a way are included and the one above no, one, meaning that the less support, it is to let it go and to have no efforts to look at this disinformation, we see citizens are really approving, supporting common action by all actors to fight disinformation but at the same time, we see that different actors should have also different priorities.
Raquel, I would like to have your view, your feedback on this. 
>> RAQUEL GATTO:  Thank you.  I was so lucky around ‑‑ to be around the project with you over the three years in different capacities.  I should say that this year, being on the ground, being closer to the discussions was really, really rewarding and I could see the impact it does with the citizens while they're asked as Vint said about how they feel about the internet.
Some of the reflections, first, before I forget, I need to thank also the local team, the wonderful team there in Brazil, all of the facilitators that worked on the ground.  I should take this moment just to give them a big clap, they did an amazing job!.
As well as many of the national partners I guess here, I'm also feeling the information, the spice, the flavors for the local results.
As Vint was say, a thing when asked about how Brazilians feel about the internet, they were much more hopeful.  Over 55 replied that they see the internet as an opportunity ‑‑ more often an opportunity than a threat followed by then equally being an opportunity and a threat.
These a piece of information that's probably a cultural difference also, but it is an experience and the perception that they're having.  My reflections on the digital public sphere, they're really ‑‑ I'm going to keep on four quick topic, I know we're short on time.
The first one, it was when you were showing the results at the global level regarding the exposure and how the individuals felt about themselves being exposed to the disinformation and how they perceived others.  It is interesting to see that people seem to be okay in terms of their moderately exposed to the disinformation but then when they look for others in their country, it is closer to their knowledge, they seem to look at it is bad, they're highly exposed to the impact of the disinformation.  When asked further, how do you feel about other country, how do you perceive other countries, there seems to be the effect of the neighbor's garden is greener and it might not be the pulse, that is interesting to see this perception.  Again, at the end, after the discussions about 70%, they did reply that they were willing to change their behavior regarding the disinformation.  That's an impact that should not be apart from the interesting interpretation, that's the impact that we saw the theory of change, the change of behavior that they're willing to commit to.
The second ‑‑ this turns to the second comment regarding the results which is a very interesting one.
In the discussions about what is a healthy digital public sphere environment, of course, education, the legal tools came out highly in the discussions, and there was another one that came, it was access, universal access, meaningful access, inclusion, ways that ‑‑ why is that, and the perception, I'll give examples from the participants that to join online we had to do because of the pandemic, as many other, the fully online version of this discussion, and some of them did have to travel some hours to get to a point, to a church, to a telecommunication center where ‑‑ to a public center where they could get connected.  Some of them even had to travel from boats and the connection, it was ‑‑ from ‑‑ in their hometown, it is non‑existent, they have to take to another city, another village to get through.
When talking about fact check, critical thinking around disinformation, it is interesting to see if they have a few hours to get connected, even minutes, if they have a very short amount of time to get connected, it is a different way to deal with the data that they receive than those that are fully 100%, 24 hours connected.  Then you can take the time, I can do the fact checking, I can ‑‑ because I'm connected.  Those who are not, they have a different way to manage this data.  That's why access and inclusion as an example came up also in terms of how to build this healthy environment.
The third one, it is around the education, and Antoine, if I'm doing the time ‑‑
>> MODERATOR: Just one, and then we can go on.
>> RAQUEL GATTO:  Education, that came already, you mentioned that.  Education, it is a high priority for all of the actors for Civil Society, for the public sector, for the private sector to use the tools to get ‑‑ to fight better disinformation.
The only thing I think it is interesting to show in the preliminary results, it is that the impact changes.  While they all agree that education is the way to go in terms of priorities, they don't feel ‑‑ at least in the results ‑‑ the response, they were ‑‑ they are a bit skeptical, they were not sure that the impact on the private sector would be done.  This is not about companies are evil, all of those things, but this is about the perception that they have in terms of influencing and the power balance to influence the decisions and really how this would happen.  It is a bit on the trust also.
The last one, regarding the law.  I should mention this, it is not only the legal appetite for having a law, but it is also how this law is going to turn into reality.  It is how we'll have the implementation around it, the follow‑up processes around it, and Brazil, as you all know, there are examples, we have for example the multistakeholder advisory board, that's since 1995, we have had the principles around the internet used in 2009, we had the internet in 2014.  Right now, the reality, it is that we're also fighting ‑‑ or not fight, we're debate, right, in terms of where is our regulatory response also to this disinformation and fake news.
This has been a very divided environment while you do have the concerns for the society as a whole and you also have the technical concerns behind it and this all came up in terms of this is not only the law, but it is about the processes that we build.  I hope ‑‑ sorry for taking more of your time.  Thank you very much.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.
I would like to jump to Simon.
>> SIMON KREYE:  Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on this distinguished panel.
Congratulations for conducting this online dialogue, the citizens dialogue, the biggest we know about so far and these challenging circumstances.  I have to say, joining this journey with you over the last I believe year or so was really exciting and very inspiring.  The reason why the German foreign office joined this endeavor, I have to say, it is exactly to look at the digital public sphere and the online disinformation.  That's something that obviously we experienced that every day and we wanted to get a clearer picture of what citizens think about it and what possible solutions they would favor.  I should add that we have made very explicit decisions that we as a foreign ministry wanted to join and maybe not another ministry within government because we understood and still understand disinformation as a phenomenon that happens also in the international arena and can be part of the hybrid net and for interference.  I believe some results we have just seen, they speak to this understanding quite a lot, when we look at this charge where people have been asked whether they personally or maybe their country, other countries, they're mostly effected by disinformation and many, it is mainly the country, another country, and we understand it as a confirmation that the disinformation, it happens between border, maybe with misaligned misintent from other actors.  We know that this happens inside of borders, we have a lot of examples in our minds, and this is, again, then sort of confirmed by the answer that people give or gave when asked what tool can best be used to tackle this disinformation and they answer education is actually the primary tool.  I wouldn't have expected that answer from a personal point of view, I thought maybe it was too ‑‑ too soft of an answer to disinformation, I see awareness raising, media literacy activities, it has a huge impact.  That's maybe why I say, this why we're implementing such activities in third countries and hopefully quite successfully.
I also saw in the results, people see a very strong role in Civil Society to act against disinformation, and I assume it means things like fact checking, journalism trainings, so on.  I also saw a very strong role for regional bodies and government and this obviously is a call for legislation for regulation, and I would just like to very briefly mention that as a regional body, E.U. is preparing to document in that regard, the European Action Plan on Democracy, which is about to come out I believe on the 2nd of December which will contain elements of dealing with disinformation and the other one is the so‑called Digitalizing Services Act, I believe that's a longer shot and the first draft will come out towards the end of this year and the beginning of next year.
Together with E.U., Missions Publiques we'll use the results, especially obviously from Europe, but also from across the world in order to inform the debate at the European level and to try to make sure that the results will be taken onboard.
Thank you again.
Having seen this last figure, that 80% will be more cautious on using online information, it gives me a lot of optimism.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Simon.
Thank you for your support and what you said.  It is all good in discussions when you say it like that.
We're now going to go to the question of governance.  Before that, I would like to share with you the answers you have given to the question on freedom of speech.  You seem to have the kind of same priority that ‑‑ yes.  No.  You have a different view.
For you, the context, it is more important.
Citizens, they had more priority on harm and harass and rules should be the same.    The numbers are not the same, of course, but it is a way to have this interaction.
Governance, a reminder, we have been running together with our partners a stakeholder dialogue, not citizens, but stakeholders involved in internet governance and we have asked for their feedback to assess three models of governance for the future of internet.  This was part of the work done by Germany and the United Arab Emirates providing information to the United Nations Secretary‑General on the future of digital cooperation, it is a discussion going over two years.  A piece was to ask for feedback from stakeholders on how they see the future of internet governance, what architecture it should have.  We ran a dialogue in over 80 countries in the world online.  I would like to play again with you, and the game, it is find the differences.  
What you see on the screen, it is on one side and you have the titles of the recommendations of the stakeholder dialogue that we have been running since June and on the other side, you have the titles of the options paper that's been submitted to the United Nations and I would like to see if you can find which one is which so I give you a few seconds.  You can bet left or right for the stakeholder's dialogue report or the options paper.  I'll give you the answer.
On the left, it is the title of the options paper and on the right, it is the recommendations of the stakeholder dialogue report.
What I want to say with that, it is we're convinced that constructive, deliberate informed discussion, it can be very valuable for a governance process at a global level and particularly for the future of the internet.  That's one of the proofs of that.
With that, I would like to go back to the citizens dialogue and ask you the last question, the last question, it is should citizens' dialogues become part of the normal way of making decisions on the future of the internet.  We can see what citizens have answered.  Citizens have said ‑‑ 87% say yes, that's it's the normal way.  What it tells us on governance, it is more than that.
What they say, it is the strong support for multistakeholder process.  If we ask them following institutions, organizations, they should be part of the discussion and decision making process in the future of the internet, you see overwhelming support for multistakeholder process, all actors should be involved.
What you also see, it is that when we asked them for which kind of topics, challenges, which kind of level of decision making should be implemented we say there is a strong support for a global discussion on artificial intelligence on internet governance itself, on access, so access, it is for citizens for global discussion, on environment, and a bit less on disinformation and data, we have talked about that.  For citizens, it is also something that has to do with more local, regional, national developments.
What are your thoughts on that, Livia.
>> LIVIA WALPEN:  Thank you.
I congratulate you and the whole team at Missions Publiques for the very important and successful initiative that you did.
From the Swiss government side actually, we really have supported the initiative from the very beginning.  I think it was back in 2017.  We are convinced that the discussions on the future of digital governance can and actually must be enriched with the informed opinions of ordinary citizens from all over the world, particularly also from the Global South.  It is our strong belief that decisions are better when they're taken through a sound process of participation.  I think also that capacity is an important precondition for meaningful participation and particularly also when it comes to the world of complex, abstract issue of digital governance, and with this initiative, Missions Publiques made a valuable contribution in this regard.  Also I'm very satisfied with the results of both the global stakeholders dialogue in June as well as the citizens dialogue in October, particularly with regard to the issue of digital governance.  I think, just to outline the results, they clearly confirm the multistakeholder approach towards digital governance so the citizens that you ask, they have clearly stated that all actors, government, international organizations, the private sector, academia, the technical community, Civil Society, and also ordinary citizens should be included in the decision making process in their respective roles and I very much agree on this, of course.  Moreover, the results of the dialogue also say that cooperation coordination needs to be improved as the current digital policy landscape is complex and sometimes lacks efficiency and I think it is interesting, this really is also very much in line with what the UN Secretary‑General says in his roadmap on digital cooperation and particularly with regards to strengthening the IGF towards an IGF Plus and from the Swiss side, we fully support the intentions to involve the IGF into a more inclusive, responsive, effective instrument of global digital cooperation.  I guess in a world that's becoming more and more complex we really urgently need inclusive participatory and innovative models of governance that's ready for the challenges we have faced in the 21st Century.  I'm convinced that deliberate citizen dialogues as Missions Publiques, as it just conducted, they can and should be part of such new forms of global governance and particularly also with regards to the internet which is a global common good and against this background, I can say that we fully support also further establishing and institutionalizing citizens dialogues, maybe also as a permanent feature of the IGF framework and probably we cannot conduct a worldwide citizen dialogue every year, as you know, but perhaps we can start with having representative selections of citizens from different countries in all regions of the world participating in annual dialogues to express their views on the main thematic tracks of the annual IGF as well.  I mean, this would definitely help make the IGF more inclusive and this is also very much in the spirit of the IGF Plus.
Yeah.  I'm looking forward to the future developments in this regard and from the Swiss side, of course, we stand ready to further support digital governance with and for the citizens.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Thank you.  Thank you for your support.
Before I give the word over, we have 4 minutes on the clock.  I don't know when we'll be cut.  We can be aware of that, that maybe ‑‑ I don't know, from the secretariate, when you cut the session, if you cut the session, but I hope not so directly!.
>> ERLINGUR ERLINGSSON: I'll try to be as brief as possible.
I quickly want to echo what others have said, congratulating you on the dialogues and saying at least we are supporters of this so far.
The multistakeholder approach, it is at the heart of internet governance and it is essential to realize the benefits of the internet and those benefits are not con trained to any one particular area.  This conversation, that you organized, it is very important contribution to that.
Looking at the takeaways, the one that jumps out for me, it is this emphasis on multistakeholderism, one of the good isms, if I can say that, that tells us that the diverse group of stakeholders should have a voice when it comes to making decisions on the future of internet governance.  Also noted, the emphasis on a role for the research community and academia, not being a statistician, that tells me that the citizens want to inform transparent, evidence based decisions on internet governance and it is an approach we would agree with, pointing the way towards a collaborative approach to policymaking where many different stakeholders provide evidence and information that helps governments or regulators to have regulation and making choices for the internet.
I think it is also understandable and welcomed that the outcomes tell us the role of the private sector is to be a part of the considerations, but not to lead it or to solely decide the rules of the road.  That's appropriate and aligns well our fundamental approach, supporting a consistent multistakeholder approach to developing the future of the internet.
We have cautioned in the past the benefits of the open internet and have argued in favor of collaborative approaches to regulation.  This is why we're keen to work with governments and to engage with multistakeholder dialogues like here at the IGF.
Taking a slightly wider view, I think it is also important to recognize that we're in a moment when the future of the global internet as we know it, it is far from assured.  There is a rise of what some termed a Chinese model, and that's segregated from the rest of the internet, subject to surveillance, limits on privacy, this definitely presents significant risk to the open, accessible internet that we have gotten used to and have enjoyed in the past.
We see other countries, Russia, Turkey for example making similar moves to build digital walls around citizens and expert data sovereignty.
The traditional approach is to internet governance, it has been rooted in values like free expression, privacy, transparency, the Rights of individuals and as we move forward, to decide on the rules of the internet, it is important that these values are protected.
I think I'll close by saying that decisions that are made now about the future of the internet, including internet governance, will have a great impact on society and our economies for a long time.  We hope that multistakeholder is at the heart of that conversation.  Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Thank you for your feedback.
>> OLGA KYRYLIUK: Thank you for inviting me to be here and thank you for the opportunity for my organization to act as a national partner in Ukraine for the global citizens dialogue.   
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-of31-safe-digital-spaces-a-dialogue-on-countering-cyberviolence^^

 
>> TECH SUPPORT: I just wanted to welcome everyone.  Thank you for joining, welcome to this webinar.  This is organized by U.N. Women.  All participants and panelists are reminded this webinar will be recorded under the IGF code of conduct and the rules and regulations for the participants.  If you want to speak you possibly can.  One of the panelists will allow you to speak, yeah.  Alex, are you trying to say something?  You're a little bit low.  Alex is my colleague from the IGF, yeah. 
[ Inaudible ]
>> TECH SUPPORT: I guess it's time to begin now.  The organizers can take the lead. 
>> EVE KRAICER:  Welcome to our open forum, Safe Digital Spaces. A Dialogue on Countering Cyberviolence.  My name is Eve Kraicer, I'm the gender policy officer at the Web Foundation, so I've had the opportunity to coorganize this session with Nandini and Helene.
First I really want to quickly share a little bit about the Web Foundation's work around online gender based violence and tell you more about why we're so thrilled to be convening this discussion today.  The Web Foundation has three approaches to our work on online violence.  The first approach is research. Our research team conducts a broad range of research around women's access and experiences online.  A lot of this is led by Chenai, and we have a report coming out later next year that will look on online gender based violence and we recently released our report which covers issues of access, privacy and data rights.
Our second approach is amplifying the work of grassroots women's and digital works initiative.  The network aims to drive women's empowerment.  It comprises of women's rights and digital rights groups from across 14 countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, and they're working to bridge the gender gap on technology, data and policy making.
Our third approach cocreates product and policy solutions.  We're running a series of consultations that are bringing together tech companies and CSOs to hold dialogues around countering online gender-based violence.  The Web Foundation will host several design workshops to provide space for civil society organizations to cocreate solutions using a human centered approach.  I'm about to put a link in the chat, which will give you a document you can follow along from for the rest of the session.  On that document you'll find links with you can find more about the foundation as well as with our other co‑organizers. With that, I'm going to pass it over to my co‑organizer, Nandini.
>> NANDINI CHAMI: Hi.  Thank you, Eve.  Hello, everyone, and it's like, nice to see you all today, coming here to discuss this very urgent and burning issue.  An issue that is as bothersome and immediate as the U.S. election I would say.
Now to begin with, IT for Change is an organization that works on research and policy advocacy at the intersections of technology, social justice, and gender equality.  And we have been working with the Web Foundation's Women's Rights Online Network for a long time.  We've also been working with U.N. Women for quite some time.  It's a pleasure to co‑organize this with the Web Foundation and U.N. Women.
I would like to take a couple of minutes to just like, you know, frame the reason why we wanted to have this conversation.  So let's just start with, like, today's context.  In the context of election day, it's just very important to remember just about a month ago on October 2, Donald Trump contracted COVID‑19.  We all remember that, right?  And within 24 hours of this, Twitter had announced or rather reminded everybody that it would deplatform tweets that wish or hope for death, seriously bodily harm, or fatal disease against anyone.  Of course, like wishing bodily harm or death against anyone is problematic and it is good that Twitter iterated this policy in that context.
At the same time a question arose in many people's minds, especially feminist organizations like us working in the Global South and like most of us here, right.  So there are numerous and billions of times when women, people of color, and nonbinary people face rape and death threats and bodily harm on social media platforms every day.  At that point we know how we have to run a lot of posts to get access to justice, right?
Why is it that only in certain moments platform accountability is talked about?  This is a question that bothers us, like, time and again.  And at the same time, when you look at like, what states are doing, all is not well either.  In the country I come from, India, maybe have you heard of a state that is known to be very progressive and is famed for this gender and development model. At the same time, it's very highly gender conservative.  This month, it announced it would pass an ordinance, which is not a law, but it will have a binding effect like a law, that to deal with what it calls cyberbullying it would make it an offense ‑‑ which means if whether or not a person is complaining, if they find that they threaten harm or they insult your reputation, that person can be picked up and, you know, put in jail for cyberbullying.  We all know where this goes because we have seen these instances time and time again.
Every time we have the conversation on cyberviolence, we keep getting stuck about, you know, platform accountability and the difficulties.  And I'm also cognizant and respectful of the fact that when we talk about social media governance, the sheer volume of content and the amount of content social media companies have to process, there is a very real challenge there because of the public sphere.  They end up usually going about trying to solve that.  When you look at national laws and nation states, how do you talk about, you know, free speech and ensuring freedom from harm for women without falling into the trap of state censorship?
So I would like to really urge us all to be in these reflections to think that maybe it's time for us to think of a new global constitutionalism for social media that we're able to come outside just self‑governance of platforms, which also has its own limitations. Because one is trying to interpret certain standards and when those interpretations will be challenged and completely relying on a national, state level response because as feminists, we always know that states uphold the gender social contract and it is not always ‑‑ and from the experience of our feminist foremothers, it's time to think in the data age what would it mean to have women's rights reclaimed again and how do you address that and reground that in the context of reclaiming the cyber sphere and abolishing sexism and misogynism online.  I hope to learn from your experiences today, I'm sure as everyone on the table.  I look forward to an extremely insightful conversation.  Thank you so much. 
>> EVE KRAICER: Thank you, Nandini.  Helene?
>> HELENE MOLINIER: My first words are going to be words of thanks for championing this.  I think I've got a few words of a building up what Nandini has just said.  Looking backwards, looking 25 year ago, we were at the first meeting in Beijing, and at that time we had 50,000 people in Beijing.  I don't think we'll ever have that many people I think.
Hereupon we were making commitments on gender equality.  And at that time the internet was almost absent from the discussions.  There was no social media.  Google hadn't been created.  You fast forward to today, and now we are in a space where we have the U.N. Secretary General who is actually saying that technology and innovations are one of the five priorities for gender equality.  And if we achieve results in this area, we're going to be transforming the world.
So today our societies are shaped by technology and the internet is shaping gender relations across the world.  Much more than we think.  And at that time, in Beijing, we thought the internet would give the opportunity to every woman and girl to explore new forms of self, have more autonomy.  When they use the internet, it's enforcing the sex force stereotypes.  And we see that happening all over the planet.  It's a common phenomenon.
So I joined ‑‑ it's the responsibility of everyone, government, businesses, civil society.  And this is why we want to champion stakeholder initiatives to forge new partnerships on these issues.  Firstly, it's one that many of you know, it's the Secretary General digital cooperation road map.  And it's really a call for qualitative action to ensure that digital inclusion is a reality for all and special for the most vulnerable.
And the second one is the generation equality forum that will take place next year in Mexico and Paris.  The objective is to address the gender digital divide, but also to increase the safety of digital spaces.  And we believe that these two new partnerships and new gathering will be the occasion to discuss how we can change trends, how we can redesign our society, and how we can chart an agenda for concrete action.  I look forward to our discussion today and thank you all for being here. 
>> EVE KRAICER: Thank you for both framing and the introductions of the topic.  I'm going to turn it over to my colleague, Chenai Chair, and will be the moderator for the panel.  Chenai?
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Eve.  To start off, I just want to say to you, Helene and Nandini, for organizing this panel, a very needed conversation.  Welcome to everyone who is on the call.  If you have any questions, we'll save them till the end and you can post them on the chat as we move on and we'll be monitoring the chat.
I am joined by Bhavna Jha, who is a senior research associate, Cindy Southworth from Facebook, Helene  Milinier from U.N. Women, Marwa Azelmat, policy coordinator, and Mariana Valente, internet lab director.  I'm very excited to have these amazing panelists.
To start off with, I'll start with Bhavna.  And as you introduce yourselves and tell us a little bit more about your work, I would like for you to respond to this question.  In what ways can feminist framings, for example, help us understand why the online space is unsafe and how can these framings be used in developing policy and regulation?  Over to you, Bhavna.
>> BHAVNA JHA: Thank you, Chenai.  Hi, everybody.  I'm Bhavna, I'm a lawyer and a researcher at IT for Change.  I look at the intersection of technology, law policy and gender.  And I'll just dive straight into this really tough provoking question that you presented before me.  It’s very close to the work we've been trying to move closer to at IT for Change more recently.
So I'll step back a little bit, not too far back, but six months ago in May 2020, during lockdowns.  We did some Google trends analysis and there was an incident in India where an Instagram group found itself in hot waters for objectifying women's bodies.  We saw a 5,000% increase in the search for feminist and feminazi.  It was apparently that misogyny, while always lurking in online spaces, shows itself in amplifying anti feminists.
Platform intermediaries, what are effectively human rights, and the corresponding absence of any liability of them when user reported sexist hate and violence is not taken down.  Amidst this censorship of women's voices, this is exacerbated by the strange fact that in India there are many laws that are against sexual harassment that are applicable to acts that would broadly cover what's happening in cyberspaces.  But they're defiant as ‑‑ in public spaces.  And it suggests that misogyny is manifested in digital private spaces.  And the courts seem to be unable how to protect the victims of harassment in such digital spaces.
A feminist framework firstly recognizes that it is not enough to respond to violence towards a woman at an individual level but sees it as a structural problem.  Secondly, it informed policy initiatives that are not only the distinction meaningless, they're harmful and existing legal interpretations of public place no longer hold true in a digital world.
A feminist review of laws must open its eyes to the reality of spatial fluidity and mutability in a post digital society.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Bhavna.  I was nodding my head with everything you're talking about in terms of how we look at these spaces from a feminist lens and what it means in terms of the trends when you take on that feminist perspective.  So actually, we'll move on to Cindy, who is representing a platform, a head of women's safety from Facebook and also reflecting on these remarks.
Cindy, my question to you, can you give an example of a time when a CSO, civil society organizations and Facebook have actually worked together specifically to address a political aspect of online gender based violence?  What was the process and outputs and how can Facebook do this more widely with civil society organizations mainly from the Global South?  Coming from that collaborative perspective of how do we work together in these platforms.
>> CINDY SOUTHWORTH: Thank you so much, Chenai.  I am just really honored to join you all today.  I joined Facebook in July of this ‑‑ 2020 as their new head of women's safety.  Prior to that I worked in the gender-based violence nonprofit for the past 27 years.
I'll start off by sharing an example that I know intimately well because it was with me in my previous life as an NGO, and then I'll talk about more recent work we've been doing in all parts of the globe.  At the National Network to End Domestic Violence I founded the Safety Net Project, and one of the things that we brought to Facebook when we joined their safety advisory board we talked about how if technology is meant to be this great equalizer and opportunity for education and empowerment and economic opportunity, survivors of gender based violence, specifically domestic violence needed to be able to safely use Facebook and other technology platforms.  We know that abusers are using spyware to monitor, surveil, to control using it to harass, threaten, et cetera.
So back in 2014, we put together a very lengthy guide on a survivor's sort of guide to using Facebook.  And we walked through all the different privacy settings and things they might want to do -- because there's sort of a myth out there that if you're being harassed or threatened just block the person.  That doesn't work if you need to keep an eye on your ex to see if they're escalating.  It's a way to assess your own safety risks if you can see what your ex is saying about you.  Blocking is not always the best feature for a victim of domestic violence.
We put together this comprehensive guide.  It was not only translated into other languages but we ‑‑ Facebook, I have to figure out which we I am today.  In my past life I was we, the nonprofit, and now ‑‑ so Facebook worked with many CSOs and NGOs around the world to adapt the women's safety content to contextualize it to make sure it was culturally relevant.  Even though the features Facebook offers was the same, wanting to make sure the women's safety content was adopted in Finland and India and all parts of the world to make sure it was relevant.
That's one example.  Fast forward to a more recent example, same concept, we partnered ‑‑ Facebook partnered with NGO in Palestine and they put together a cool video you can see on the Facebook safety center.  They walk through all the different ways for women to be able to use Facebook's features and to know how to report if there is harassment, if they do experience hate, if they bump into impersonating accounts and it's under Facebook.com/safetyresources.  If you change your country to Palestine, it's in Arabic, but it's easy to understand.  They're walking women through how to use this tool while we know misogyny offline and online is still something that women face worldwide. So I could go on and on, but I want to make sure there's time for all of the presenters to speak and I'll save some of my other comments for Q&A time.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Cindy.  I understand the navigating between who is we.  It's really insightful.  I'm going to piggyback that question and ask Marwa this question.  In your work as a policy advocacy coordinator with one of the biggest organizing society organizations, APC, in your work with diverse stakeholders, what are some of the examples or strategies you've seen emerge from civil society in engaging towards ensuring women's safety online? 
>> MARWA AZELMAT: Thank you, Chenai.  I'm also very honored to be here today with this all women panel.  Yeah, I mean, just a bit of background to everyone.  Take Back the Tech is a campaign that takes back ownership and dismantle online gender-based violence.  At Take Back the Tech we strongly believe that technology should be reclaimed for pleasure, consent, to counter the online harm and that kill‑joy conversation that targets those who perceive women as victims of their virtual experiences while normalizing with the way technology has always been designed, governed and deployed.
I guess something we've realized throughout all these years at Take Back the Tech, it was really a breakthrough for us, is that cyberviolence and cyberviolence campaigns, specifically against women, they have a common strategy.  They would often deploy personal attacks with political ties.  So you would find the issue of violence online is mostly a threat against freedom of expression, that bodily expression, that identity expression, that sexual expression. So when highly emotive and value laden content is being deployed against women and people of diverse genders and sexualities and their mind, their right to expression online, I guess we would ‑‑ we're entering that phase where we're talking more about how to counter that speech online more than how to counter violence.
Because at the end, violence is more weaponized to target that freedom of expression.  And we've seen that specifically throughout the Arab uprising where civil society used the online space to create feminist networks and organize both offline and online to resist the oppression and demand gender equality across all spheres of society.
For instance, in Tunisia, where they ‑‑ the civil society has hosted and emancipated cyber activism and tried in online communities, it was due to its supposedly progressive status of gender equality.  And so we've seen how they've been influencing the ways women reverberated feminist discourses.  Sometimes keeping a low profile, other times publicly calling out harassments and violence, exercised by anti‑gender movements, members to silence feminist dissents.  You have found they blocked, tweeted their experiences, spanning digital platforms with multiple identities, languages and cultural affiliations and articulating the revolutionary messages around feminism, conservatism, and that was truly ‑‑ yeah, that was truly revolutionary to witness.
And another milestone in civil society was in Sudan and South Sudan.  We've witnessed how the civil society emerged and organized really well given the long‑standing misogyny in the country's history.  And so specifically women's led civil societies, they enter into significant online mobilization, admitting everyone regardless of their political affiliations.  I guess right now and ‑‑ it's very important to talk about the level and the layers of online behavior and how we can really ‑‑ and how we can really position cyberviolence within the context of freedom of expression, freedom of mobilization, and freedom of association so that we would not only tackle violence, but also as a weapon against how other vulnerable communities try to speak their mind basically.  Over to you, Chenai.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  Those two examples that you mentioned are quite reflective of the current hashtag approaches that are happening right now and how feminists are really organizing within their spaces, but also in the light of like, the misogyny that are in these countries.  
Moving over to Mariana.  My question to you is how do we actually build evidence around online safety issues that allows for those who experience ‑‑ actually experience these issues to also shape the policy language and the research that's done?  Because one of the most effective ways when speaking to policy makers is the big question comes back is what's the evidence?  How do we know what we know?
>> MARIANA VALENTE: Thanks, Chenai.  I thank you all for the invitation.  It's a pleasure to be here among you.  I want to start answering this by providing an example of violence that's not exactly cyberviolence.
I wanted to tell you a bit about the research we did on the use of ICT by domestic workers.  With 30 domestic workers we developed questions for a quantitative survey and then we gathered again to analyze the result.  30% of the domestic workers were women in Brazil used the internet to find or publicize their work.  70% of them felt unsafe to do so.  One good thing, this has to be with capacities in literacy.  This group of women told us it was not safe to find work online because they all had experiences either personal or of people they knew of people who were harassed in their workplace or were not paid.  The violence they experienced conditioned their use of the internet.
If we were not developing this participatory research, we would probably have reached different conclusions.  I'm using that example just to point out three things, which I think are central to producing evidence on cyberviolence against women and being able to effectively communicate that and using that for concrete results for women's lives.
The first of them is that we really need to take into account the multiplicity of the experiences of women.  And that encompasses not only the intersectionality as a methodology, but in this context of the digital environment, I think it's really essential to highlight that this means that what intersects is different from place to place.  Right?  And I'm glad that my colleague, Marwa, was bringing examples from different parts of the world before.  Because I think it's never enough to emphasize this.
The second thing is most disciplinarity.  I think it can sound obvious, but it's not obvious when we're developing research in this landscape that knowledge from other areas rather than internet policy is really essential for the work that we're doing.  And we should be building bridges and being more transversal in our research.  For example, studies have a lot to add to discussions on hate speech against women online.  For instance ‑‑ and if we're only drawing from research and references from the internet policy space, I don't think we're going to be able to really shape the policy environment because we need those bridges to bring those messages more effectively and to really understand the whole landscape.
And the third one is that methods must be participatory and inclusive.  Otherwise ‑‑ I wanted to show by the example I brought ‑‑ we can bring assumptions into the table which add little to women's concrete lives.  And we are going to have results which are less powerful in terms of convening for policy.  I would have a lot more to say, but this is just a start.  I'm looking forward to our discussion.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Mariana.  I think those are really key ‑‑ a key illustration of that offline/online, it's not a binary but it's a continuous experience.
So then I'll move on to our last panelist as we get ready for questions, please get ready to ask questions.  Helene,  touching on that, like, experience that Mariana has talked about, my question to you is that it's been 25 years since the Beijing declaration. The online space has evolved in that period, but how can we use this declaration and others to advocate for safe spaces online as well as hold governments accountable to put the necessary regulations in place.
>> HELENE MOLINIER: Thank you, Chenai.  Even though the context has obviously changed a lot since Beijing, the principles that were formulated at the time apply offline and online.  The declaration says that human rights and women's rights should be protected.  And it applies whether you're working down the street or you're on the internet.  Some of the participants put very interesting comments in the chat section about the continuum of violence online and offline.  It's not two separate things, it's the same thing.
And I think the major shift since Beijing and what we'll see with the generation equality forum next year is that it's not going to be only about government.  We need to hold everyone accountable and everyone has a role to play.  We need a strong civil society.  We need voices that address the challenges face women online.  We need to be vocal on how women are being pushed back in online spaces especially in developing countries.  We need to use the forum as an open dialogue with social media companies.  Just like the one we're having today.
But really to bring to the table the companies that are the most impacted by this and make sure that they are addressing online gender-based balance and priority.  Social media companies have ordered that we need to better understand what triggers online attack.  Whether it's on women, but also on young girls and adolescents, and so they have to use the data to figure out how to better protect them.
I mean, obviously, it would be a space where we want government and law enforcement to get better at.  Where we need to see concrete actions, to see them prevent and finish ‑‑ rights and online activity.  And, obviously, it requires regulation and accountability.  But I think overall what we need to call for is a check and balances for all behaviors.  Whether we're talking about companies, governments, or just individual putting an unsafe comment online.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Helene.  It's true, like, we have to hold everyone accountable, not just governments, this requires everyone to actively engage on it so I'm going to switch my view.  Are there any questions?  I do not want to become an extra panelist, but if there are any questions I can actually ‑‑ yep, so there are some that are coming up right now.
We have a question from Ellen Walker, Ellen would you be okay with asking your question live?  Eve or Nandini can adjust the mic for you to ask your question.  Eve, are we okay on that?
>> EVE KRAICER: Ellen, you should be okay to talk now.
>> AUDIENCE: Thank you for organizing this, it's been really informative.  It's such an important topic today.  I think more than anything else, as it becomes more and more space that people can occupy.  It's so important that women take up that space equally and have all the options open to them to use that space for education, for employment, to better their economic situations.  You know, for everything.  So thank you all so much.
So my question was if there are any good practices you like or would like to highlight, if there are good examples where a company has improved its anti‑cyber monitoring law or policy, rather and if there's a good practice of a government adopting a change for better anti‑cyber monitoring laws?  That was one question.
My second question is at the individual level ‑‑ I heard from the discussion people have different ideas about how much sense it makes to engage at the individual level or not rather at a policy level.  I think that's a very interesting discussion in itself.  When you do talk about at the individual level, are there, for example, you know, handouts people can easily share?  You know, actions to take?  You know, that's one other part.
I want to add that I'm with Rights Tech Women and we work to combine human rights education with technology education.  So we work to train girls on robotics and programming but also train them about their rights at the same time.  So it's kind of something exciting that we're doing.  I just want to share that.  Hopefully, we can increase the practice of educating people, not only on technology, but on the rights that are attached to technology.  So I hope that can also be part of the efforts going forward.  Thank you so much. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, so much, Ellen.  I think we're going to take a couple of questions and the panelists can choose to respond.  Next we have Daphne Stephens.  Her question is in the Q&A. Daphne you might want to turn on your mic and the question.  I'll go over to Madeleine, Elizabeth and then Tara.
>> AUDIENCE: Thank you for the sessions, it's very interesting, I feel like I learn a lot from it.  I was wondering what individuals can do to participate more in stopping cyberviolence?  Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Daphne.  That was a very clear shaped to the point question.  I'm going to ask Madeleine to speak. 
>> EVE KRAICER:  Last name on that one?
>> MODERATOR: Madeleine Mayat. (?)
>> EVE KRAICER:  You should be able to ask your question now.  Do we have Madeleine?  Maybe not.  Should we read that one out loud then?
>> MODERATOR: So Madeleine's question was from your experience, to the panelists, is there one national strategy that is an example of a multi ‑‑ approach.  Yep, so maybe we can answer these questions and then we can have another round from the Q&A.  Panelists, you can pick whichever question you'd like to respond to.  Anyone? 
>> BHAVNA.  I'm not going to directly answer the question, best practices, I think we've got so much built up, some amount of, you know, say frustration about how much time it takes for a response to actually take place.  For instance, since we're talking about intersectionality, the fact that it took several years of campaigning for, you know, bodies like equality lab to get costs to be added as a factor within the Facebook's India policy.  It took them three years of campaigning to make that happen.  Even though ‑‑ and there's some strange phenomenon where even though the Hindi translation word, caste, it was already a part of the Hindi version of the policy.  It wasn't present in the English version and therefore didn't present as an option for, you know, reporting, being there on the platform.
So I think the fact that platforms are responding is great.  We'd really like them to respond faster, to step up their game, especially in the Global South, where a large chunk of the user base exists I think there's a strong need for greater accountability and responsibility towards users in these areas.  That's what I have to say about best practices in terms of content moderation responses.
As far as ‑‑ yeah, I think that's the only one I want to take a response for.  Someone else would like to join in for these other questions?
>> MARIANA VALENTE: Many people are muted now.
>> MARWA AZELMAT: I just want to jump in on that specific question around content moderation.  And I mean, I don't really have a best practice right now, but I just want to point out three important dimensions that are really and often overlooked.  Is that first one, I guess questions around content moderation, they should be tackled in a way that is multifaceted because it takes so many forms.  But they should also be contextualized.  It's very context specific.
We would find these responses, they would often really entail so much bias towards communities in different contexts.  But at the very same time, we would find that we would need to really mobilize this local expertise when it comes to cyber policies.  The best practice would be to hear from these experiences and to deliver these experiences for us to understand what can fit and what cannot be done basically.  Over to you. 
>> MARIANA VALENTE: There's an interesting conversation going on in the chat in terms of examples.  I'd just like to quickly address the question on what individuals can do and how individuals can engage.  I think there's a lot of discussion right now on the counter speech strategy, right?
I think there's something that on this very individual level can be done, that's the space for counter speech, right?  I mean, there are limits to it, of course, and I think the panel has been addressing that somehow, that private policies, public policies are really important to address it.  But there is value, great value in counter speech only spaces are really important for women.
If you talk to ‑‑ I mean, any person who is involved in feminist activism, understands, I think, the role of being able to be online, being able to campaign online.  So I really think that the connection that Marwa was also making between freedoms and cyberviolence and how cyberviolence affects freedoms is really, really important for this discussion.  And I think joining campaigns and driving discussion online is perhaps what's most at reach when it comes to the individual level.
>> MODERATOR: Thanks so much, Mariana.  We have about 15 minutes left.  Helene, I can see your mic is off, do you want to respond, or should we take the last two questions and then we can also embed the response in the closing remarks?  Okay, great.
So we have two questions in the Q&A.  We have a question from Elizabeth Sutterland.  Eve, do you want to unmute and she can ask her question? 
>> EVE KRAICER:  Elizabeth, I'm not seeing you on.  Give me one second to try to pull you up.  Okay.  Elizabeth, can you say hello if you're there?
>> AUDIENCE:  I think the unmute button worked.  Thank you all for putting together this panel.  It's been informative.  Thank you.  I had a question on the Facebook front.  You know, it's really great that, you know, we're connecting women with these resources to report their harassment and to kind of, you know, find the proper resources after experiencing it. Given that that process can still be so traumatic, you know, I'm really curious what kind of efforts these companies are going through before women get harassed to prevent that from occurring and to make these spaces safer before the harm is done? 
>> MODERATOR: The last question from Tara? 
>> EVE KRAICER:  Can you say hello?
>> AUDIENCE:  Can you hear me?  I want to echo what some of the other attendees have said.  I'm appreciative of everyone's time in putting this together.  It's an important conversation.  Thank you all.
My question relates on the fact that we're focusing a lot ‑‑ and obviously rightfully so ‑‑ on the content moderation piece.  But I'm curious working for a tech company myself, what recommendations would the panelists have with regards to kind of other aspects of technology that can be addressed in this conversation?
You know, one of the questions that my company and others are struggling with is just how do we make sure that the products we're developing is attuned to these issues and making sure that they cannot be abused in a way that perpetuates this online gender based violence.  I'm curious if there's best practices or recommendations you might have for the private sector that may not be in the content moderation space.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  We have about 12 minutes left and I would invite my panelists to take this opportunity to respond if they have anything else to respond.  I think Cindy, there was some direct questions.  Helene, you had something you wanted to say, and also use this opportunity to offer some closing remarks as we wind down this panel.  I'll start with you, Cindy.
>> CINDY SOUTHWORTH: To Elizabeth's question about what could we do to make sure that abuse is not even occurring on platforms so we don't have to worry about taking it down. There's a couple of things.  One of the things that I'm excited about is we're using more and more machine learning and artificial intelligence to try to identify potential harmful content.  One of the ways we do it is when people are typing a caption or a comment, it will get a pop up that says what you're about to post has been reported by other users as violating our community standards, do you want to still want to post it?  It works, a surprisingly number of people rethink what they're getting ready to post when that is brought to their attention.  Which the whole point here is we're trying to change culture so it is not even fathomable you would say something harassing, threatening and misogynistic offline or online.  We want to change that entire mindset.
One of the other things we're doing, especially with some of the coordinated attacks and the cyber mobbing, as a couple of people have mentioned is using technology to look for the spikes and immediately investigate so when something is starting to go viral or it looks like there's a pile on attack to get human intervention.  Technology can identify it and flag it for teams to go in and look at it so it isn't up to one individual victim to have to say, look, I'm being attacked by hundred plus people.  Ideally, we want to be able to catch that quickly and shut it down.
One of the ways we need that machine learning and the artificial intelligence is by people reporting things.  So please, if you see harassing content, even if it's not directed towards you, report it on any platform.  It feeds into the artificial intelligence and will help our communities get better because context matters.  If we don't have that contextual piece, it's hard to action on it.  And I'll pass to whoever wants to go next. 
>> HELENE MOLINIER: Thank you.  I'll go next and then I'll address this question and the one before.  I think it was Tara, it's a very good question on how do we ‑‑ we have worked with a couple of companies to try to see how we can integrate gender in the design phase in the pilot phase when a new platform is launched and afterwards.
And it's complex.  There's no silver bullet I think to the technology that is safe that is from the get-go.  But I think what's important is to at least during the development phase try to take as many steps as possible, try to have diverse teams, also test your technology on a diverse panel and on people coming from different countries, different religions, different context. I think it's very important to look at intersectionality because it's bad enough to be a woman online, but if you're a woman of color or if you're LGBTQ, you have much more aggressive behavior against you.  This is something to take into account.
One thing I also used to say a lot to people, you have to educate your team, especially your tech team, about gender, about social science.  It's not the job of the one woman or the two women on the team to tell their colleagues what it is to be a woman or what is gender based violence.  It's something that everyone has to be aware of.  We all come with our own biases.  I think it's important that you address it not as a woman issue but something that the whole team is responsible for.
I would just also say a couple of words on the present discussion.  I think it's really important when we talk about regulation, legislation, policy that we really have focus on prevention and on legal aspect and punishment together.  It's not one or the other.  I think it's important to have an ecosystem that is inclusive so when you look at policies, you also look at what you can do for prevention, for changing social norms, for trying to educate by standards because it's as important as looking at the policy.  And for policy, please keep in mind that you have to contextualize.  We have all different privacy law situations, we all have different histories.  It's important you contextualize what works with your authorities and what works.  Thank you, it was fantastic to be with this amazing group of women.  Thanks.
>> MODERATOR: Bhavna, Mariana, closing remarks?
>> MARWA AZELMAT: I can go ahead.  Perhaps I would just like to briefly just mention the issue of gender disinformation like on news, on harassment, or biased AI or other interventions.
So from this remark, we can really conclude that it's just about like cultivating that herd immunity online.  We really need it.  In this process, all stakeholders should work together.  Even if we try to really build the awareness of the tech teams or corporate or whatever, we would see the need to really leverage that together.  Because even if we work on the design, we would fail when it comes to moderating the online behavior.  We would fail to fight this self‑censorship online.  I believe this sort of herd immunity is very much needed.  And to do it, we would need to bridge the conversation just like we did today.  These discussions are really rare, but they're really needed, yeah.  Thank you.
>> BHAVNA JHA: Thank you. I'll take off from your last point about this being absolutely needed for us to have these conversations.  I'll start off by responding to Tara's questions about other aspects of technology, broadly your question about what sort of technical design measures can tech companies take.
I think it is absolutely vital for companies to do algorithmic audits before they launch into new areas.  These need to be sensitive to intersectionalities in cultures that they're going to be unleashing this technology into.  Not doing this has had some devastating effects across nations, across the world, and has really hurt the social fabric of several societies and led to, you know, like death counts that can be directly ‑‑ can be directly notched up to these lapses.
My second point is that, yes, content moderation gets talked about a lot, but not enough.  And it is very important for us to move beyond just speaking about agreements that, you know, that tech companies can sort of sign off on and move closer to something that ‑‑ because we've really been able to see how nets DG (?) to their responsiveness to a lot of ‑‑ transparency in their reporting of content in Germany.  We'd like to see that across the world.
And, finally, we really, really need a global consensus around online civility to echo what Nandini started off with.  And we need to, you know, get all of us and everybody who recognizes the necessity of this conversation together until we have been able to create this consensus and we're able to recognize, not only ‑‑ we need to ‑‑ there's a need to redesign, but we need to transcend conversations of safety of online spaces to making sure that online spaces are spaces of, you know, what Marwa called pleasure and consent.  And two words that, you know, I raise my hat figuratively.
>> MARIANA VALENTE: I agree we should speak more of moderation and just as a last remark, closing remark, in that conversation of let's say policy versus individual action, I think one thing that's important to add to this conversation is that even when policy is at stake, culture drives enforcement.  We've seen a lot of laws not being enforced or not being properly enforced because of how law enforcement agents see these issues and there's a case in Brazil that's huge right now that sort of talks directly into that. So I think all these things are more connected than it may sound from some conversations that sort of drive a very ‑‑ a distinction, a strong distinction.  Yeah.  It's been a pleasure, thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you to everyone to our panelists for such an amazing conversation.  I think we've all taken away some key points on how we can respond and how we can build up all the work that we're doing.  And I think you can find them all on different social media platforms and you can reach out to them.  And thank you to our fantastic organizers and to our audience who have been part of this conversation.  We do hope to continue to engage with you on this work on trying to make the internet a safe space for everyone, and in particular women and girls.  Thanks, everyone.  Have a good day, evening, night, wherever you are. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-3-%E2%80%93-youth-coalition-fostering-a-new-key-role-of-youth-in-internet-governance-^^

>>  So hello and welcome, everyone, to the annual session of the youth Internet Governance.  My name is Meri, I'm a Human Rights attorney.  And also at the University of Pennsylvania law school.  And today I have the pleasure to moderate this session in my capacity as the student committee member for the eastern European group.  And my colleague will be our rapporteur.  So the title of our session is fostering the role of youth in the Internet Governance and 2020 has been indeed been a very challenging year with the pandemic and many developments in different parts of the world as well as in the Internet Governance ecosystem itself from the roadmap to the youth cooperation and through the discussions on different models for the future GIF.  This year offered us a lot to work with.  But at the same time, the pandemic offered us unique set of challenges in terms of the major participation and engagement.  And today at our annual session, we decided to start with taking a tour around the world to identify the developments that happened in the last year in different parts of the world in terms of youth participation.  And then we will have an open discussion on where we are, where we want to go, and how do we envision doing this.
So it is my great pleasure to introduce to you our panelists of this session who represent different youth movements and initiatives from various regional groups.  Today we have with us Emelia from Poland.  Mohammed representing youth special interest group known as the youth observatory.  From Portugal IGF Lily from Ghana.  And then we have Augusto from Argentina representing youth IGF Argentina.  (sound).
I'm sorry.
And we will also have a special intervention from our student committee member Eileen from Argentina.  But I will get to that in a little bit later during our session.  And right now, without further ado, I about would like to give the floor to Emelia as a represent of this year's and also next year's GIF Poland basically to share the state of affairs with regards to youth participation in Poland.  Emelia, you have the floor.  Thank you.
>> EMELIA:  Thank you very much, Meri.  I'm very glad to be here and to see many familiar names.  So thank you very much for inviting me.  Just quickly introducing myself, I'm currently the part of the initiative GIF Poland that was founded this year by me and my good friends.  I am also, as Meri mentioned, active part of ‑‑ information that's main goal is to bring together lawyers and community.
So today I would like to share with you a few of my experiences with involvement in the Internet Governance especially in my region.
I would like to start with a few words about my last year's experience in Berlin during the IGF.  It was a really great opportunity there to meet a lot of people from different countries because there were over 100 people from 30 different countries.  And it was really an eye opening experience.  And I have learned a lot.  And I had a lot of chances to talk with brilliant people who in spite of their young age were already experts in their field.  So that was amazing.
And also very inspiring because due to this event, we had an opportunity to get together a lot of different points of view from different regions of the world.  And that's something that I find very important.  And it inspired me that I would like to continue the discussion on my national level in Poland.  And both on international level because Poland, as you for sure know, was supposed to be the onsite host of this year's IGF.  It was supposed to be in ‑‑ however due to the COVID situation, it is postponed to the next year.  However, it is not too bad because we as yet IGF Poland have more time to prepare.
So we created the initiative, together with my two friends, because we wanted to create this platform for young people also during the IGF to meet again and to share their views because, you know, Internet Governance issues are global.  So it is so important to overstep our national regional point of view that tends to happen, which is natural.  But to compare this perspective with perspective of people from other countries.  So that's why we wanted to create this space.  And because of the ‑‑ because this IGF will happen next year, we still are planning to do it.  And we are really hopeful that we're able to provide many opportunities for youth to network, to create this connection, to bring together these different points of view during the preparations to then next year's IGF.
And also I want to invite all of you to support our initiative.  We are very ‑‑ we really welcome all of you.  And we hope to see you next year.  And it is all for me right now.  Thank you. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much, Emelia.  Glad to hear you from Poland and I think everybody here is looking forward to working with the host country hopefully next year.  And we have Mohammed Atif Aleem from India and you have the floor.
>> MOHAMMAD:  Hello.  This is Mohammed Atif from India.  It's half past noon here.  So pardon me if I seem a bit sleepy.  But I'll try my best to be very active and proactive rather in this Ig space which most of the youth, I believe, should be.
So, thank you for giving me this opportunity.  I am currently the regional engagement director for youth observatory or youth special interest group of Internet Society.
Apart from that, I'm also a resear offer analyst for one of the software firms, multinational software firms in India.  And I've been actively involved in the Internet Governance and have been contributing to it since past two years.
So last year, I also was awarded the IGF Youth ambassadorship and I was lucky to represent the voices of the youth at annual IGF 2019 in Berlin.
And my journey with Internet Governance basically began from I started to interact with more and more people, experts working in the field of Internet Governance.  And then also I was fortunate to, like, connect with youth special interest group.  And luckily I was elected for the position of regional engagement director.
So I'm going to give you an overview of what engagements we as an entity of youth observatory or special interest group of Internet Society had in particularly in my region of Asia‑Pacific and what avenues there are for the youth to interact with in this form of Internet Governance.
So I believe in recent years the global Internet Governance ecosystem has witnessed a great number of youth newcomers, students and young professionals.  And especially it has, like, taken a huge surge in these current pandemic times where you have to engage with Internet technologies more as compared to your previous engagement.
So I believe it plays a very crucial role in shaping the digital future, especially the youth.
We need to be ‑‑ they need to be included in defining processes, principles and policies that govern the use of technology globally.  And when we study about Internet Governance, there is a concept of multistakeholderism.  So I think youth are part of the focal point that need to take an equal footing and raise their voice in those multistakeholder meetings so that our voices are heard because we are going to be future policymakers, scientists and it's very important that we start learning things from the very budding age so that the future is both sustainable and progressive for all of us.
The participation rate of youth from the regions in Asia has increased and this is basically due to the increased number of Internet public meetings that are there.  These meetings are conducted by NGOs like Internet Society organizations like ICANN, Internet cooperation for assigned names and numbers.
And there are a lot of organizations that conduct these meetings and have youth as a very important stakeholder in them.  So it's important that we know about these entities and try to, you know, put forward our best foot and participate in it and raise our voice and project what our ideas are and amplify our learnings there.
So, regarding the amplification of research learning, so there is a giga net conference which is held annually by the IGF platform as well on the day zero.  So it was very ‑‑ it was a great pleasure for me to see that a lot of youth also participated in the gig net conference and presented their papers which in the past didn't used to be the past because they used to be professors or presenting their papers.  But this time there were a huge number of papers from young scientists especially the youth in the areas of sustainability or coareas of data, trust, environment and inclusion, which are the goals of IGF in this year.
Apart from that initiatives that we took as part of the entity of youth observatory was youth focus.  So we conducted two pep talks by some Internet leaders that are there across the globe.  One of them an Internet advocate who is working on how artificial intelligence can be leveraged to detect early symptoms of mental health illness on social media and introduce cyber bullying cases.
And the second one was the initiative of youth for digital sustainability, which was taken by German information so that was primarily based on focusing sustainability and the Working Group involved clearing the Internet, fair digital businesses, social inclusion in digital age and sustainable Internet Governance.
And if I talk about like the Asia‑Pacific region, there has been a lot of work that has been done by active players which are youth observatory, youth for IG, which also introduced a mentorship program and successfully conducted the first cohort of its mentorship programme through erudite people like Donna Austin, who is a policy maker of ICANN, and the head of ICANN India Surim Gupta.
So Asia‑Pacific some were selected for that programme and they graduated in the first year in the first project that was held by them.  Then there was youth IGPif India which was recently concluded on first of no.  So ion behalf of youth Internet of Internet Society also collaborated with youth IGP India on the Code.  And we had interesting session where youth was not only on the other side of the podium but was also into the main policy building and raising voices and among the panels raising their voices to some older erudite policymakers out there.
So we had our voices raised.  And one very important initiative that was taken from youth observatory was working on the policy papers or sessions to implement to raise youth voices in the IGF itself.  So I worked on the team of environment and similarly my colleagues like Elenia and Lily, they also worked on different teams of data, trust and inclusion.
So one of the sessions for environment that we worked was enhancing sustainable computing production and consumption.
So it is basically focus on the sustainability aspects of Internet Governance.  And we do have youth voices like young erudite entrepreneurs from Africa raising their voices.  And also from Asia‑Pacific about what role can youth play in fostering these practices?
So, this was an overview about what are the practices that have been going in Asia‑Pacific region in the form of Internet Governance.  So I look forward to hear from other erudite panelists from here and then let's take the discussion forward, yeah. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much for a very nice recap of the recent developments in Asia‑Pacific region and also you touched on very important other initiatives that were happening on a more global level with participation from our regional groups.
So next I would like to give the floor to ‑‑ to represent what was happening in the western European and other group basically.  Thank you.   
>>  Joao:  So I'll jump to the more interesting conversation.  So I see for those who are joining on the Zoom call, you're all familiar faces.  I'll get there in a moment because this could be a good thing.  This could be a sign of something else.  But mainly I want to speak a little bit today on the situation first in Portugal.  And then on western Europe.
I'm not sure, for instance ‑‑ and I'll give the example ‑‑ but I'm pretty sure that in Portugal, this COVID situation took a major blow in youth participation.  There was no national IGF this year, so in some sense I would say that, well, participation in general was affected.  But the idea of getting a satellite event for youth that would channel to the many discussions is unfortunately put on hold.  Even the activities, the initiatives to create engagement and awareness were suspended in mid‑March.
From my experience, the face‑to‑face, the in‑person discussions were a way of getting the youth perspective right in and tuned at the grade level.  But I think this current setup of virtual conferencing is not helping as well.
It's true we are raising ‑‑ or we are lowering the boundary for access, which means we can provide access for more youth.  More youth can attend these types of events they're not constrained by []physical traveling to these conferences, buttes I'm still ‑‑ but I'm still really skeptical because it will be harder to get noticed.  You'll see probably the voices of stakeholders who are already involved, already taking these conversations.  And I think that makes it difficult not only on a national level but also on a wider level.
In terms of the situation in Europe, I'm glad to report that I was invited to be the coordinator of a youth committee for the you read, which is the institution which currently manages the dot eu.  And the point is I think this is a clear example of the type of message that we want to pass.
We always talk here about the idea of having a youth representative within the decisionmaking of the different institutions of the different organizations that create or are part of the Internet Governance ecosystem.  And I'm happy to report that in this specific example, we are now an example that recognizes one out of three Internet uses on the decision process.
Also reflecting a little bit on the other points of the discussion because important.  I think we don't have yet a youth umbrella.  Personally, I don't know if this is a good or bad situation.  In the past.  But we all know that there's different initiatives, youth initiatives.  And, for instance, those who are geographically diverse, it's great.  There's also the ones who are local which make great efforts to implement either awareness campaigns or policy development at the local level.  But the idea of having a strong unified youth voice, if we are still getting on the right arguments here, that's something that I'll leave open to the discussion a little bit after.
But I'd just like to throw some ideas so that the others can already think about it.
The idea of youth that can cement the aggregation of the IGF.  It's something that I would like to hear.  It's something that I would like to debate.  And I hope also for the ones who are listening in and can comment in the shots to be ‑‑ so they can participate as much as they can because in the end, we want these discussions to be broad.  Unfortunately, it will be a little bit of youth for youth conversation.  But hopefully we can move forward and have great achievements.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you Joao:  Very important points raised in your intervention.  I think we'll get back to them shortly.  Now I'd like to give the floor to Lily.
>> LILY:  Hi, everyone and good evening from Ghana.  In Ghana we say akwaba, which means welcome.  Jaoohas invited everybody to type into the chat.  Maybe you can say in one word how your first meeting with the IGF concept and IGF conference was.  If you can type in the chat what it felt like being a first timer.  Let's see if the experiences resonate with everyone or if there are differences.  I think it's necessary because you're telling us what you have to look at.  And what it means for us to make the space as approachable as possible and how we let people ‑‑ and how we have a keen focus on the different personas and their part with and how they enter into the space and how we are able to guide them from their entry point through to potentially ‑‑
So my journey began with the IGF fellowship with ISOC.  And it was interesting because my very first encounter with anything Internet was when I was in university.  I remember it was only the first year and there was an Internet Society caucus that had started on my campus.  And I was wondering what they were talking about when we all know, well, we know digital communications, we know there is the Internet already.  And everybody was so keen on talking about the Internet.  Probably I thought there was something to it so maybe I should attend the meetings and find out for myself what the discussions can be.
And then I joined them for a few sessions.  And it just got interesting.  So I remember one of the leaders were leaving.  They wanted to take over.  And I was secretary then on campus.  And I'm like oh, that's interesting.  I don't know what you're supposed to do, but let's get to it and see how it turns out.
Then afterwards, after school there was nothing like ISOC or IGF for me.  So after school you are supposed to work.  But I think I chanced on the middle list, the ISOC Ghana mailing list that there was a call for young people to apply for this fellowship.  And I just sat in my seat and relaxed and filled in the whole form.  It turned out what I was typing really made some impacted and I was selected.
So it dawned on me after the selection thatselves' work to be done.  That's where everything began for me.  You have to learn the modules.  You have to interis act on on the platform.  For people in the chat, actually for some of us also, I remember I'm thinking why are these guys typing episodes?  It was a simple question everybody asked.  And they're writing a very long thing.  I'm thinking to myself.  I want to see what they are saying.  It just shows how diverse the community is.  You're able to learn from people.  You're able to also contribute.  And everybody's accepted.
So one of the things that stood out for us in our conversation was where we kept on hammering on the fact that we're not just citizens of our coin tries anymore.  We have now gained citizens as netizens.  We contribute as developments in our country also on the Internet because everybody's a custodian.  Everybody's a stakeholder and everybody can shape it, you know.
But it got to the point where we had to decipher exactly how to shape it.  So beyond the conversations we're having, how could we feel the impact?  And I think this is why the communication today and the conversation today is important.
So we all know we have a part to play.  But beyond the things we have to say, how do we make it happen?  How do we get the conversation out there, follow through, and see some results happening?  So after the IGF, right, we have projects you have to work on.  And then we worked on breaking down the technicality of the IGF.  We created a project called the global ‑‑ for studies.  You can check it out on Instagram and Facebook.  Also Grace global.  That was a project for us in 2018.  We thought that we had some ‑‑ trying to understand how technical the space was.  So how about we break it down using audio, using videos, using infographics so people understand it.
But it turns out we were doing the work only to a certain point.  Then that had a barrier of having to know if your ideas have gotten any effect.  We're still wondering are we getting any results with advocacy?  Are we making any results with the things we are happening around the world?  So that said to me something you have to talk about.
And then from building, I had opportunity to lead the community, that started the Ghana youth Internet Governance Forum.  I remember in that year when we send the forms out, the number of emails that came in.  Asking what is the Internet Governance about?  And you get a very popular question.  Is it government?  You get very popular question?  What are we supposed to do?
And the important thing I heard from people is:  What are the carrier prospects in the space for me?  And I just sat back and thought about it and said yes.  So if you want to look at IGF for us to contribute to shaping the Internet, how about reciprocal process by helping us also get something out of the journey, capacity wide for young people coming up.  So those have got us thinking a lot.  So with the Ghana IGF.  We tried to do things that are really ‑‑ and over the years, so we had the first one in 2018, massive outcome.  This year, the Ghana youth Internet governance for um went online.  So you had it as part of the main IGF process.  And in Ghana, we're not separate NRI.  What we are is registered under the Ghanaian IGF as the youth initiative.
So we get support from them.
They also leverage the energy people have the in the country and made the online events to happen this year.
But also want to see what goes beyond the conversations we've had also this year?
Now most other parts of the space which I play in and which I learn and most of us know how and most of us also play in which is the youth SIG.  And Mohammad was so kind to show what we do.  So amplify these voices and we have the global and regional so that you have discussions sometimes specific to your region sometimes also broad enough to cover the others.
And then also as a part of the youth summit last year and was interesting, I was late to coming to Germany.  But part of the process online was awesome.  And I saw the difference I was looking for before were we able to have draft messages out and to have the conversation out there?  So those draft messages meant a lot to me.  And this year also I'm part of the team that's talking about winning the Internet.  And interested to know how the Internet has a very close relation to SDGs and everything you're talking about environmental‑wise.  And you wonder why didn't we think this?  And why did we think that the Internet can give us all the positive and not look at the negative that could be there?  So those were the conversations out there.
And so far that's been what has been in the space.  And the Ghana IGF so far is going.  We're still at the process where we have to tell people what it is exactly before having them settle in and want to contribute.  So the journey has been steady.  And we see that it is beginning to rise.  Hopefully we will be able to get that concrete beyond the conversations.  I'm really out for a day where we say that based on our discussion, well we've had some progress like that because in Ghana it was to get a reduction in tariff, but for data bundles, but want to see more.  So you say you give the credit to the young people for raising their voices.  And you also appreciate them and involve them some more.  Not just inviting us to the table.  Hearing us.  Listening to us.  Not just hearing.  Listening.  Taking our points into consideration.  And putting into execution.  So that's the level we want to look at.  People are able to enter the space, there's ability to grow career wise and capacity wise.  You are able to see your results beyond than focusing on the conversation you're on.  And that will give everybody the zeal to also want to contribute some more.  Sometimes it gets overwhelming as it is.  And I think when you see the results come out, that's the motivation you will have to continue.
So that's it from my end.  And I'm excited to learn from more people.  Thank you. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much, Lily.  And I also enjoy reading everyone's contribution in the chat how they got involved because I think all of us are very different journeys and stories in IGF.  But I think all of us are here to work together, which I really love about this space.  And last but definitely not leased I'd like to give the floor to Augusto about the Latin American and Caribbean group.
>> AUGUSTO:  Thank you for having me.  I started my journey in the Internet Governance as a system engineer and open software enthusiast.  And in 2016 I attended to the IGF Argentina national IGF.  And I have the opportunity to travel to Mexico thanks to the youth of Asia fellowship by ISOC.  And nowadays I'm doing some research.  I'm from the technical community for Latin manners about routing layers of the Internet and security.  And also I'm part of the organising team of the youth IGF Argentina.
And I want to start with this point because I think that the youth IGFs are a key factor, in my opinion.  These are like grassroots initiatives.  We don't need to ask permissions to start them.  And I think this is a really strong point.  And led us to create spaces by the youth for future generations and create spaces where youth can discuss Internet topics, issues, et cetera, in some kind of safe space where we can prepare, all of us, to start taking the places in the Internet world for everyone and not just for youth people.
But also I think that it's not that we should expect always to have a big slot reserved for youth people in these discussion places, we should prove that we are valuable, not justs because we are young but because we are experts.  We're committed.  And we can contribute.  We can make a real contribution to the discussions and all the things that are built in on the Internet.
And now talking about the Latin American region, and I think this year was a big one and in terms of opportunities to participate and get involved.
Of course the COVID‑19 caused havoc to all our lives.  And that's true.  But I wanted to see like the right side of all of this.  Because it created the chance to participate to all the events remotely.  And it's true that remote participation was always a possibility.  It's not new.  You can attend to the previous IGF remotely, registries, meetings like Latinique et cetera from your ‑‑ you don't have to travel.  But it always feels like you're in disadvantage with those on site.  It's not like you feel that real participation.  These times it's like everyone was in the same conditions.  And that opens the door to see a lot of youth everywhere in all the events and spaces.
For example, here in Latin America, well, I had the opportunity to feel like participate, to have a real participation in some events, for example, the Latinique meeting also, well, the rights con, from access now, I had opportunity to attend it when it's sometimes harder for people to have the resources travel and pay the fee and that.
And specifically for the IGF or analyzed initiatives, we have a lack, youth IGF for the Latin American and Caribbean region that this was the youth division, it was huge and it was a really great step moving in terms of how many youth people participated because here our region, well, it's like ‑‑ it has a considerable size.  And we don't have the connectivity.  So it's hard to get all these people together because always we have some lack of resources.
But this time we can participate.  A lot of people from all the continent.  All the countries.  And that was ‑‑ I think it was a really improvement for event.
And then just to get finishing here in the local area, in Argentina, this year we ‑‑ I think national IGF, but we as the organising committee of the youth IGF Argentina, we managed to arrange a youth division.  And also the right side of this COVID‑19 situation, and I think it was also an opportunity because we have the chance to have more people from other places and not just Buenos Aires which is the capital City of Argentina.  We even had participation from other countries.  It was interesting, too.  And, well, and also another point is that last year it was the last year that we had a physical place to make the event.  So this year, at the beginning we don't even have a physical place to make the event.  But then with this health crisis we have to do it remotely.  And you just need some ‑‑ well, you can always get some resources to get an account to make the event tremote event.  So that makes and gives us the opportunity to continue with the event.
So I think it's not all things negative because of the pandemic.  It's also we had a really big opportunities to improve and make more youth people to get involved in these events.
But I'm going to finish my first intervention.  I am really looking forward to the next open discussion in the face of this workshop.  Thank you. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much and I would like to thank all of our panelists for taking us over the world and just giving us a snippet of what is happening in the regional groups.  And very important, I think a lot of very important points were made by all of you.  And I would like to say that I agree that all of us started this journey differently.  And the journey is going differently because we have different interests and different involvements in different spaces in the IG ecosystem.  But I think all of us can attest that the space for youth participation changed and reformed since we all started this journey because in the beginning it was just about having people, having young people in the room and just having them like participate in the IGF.  And that was all.
And then gradually we tried to push further and further.  And now we are here after several years of already participating in different capacities and already having acquired some level of expertise in the field.  So now the question that I would like to start our open discussion with is:  Whether you believe that youth should be considered a separate stakeholder group within the ecosystem or not?
And I would like to note two things.  First is that my colleague Noha already posted a link in the chat to a rice pad where we invite all those to participate.  And we will use this to shape the work for what we are doing next year.
And then I would like to open the floor for our panelists to comment on this and also everybody is very welcome to comment in the chat.  But I think rice pad is where I would like to have everyone's contributions to have everything in one place.
And I will post the link again.
So, your panelists who would like to start with this question?
>>  Joao:  I'll jump ahead.  I guess this is one of the ongoing questions we're still trying to figure it out.  There's both points in favor and against.  Perhaps the most against point would be that if you're not considered a stake helloeder, we have a wildcard kind of position where we can jump into conversations and be as transparent as possible.
But in terms of the why we should be considered a stakeholder group, I guess we have to think a little bit on the numbers.  So we are one out of three Internet users.  So this should be just then why we have an interest in participating in the discussions.
I guess these also correlates with the idea of how experienced we are in these situations and how can we bring more value than the ones that are doing this for years.
But it's true that we are the generation that lived with Internet from an early age.  And I guess this brings a unique vision that for those who haven't, won't be able to perhaps connect the dots as we do. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Augusto?
>> AUGUSTO:  Yeah.  In my opinion, I think it's not about adding more tasks to the stakeholder because we are in this group, we are starting this certain age.  The youth should be a stakeholder.  But then the elder says yes, we should be a stakeholder, too.  And people from First Nations, they can say this, too.  And people from LGBT community, and people for every minority and they say, okay, we have our stakeholder tag and say we select that point.
So I think it's more than just to try to evolve the concept of multi‑shareholder approach and start thinking about we have multi‑shareholder but also we have to think about some ‑‑ it's now so trendy to talk about everything by design.  For example, security design.  Privacy by design.  Okay.  Let's talk about diversity by design, for example, and create this discussion groups, organically, with the most diversity as possible.  Sometimes it's not ‑‑ it's hard to build these teams that can represent everyone of the but I think we have to involve this concept and create this group in an approachable and open way enough to welcome everyone to be part of the conversation and they can contribute.
So I think it's not just to add more stakeholders because the list could be ends.  And I think we should evolve this concept and take the world and diversity as a really strong concept.  And we should create all these participation groups well, with diversity in mind.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Yes, Lily, please.
>> LILY:  So apologies.  I had to raise my hand this way because I think giving me the option to rather do another thing.  So I just want to also side with what Augusto has said and what Joao has said.  You know, thinking about it, you want to know on which basis, on which lines we want to break away as a stakeholder.  This is why.
So like Augusto mentioned, we have the same, the stakeholders.  And then the group, they gets broader and broader.  But in essence, everyone is a stakeholder.  You are.  I am.  The youth, like we are stakeholders spread across this broad categorizations.  So these are just broader baskets so that we sit in there.  And we are able to contribute.
But I see that from the angle we are coming at, from as young people, the issue remains or the issue remains like this that we are invited.  You want to think of it to some extent as tokenism.  You know what to say about tokenism.  So there has to be a young person there so we are bringing themself.
So like they said, we have to enforce diversity and inclusion.  Everyone is an Internet stakeholder.  Like you've all said, we are the very first generation of active users of the Internet who not only grew up using it but we contributed building its core.  We understand how it has been made.  We are able to have so much views from young people and wondering how they're able to understand how this works and what it can contribute.
So, yes, we have inputs that are very insightful, very valuable to the discussions.
On breaking away from, I'm breaking away a separate stakeholder group, I think we are already.  What has to be done is enforcement.  Just like enforcement is lacking everywhere.  It's important that you have to enforce diversity, have to enforce inclusion to its fullest not just invitations.  What do you get from youth?  What do you work with them?  Beyond what happened to that?  Are they allowed to even contribute to the discussion?  Even grow in the space.  You know, so that we don't see only people, or certain kind of people occupying the spaces and then you're wondering what the young people are doing.  Are we waiting until people hit 40 and 50 and 100 until you see them assume positions.
Like this afternoon, right, when we spoke to ‑‑ it's interesting to see how she started as a very young age, able to interact, able to contribute as her age and how she deems it's important that even as of now, she has to pay it forward and allow space for us as young people to talk.
So when we consider us already as stakeholder group, our voices have to resonate one thing and that is enforcement and inclusion.
Someone said that we have to get this space, contribute and have the contribution realized.  And it shouldn't just be because the young people have to be there.  So that's what I'm thinking.  I don't think it's a matter of exactly yes or no.  You can talk about it some more.  Already we are.  This space is us.  Everybody can contribute.  We are probably born to be.  You can also have your voice captured.  So that's it from me. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Yeah.  I can also just say what I thought about this because when I was just starting, I thought that why should we have another stakeholder group because it's multistakeholder groups are everywhere because of us are different.  We are wearing different hats.  So we are basically involved within other stakeholder groups.  But then as I went on doing my journal I,[] I realized that, okay, that is just messy, bus[] they do not understand you and perceive you as presenting the voice of youth at all because you are just talking about a specific subject matter and they do not understand that this can in any way be the voice of youth regardless of your age and whatever organisation you are representing.  And just pushing this further and taking this forward didn't feel like something is going to happen.  We are doing a lot all of us but even with the pandemic, we didn't experience that much youth involvement and participation in all of these spaces.  It's a bit better but it's not as it could have been.  Because with this, everybody was kind of put on the same footing with just being online.  Like there was no Visa or travel restrictions applicable to anyone because nobody was traveling anywhere.  But still in the end it was the same, almost the same.  So that's why this discussion is very important.  And I agree with himy that maybe this is more about the enforcement at the moment and also receive the comment/question in the chat which is about how to make this situation more formal, the situation of youth being a stakeholder.
Yeah, so if anybody wants to address that.  I think Emelia wanted to jump in, too.
>> EMELIA:  Yes, I wanted to jump in like maybe I will get to this question.
I wanted just to say that I couldn't agree more with all of you, especially with you, Meri, because you make a really good point that we are all from other panelists, as well, we are all from different backgrounds, but, for example, me myself, I am Myakka deemia background is low.  But taking part in the IGF, I usually feel participating in this event more as a young person as, yeah, representative than as a lawyer.
So that's why I guess it's more of how we perceive ourselves and how we want to be perceived.  Because as other panelists mentioned, we as young people have really Nikol view of our Nikol perspective that is really worth being heard because we were the ones who have grown up in the same time as most modern technologies, Internet technologies have been developed.  So we are really into it.  And that's why I guess that being separate stakeholder group wouldn't be such a bad thing.  Of course, taking care of the diversity of inclusion in the matter, as well.
And, of course, also inviting others to dialogue because there's also these senior IGF are the people who are usually the decisionmakers, the policymakers.  So that's why it is so important to invite them so that dialogue with us because because they are people who can help us to make our voices heard.  And right now we can say first steps, even the first steps, even the farther steps to be recognized as stakeholders because last year we've had the IGF summit.  This year we also had the FIGF summit that is super event and also there's ‑‑ summit.  So I guess we are going different direction.  Thank you. 
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you.  And I would like to say I'm enjoying all the comments in the rice pad.  Please keep them coming and we will make one piece of something that will try to incorporate all of your comments.
I think we can move to the next question.  Yeah, if we can move to the next question.  This is more to what I think Joao mentioned during his intervention, even when we thought the pandemic first started we thought there would be more opportunities for involvement but in fact maybe we faced more challenges, one of them being the Zoom fatigue.  What has later been coined as that.  So I would like to ask you to answer this question from your regional perspective, too, so that we understand what are the current challenges and unfortunately the pandemic is not over and we don't know when it will be over with a lot of countries facing the second round or the third round of lookdowns.
So moving forward, we would like to know what are the current challenges that you are facing.
And then later we will go into what do we think can be done to overcome them?
So whoever wants to start, please jump in.
>> EMELIA:  Okay.  So maybe I could start.  As I mentioned before, the thing that I find really sufficient and I think might be a challenge that, you know, it's a great thing that we have these events, but my observation is that most of attendance are young people.  And the other groups that we would like to hear we have to say they're not much represented during this meeting.  And I guess that the thing that we should find the solution to is how to encourage these other stakeholder groups to take part in our discussions to share our ideas with them and for them to share their ideas because it is the way how we can encourage them to invoke us in their decisionmaking processes, in their actions.
So, that's ‑‑ I think that's the challenge that we should focus on during our next steps by fostering the involvement.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  As we are talking about challenges, I would like to also voice [] Gustavo posted in the Q & A.  His point being that well he's responding to our previous question, but I think this is very applicable to our current discussion, as well, because what he's saying is the relevant topics for youth involvement are decided by those who are already involved in the ecosystem but it doesn't mean that these are the questions that resonate with a lot of young people, with which I also personally agree.  And that is why we had our questionnaire that we did earlier this year, my colleague will talk about that later.  And just to add this to the topic of challenges, I think it is important that we come to a consensus about priority topics for youth in general so that also we can coordinate the efforts more productively.  And I think Joao wants to go next.
>>  JOAO:  Exactly, Meri.  I'm totally in sync with what Gustav said.  If there's not a universal message, you can be a stakeholder, whether you have different backgrounds or not.
I would still be focused or interested in answering this question or giving more input for this question.
It's true what I said about the virtual conferencing might give the appearance of participation but we can assess it as effective or not.
Other things that Dom mind and already we kind of touched upon, so we all have these experiences behind of getting in the IG space through initiatives youth programmes that were funded by different stakeholders.  And it's true.  I mean, we are getting in a place where we have a lot of newcomers.  It's like Mohammad said about the boom in terms of the youth that is getting involved.
And the idea here is, again, also touching on some of the points that I read on the rice pad, that sometimes they're not really interested in having a longer approach or participation in the space.  So you go to one or two maybe youth programmes, you get to benefit on a personal level from the programme, but then it's yet tangible to see if you stick around.
And until we get a place or a mechanism or a process that really captivates and catches and holds the youth, it will be difficult because although it's good to have similar faces, I know ‑‑ and I'm sure the similar faces are not enough.  It's really good to have different perspectives on the topic to get to know a lot of new people.  But if they don't stick around, it will be difficult to have this conversation as youth against the rest of the IG space this year.
>> 
>> MOHAMMAD:  I think I agree if I have your permission, Meri.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Please go ahead.
>> MOHAMMAD:  I agree with Joao there.  I think we need additional support for youth inclusion policies in Internet Governance.  And it's definitely not a question about whether youth is a stakeholder.  Even if there's not a formal entity for you to represent youth, there are several boards through which you can raise your opinion.
For example, there are governments ‑‑ one of the positive aspects of our generation is these technologies that are coming up, like be it artificial intelligence, be it block chain technology, Internet of Things, these are very new.  And definitely the older generation will take some time to grasp it.  But we are in the knowledge phase of our careers.  We are adapting to these new knowledge areas of upcoming technologies.
So if I see it from that standpoint, we definitely hold a very good viewpoint to present our views as to how these upcoming technologies will affect our future.  And that's why youth is a very important stakeholder.
So, to answer one particular question that I saw in the chat:  That do you need to be specifically from a formal entity?  I will say no, that you can be from any entity.  Like as Lily mentioned that everyone is a stakeholder here, be it from academy, even if you are from technical society, you can, you know, raise your voice through research papers, through amplification, your ideas.  Some of the big corporations that are making big money today, those were started by founders who were very young in their age.  They were just teenagers.
So definitely it's not about a formal entity to enter or you need a tag of youth to raise your voices.  Just having a youth for the sake of it makes no point.  It's when you ‑‑ when our voice start influencing the technology policy decisions or the political decisions or the constitutional parts of the democracies in the sense that major Human Rights issues are addressed, then I would say that we have made some contribution for the cause of it.
And as Jaoo said it's very important the youth to stick to this ecosystem of Internet Governance.  We do see similar faces.  But then we choose different parts.
So if we do stick to our niche choices and amplified it with Internet Governance, then I think this generation will pave a way for the future generations to have greater amplification because, again, I would say these technologies, even we are not aware of what will be the next technologies that students would be working on or the youth would be seeing after 20 years.  There's robotic process automations and so much coming up that it's a very good thing.  I mean, in terms of ‑‑ it's an opportunity window for the youth which it should definitely leverage, yeah.
So that is something I wanted to put forward.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you.  Lily?
>> LILY:  Thank you so much.  So I'm seeing comments in the session, I mean the chat session that I really resonate with.  So people are hitting more on entry.  People are hitting more on mechanism to reach people.  I think to some extent because the youth IGF and the IG space is a community just like we have been many communities, we have similar challenges like what open communities have.
Number one, it's entry point.  You want to talk about how do people get?  So have you ever had ‑‑ I don't know if anyone ever had the question.  Most of you are doing stuff in the IG space and say how can I be a part?  I don't know what you told them.  You start to think about NRI, you start to think about programmes.  You start to think about ‑‑ you know, sometimes you might be tempted to say to find some way they can fill in or register on this site.
So how do we make it clear how to first interface?  Or where do you start from?  And then you want to look at another problem that is very familiar with open communities, first the entry point and look at the personas and the pathway.
The way Mary entered into the space is the way different that Lily entered the space.  It shouldn't be just for the lawyers, the IT people and everything.  But how are we working to portray it as something that's acceptable for all, everybody with every skill to let somebody who's in the hearts know that look, you're able to pretend your work and there's the privacy because you know there's advocates for this and can be the voice to tell other people that, look, your work is safe if you do this kind of thing are or you're able to protect something to protect your artist alliance.
So it goes from ‑‑ it's to the entry point of how you're able to meet people at their different skill level, how different approaches reaching out to them, how different way they can contribute.  And that's where I come to talk about how people see their work materialize.  Because if you come to the space and you will all meet us like this, somebody came in as an ambassador, has said a lot of things, the person is wondering, okay, after this, what's next?  That's where you think about the sustainability and how this should go beyond conferences.  And how there should be supports, yeah.  Supports is very important.  It doesn't have to be monetary.  But support as to what else after the conference?  What else afferent erg the space ‑‑ after entering the space.  How do people rise even to leadership position?  What is is the support of having people in the space?  That's very important now when we have such conversations.  Not just advocacy but for people who come in to even see how the space can help them check their own career choices.
So one challenge I see is one that is familiar with open spaces, that people have very different points that they can enter.  And another point is:  People have different backgrounds.  And so there should be a way that the message is customized for their skills.  And to be able do this, right, we are a lot of us, we have to hear all maybe and have the message out there.
I mention I spoke about Grace when we're trying to use infographics and do IG lessons.  It felt like people were really getting some information from the infographics.  But we really don't see how it helps anyone beyond it.  So it's booking.  Have things changed?  No.  Then the support beyond the conferences.  How do you get support to keep your community, your work in the space, actually how do you keep it going on?  Some of us have had to volunteer on multiple parts and learn more to be able to contribute.
So I think from the entry point to skills and to approaches that we use to meet people tuned to the support that helps everyone beyond the conference to be sustainable in their work is what we're lacking as it stands.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Yeah, I think Lily provided a great recap of all the challenges that we were all discussing and all of our attendees were also mentioning in the chat.
So from the fact that it is not ‑‑ well, now it is relatively easy to enter the space because you don't need to go through any specific programme to become part of it.
But at the same time, it's not self‑intuitive.  So it's like you need to understand what to do next.  The space is not only about this conference.  It's the work is done in between the intercessional work is what matters, actually.  And a lot of people do not see this because when you go to the conference, you do not really envision and understand this system to be like that.
So, just quickly going to our last question for the open floor is just how do you see us tackling these issues?  Just very short two sentences, two three sentences if you are offered.  I know all the challenges are very complex.  So it's not easy to say that in two sentences.  But I think all of us are working towards resolving these challenges.  But I would like to hear your personal perspectives, as well.
>>  I would like to hear Gustavo.  It's relevant.  We have a relevant number of capacity building opportunities about Internet Governance, but the thing is that we are lacking very few leadership capacity building options.  And it was raised at one of the schools of Internet Governance sessions.  And I'm going to pass to the next slide, of course.  Please.  I know we have a lot of ambassadors also attending.  Please raise your voice if you can or type on the chat (eileen).
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  I will say also type in the chat because of the webinar system, it is difficult to give everyone ‑‑
>> LILY:  We can give them the chance.  I am a cohost.  So if anybody wants to speak.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  We can do that right now and then we'll go Joao.
>>  Hello.  We are having a problem? 
>>  No problems.  Thank you.
>>  Okay.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  So, Lily, if you can allow the person.  Okay, I think I can.
>> LILY:  I think this was Isaka, I will allow you to speak in a bit.  Please go ahead, I think you should be able to.  Oh, sorry.  Okay.  Issakha, the floor is yours.
(muted).
>>  Can you hear me?
>> LILY:  Yeah, we can hear you now.
>>  ISSAKHA.  I'm from Chad.  My question is about the global messages that we have been addressing, I mean, on behalf of our respective, I mean, youth.  So I would like to make sure that when we address, like, global messages, I want us to take, I mean, our local realities and address the messages.
For instance, in Africa, in some countries we are still facing Internet shutdown.  We have like our daily topics which are related to access to Internet while in different or in other continent; for instance, youths have been debating some high level panels such as like Internet Sustainable Development Goals, Internet in digital sustainability, Internet and artificial intelligence.
So how, like, we can make sure that the, I mean, youth are represented, I mean, respectively by taking into account our national or local realities?  Thank you.
>> LILY:  Right.  Meri?
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Yes.  Anyone would like to address this?
>> LILY:  I think I have some thoughts on it.  So if I got the question right.  Issakhr.  Was asking how we could have different needs from different regions all meeting at a certain point.
So I think it actually links to what Gustavo said the first time.  Even though we have some similar questions, similar problems with the Internet globally, it would be very interesting to know that in specific places, there are very unique situations.  So it's true.  Some of us are talking about infrastructure and even affordability and access here in Ghana.  You'd wonder how long somebody has to work to get a phone.
In other parts of the world, you are talking about net neutrality.  And we're wondering:  Okay, so you have the access.  Now you want to say everything should be allowed online.  That's well.  But I think where we can meet halfway is some way somehow what happens in some part of the world Internet gradually affects everyone.  And I think it's an issue of mitigate these at the threshold before it gets out of hand.
So there was the threat of an Internet shutdown in Nigeria.  We were wondering as Ghanaians.  We were interesting if that starts somewhere, it could come into the country and then we could have the ripple effect.  So to some extent what we can do as young people to have our voices resonating around the same thing is on global issues, there is one step you can take that is a step of solidarity.  So if somebody brings, if youth brings up issues from their region, it is not only to them.  If it's time to rally, everybody rallies around the things, if you don't know anything about it, you can probably ask how do we help?
So you have very different situation, but how do we help you?  And you can share ideas.  You can share what you think can be done.  And to get working towards a certain goal.
And it's the same as in communities.  I want us to see henceforth it is not just your original issues, your country issues, the Internet has made us so much of a global village.  One person has gone in multiple directions.  So this is why such communications are important that are able to lend your voice and want to know or be interested in things that are happening and how you can support.
So still stay on the course of heralded things from the region that need help.  But if there are other issues from elsewhere you can pick to make yours better, ask.  If you don't understand something that is speaking about, ask also.  People are able to describe things from where it pinches them the most and able to help you understand it so you can also contribute to it.
So maybe a way of collating this communication is what would be difficult?  Because we are so many.  And then we have to all work at one time to collate information.  I see the chat I'm running out of time.  Nice submission.
>>  Joao:  I'll try to keep my two sentences short, Lily.
I'll try to wrap up really quick the ideas I'll our answer to Gustavo.  I also locked at what are the points raised in there?  So hopefully I can sum up really quick.
To Gustavo, I do agree what you said.  Lily links well to the things put up on the rice pad, as well.
So the idea was to have to reserve a seat on the decision processes and advisory boards.  And here it's totally in sync with one of the messages on this year's youth for sustainability.  On the track for Internet ‑‑ I also like the translation of the reserved seat to a liaison position.  That's really on a personal matter.  Because as I brought in my intervention, I really think that solution here or the option is to bring youth as a cement for the IG space.  It's all mentioned the challenges of bringing youth for their expertise.  The challenges we face when we're brought through these different integration programmes.  So if we think youth could be the cement that kind of connects the dots because, well, we'll live within the Internet.  And we pursue or we understand the different motivations for the stakeholders that are involved.  I think it would really be a plus.
I'm sorry, I didn't read the last question.  But hopefully one or more speakers could address it.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you, Joao, I'd like to give the floor to Gustavo for his comments.  And then we will move forward.
>>  Gustavo:  Thank you, Meri.  Can you guys hear me?
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Yes, yes.
>>  Gustavo:  Okay.  So to start off, I wanted to bring a word that Lily mentioned.  It's solidarity.
I think your choice for this word was extremely fortunate because ‑‑ and I want to tell just a little bit of what was my mind set when I became involved with Internet Governance a.
A few years ago I came in, I had in my head a few ideas of issues I thought that were relevant based on my very restricted, my very limited personal experience in life.
And then you know I had a few years here.  I got to meet all sorts of people.  I went to forums and this and that.  And then after a while I started realising that, oh, well, you know, these issues I initially brought up, they aren't as important as I imagined.  And not only that, many of the issues which when I stopped and reflected, if I'm making a serious honest reflection of what are the main issues for the youth, then I need to first question what is the reality of the youth in my region, in my state, in my city, in my country, and in the globe.
So that's why I think that Lily's choice of the word solidarity is extremely important here because I think if we want the youth, all of us, to become strong enough as a policy entity to be able to be a stakeholder group on our own, we need to start visualizing like the interests of the youth beyond our personal lives.
I think this is essential.
So what this means is that in the Brazil IGF which I was involved with, I realized that, you know, I come from a Civil Society background.  But given the specific issues that my people, my state is facing, I ended up bartering with the private sector because I realized that questions of access were extremely important here and the small ISPs were the main partner for this issue.
So, I think this is essential for us.  This idea of solidarity.  And maybe working with and looking across stakeholder groups to try and identify in advance the topics which we, the youth, think are the most important for all of us, not only one, not only me, but all of us and mainly, mainly the people who are underrepresented in other ways.
And by this I specifically mean low income people and low income regions and countries.  Thank you.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much.  Very, very crucial points made.  And I also agree with himy's choice of the world solidarity.  And yes, in a way even with this pandemic, we are a big global village.  And even though I very much agree that we have different issues in different regions, there is a vast number of issues that are cross‑cutting for all the regions.  And that is why working together is something that is very important in this space.
And now I just as a reminder that is the YC situation.  We heard of all the groups.  I would like to give the floor to Eileen representing the Latin American and Caribbean group to represent what we did during these years.  Eileen, you have the floor.
>> Eileen:  Thank you very much, Meri.  It has been very interesting to hear you all.  Unfortunately, the time is, you know, is very strict.  So I'm going to try to make the administrative announcements as soon as possible.
So, basically I'm going to recap a little bit on the things that we have done this year.  For example, we have made a questionnaire which I'm going to share with you in the next slides.
We also prepared the charter, which is if you want to think about it is like the constitution of our Dynamic Coalition.  So it's the way that this is regulated.
We also created a code of conduct which, you know, is very important for every organisation.  We are not an organisation, but you get what I mean.
We also are very happy to share with you that this year, while we submitted sessions with ‑‑ also known as UC, we are having three sessions.  So the first one is on Monday.  I hope you can join.
We are also engaged at the youth engagements strategy with the IGF Secretariat, the Polish government and an institute on other more relevant stakeholders.
We have a special mission now, which is that we have been part of the mentorship programme for the Internet Society's IGF youth ambassadors programme, which I hope you guys can speak at least some minutes close to the end.
While we also participated in the survey on the IGF plus, the global stakeholders dialogue hosted by ‑‑
We held the session at the EuroDIG thanks to Meri.
Here we also participated at the open course at the youth lack IGF.  We are also engaged in other sessions, maybe Noha can share a few words.  Today earlier was a session of the DC on Internet core values.
Let me see.  We also participated I think it was last Sunday the youth IGF India and what we have also a keynote at the youth Lac IGF 2020.
This is just a partial list.  We have made other things.
So now going back to the questionnaire, we launched this questionnaire to identify the top priorities for 2020 from which we organized the work for our community.  And we discovered that people were interested in webinars, mentorship programmes and other points and most of the people who replied to the questionnaire were from the African region.
And also from that survey, since I think Gustavo and Meri were mentioning about the topics that were relevant for young people, after we launched this survey, we found out, which wasn't very good, I mean wasn't a surprise, that's one of the topics that youth are more interested was on the protection of privacy, which became very relevant after the break of the COVID‑19.
Also on environment and technologies, inclusion, inclusion in general.
So you see we have a bit of everything on the topics.  Sorry if I'm going a bit fast.
Let me see.  Okay.  So I'm not sure if we can have a few minutes of the voluntary commitment to foster the aims and goals of the IGF during the next year.
Maybe it could be a general commitment from our speakers.  I'm not sure who wants to lead this part.  So we can have a few minutes of the youth ambassadors if they want to speak, of course.  Thank you.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Lily?
>> LILY:  I want to keep it brief.  In the coming year my commitment is to inspire, involve and impact.  Inspire people to do more.  Involve people so they understand what's happening and they know how to contribute.  And impact so that we have this going forward.  Thank you.
>>  Also to keepy very brief.
>> MOHAMMAD:  In one sentence.  Commitment would be strengthen enhance the engagement of stakeholders and especially the youth and disadvantaged stakeholders for the future Internet Governance.  Particularly those from the developing countries.  Thank you.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  This is going as I suggested to take this.  Joao:
>>  Yeah:  I haven't thought on 3 in a sentence.  I'll be brief.
Well, I think my commitment is already to the initiatives I'm contributing to.  It's the promise that I'm sticking around.  And those familiar faces know I'm already involved for a while.  And that means I'll stay involved at the regional level with the different initiatives from Council of Europe, from the Dot EU management institution and from the youth IGF movement where I'm currently involved but also trying to seek a more unified approach, trying to engage in these difference institutions and try to connect the dots as I'm already doing at the personal level.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Amazing.  Next, Augusto?
>> AUGUSTO:  Just keep working, creating opportunities for all the youth to be part of the conversation.  That's all.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  And, finally, we go to Emelia from hopefully next year's in‑person IGF host country.
>> EMELIA:  I really hope so.  I really hope that I would be able to meet all of you guys on site, not online.  So.
So conclusion to make it very brief is after this meeting is diversity, to make sure that as many points of view will be represented as possible.
And the second one, networking.  And networking opportunities because I think this is something that we all are missing this year because it was one of the best parts of the IGFs even these evening networking, the parties and so on.
And I really hope that we all will be able to experience this next year.  And hope to see you there.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much.  So any last comments from our audience?  Now is the time to take the floor for any last comments.
>>  Eileen:  We have two questions from the Q & A, Meri.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  I do not see questions.
>>  Joao:  I've answered one through text.
>>  Eileen:  There is a point raised by Germán.  I'm not sure if we addressed Nadia's comment, as well.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  I cannot find the comment again.  But if I can recall, that was about the gender issues in Poland if I'm not mistaken.  I think I read it.
>>  Eileen:  He's saying that he was contributing actually requesting, I think he was talking about different issues people have.  I'm seeing EI and other things.  So thank you.  Yeah, go ahead, please.
>>  Okay, thank you.  Sorry, guys.  I forgot something very important, which is this year we have the elections.  You might imagine that each year we have different, well, election cycle.  So in our case, we are having the elections after the IGF within six weeks of the IGF.  Of course we are going to publish everything at the mailing list.  The call for the elections committee and all that.  So stay in touch.  And if any of the ambassadors want to speak, this is your time before we wrap up.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  So taking this opportunitiy would like to thank our panelists for a very interesting discussion.  This is the information that you see on your screen is the way to connect with youth CIG.  It's a very interesting way to get involved with Internet Governance on a global level.  It is not an organisation.  It is a Dynamic Coalition and we are basically involved in the intercessional work that I mentioned, which happens after the IGF concludes and until the next IGF.  So this is a very interesting space.  And you get to meet other people from Dynamic Coalitions working on different issues and also have a chance to work with IGF Secretariat.  So according what my colleague Eileen mentioned we are going to launch our elections soon, so please sign up to our mailing list to receive more information on this.  And follow all the events that we share.
And we also organise or coorganise.  And, yes, so this IGF is a bit weird to me because it's virtual.  And it's taking place during almost three weeks.  So I just would like to take this opportunity to thank everyone and wish all of you a very fruitful IGF.  Hopefully next year we will reflect on this in person already.  But enjoy the rest of the conference.  And thanks again for all your contributions both in the chat, in questions, and also in the rice pad.  I really enjoyed reading all of that.  Thank you very much. 
>> NOHA:  Can we take a group photo?  Can we allow everyone to open their cams?
>> LILY:  Cameras.  Let me see what I can do.  One moment, please.
>>  Lily, I think you can only allow ‑‑
>>  I activated it.
>>  Say it again of the it has already been activated.
>>  I'm trying to see if I can give everybody a chance.
>>  Take the can take a selfie with us.
>>  Yes.  Imagine how do it.
>>  And post it on Facebook.  On social media with hashtags.
>>  Yeah.
>>  I'm looking.
>> LILY:  Let me see if I can promote to panelists and take it from there.  So Carolina, if you can help, let's have as many people promoted and we can all turn our video.  So I'm doing that, if you join in just click on your video before we leave.  Can you help?  Let's have as many people here.
>>  Yes, yes.  Okay.  Videos on.
>>  Expect this to be your most crowded livestream of the IGF.  So don't worry.  Enjoy it.
>>  Yes.  I see familiar faces.  Take a photo already.
>>  It's really great to see everyone.  Okay.
>>  Is everyone taking screenshots?  Take it.  I see with a baby.  Right.  I think you have a photo now.
>>  Or a hundred.
>> LILY:  Maybe say goodbye also the voices, everybody.
Bye everyone.  
(everyone saying goodbye)  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-dc-netgov-and-news-media-sustainability-in-the-times-of-crisisdc-on-the^^

 
>> Daniel:  We're looking forward to a very engaging discussion.  So just hang tight for just a minute as we let those people filter in.  As Michael mentioned just a couple minutes ago, we do want this a relatively engaging session.  We are using the webinar Zoom format and we encourage attendees to use the Q&A function, use the chat function, if that's available to you.  We'll have a number of presenters and we'll be assuming you have some questions.  So please be very actively allotted with our attendees.  So hope to learn from our presenters, but also from our attendees ‑‑ presenters, but also from our attendees.  Okay am I think we will go ahead and get started.  First of all, welcome.  My name ‑‑ welcome to the session on the Dynamic Coalition on the sustainability of journalism and news media.  This is our 2020 session at internet governance.  My name is Dan O'Malley at the center for international media assistance.  I am one of the co‑coordinators along with this coalition.  And Hebson Owilla in Nairobi.  Now we're really pleased to you have join us today.  We have a really stellar line up of speakers who have contributed to this year's annual report.  In just a couple machines, they will be briefly sharing their research analysis they have done over the past year.
First I want to talk a little bit about the history of our Dynamic Coalition.  The coalition was officially recognized by the IGF last year in 2019.  Thing on thive was to serve as a platform for stakeholders, diverse stakeholders from across the Internet Governance system to engage around media sustainability, which we mean both in the economic terms as well as in the broader forces that uphold independent journalism in society.  And it was born out of recognition that, you know, virtually all elements of the production dissemination were impacted by Internet Governance decisions in some way.  This includes issue from content moderation, to Data Governance, to algorithmic policies, revenue sharing and the digital economy, the list goes on.  Let all too often, these types of impacts on the news ecosystem are not necessarily fully taken into account by other Internet Governance stakeholders.  So we wanted to create a space where that can happen.  Traditionally, news ecosystems have been managed and regulated at the national level, but now the predominance of the Internet has a platform, a global one means the decision being made in Silicon Valley are having enormous impacts in countries around the world.  I'm sure we have all read some of the tragic horror stories.  What comes to mind is the situation in MIAMAR.  The ecosystem has been really impacted by the global Internet Governance decisions and it is something this Dynamic Coalition seeks to shed a spotlight upon.  Back in 2019 when this coalition was formed, the issue of media sustainability was a pressing one, a concerning one.  I don't have to remind you that in 2020 the pandemic hit and that added urgency to this issue.  The economic down turn meant that many independent media were struggling just to survive.  Some have called it a potential extinction of that for independent media in journalism.  However, at the same time, citizen demand for news and information increased significantly.  The need for this independent reporting went up.  And anecdotally, we have heard that alongside this demand, traffic to news websites has also gone up.  So this is a kind of a very challenging time on number of ditch fronts.  It's a very precarious situation for news media and journalism in general.  And but I think there are opportunities coming out of it as well.  In all likelihood, one thing we'll see going out is there will be a larger reliance on digital platforms for the circulation of news, information, economic forces, et cetera.  That means the work of this Dynamic Coalition is likely to grow in importance.  So I think it's a good thing we got this started and we can continue to grow.  I'm going to explain a little bit about how we will run today's session.  That is we are going to be launching an annual report which we'll go live later today.  But today, we're going to have presentations by all of the contributors of this report and my co‑coordinator Courtney Radsch will be leading that discussion and that will be followed by an open discussion and question and answer with all the panelists.  That's going to be the primary thing we'll be doing today.
Before we move to that though, I'd like to give the master of the chair.  She's willing and able and she was very generous with our group to write a preface.  We're very excited to share later on.  Anriette, are you there?
>> She might have already left.
>> Dan O'Malley:  Once we release this, I encourage you to read that.  She doesn't need an introduction, but as a former director for progressive communication and now the chairman of the MAG, she's an incredibly influential person and is deeply committed to overall media development.  We're pleased to have her contribution to this report.  I will now pass the boughton over to Courtney Hadsch who will walk us through.
>> Courtney:  Thanks to everyone who is joining us today for this discussion.  We are disappointed not to have Anriette.  I want to talk briefly as we get into this discussion.  A couple of the three main points that address this report that the Dynamic Coalition focused on this year is the fact that the access to high quality news and information is a fundamental component to all development goals.  I think that one of the ‑‑ that is one of the thins that the creation of this Dynamic Coalition really emphasizes and we'll get into specifics of that as you'll see in the following discussion.
Also the technical and policy decisions that are being made by tech companies and governance treat the impact on the ecosystem as an afterthought rather than thinking about how those decisions will ripple through our information ecosystem and cross‑borders.  And finally, the IGF is a critical venue for discussions on media, sustainability because of its global multi‑disciplinary and multi‑stakeholder scope.  Without further adieu, we are going to kind of take a view of some of these issues at the section of Internet Governance and media sustainability by going and looking at specific case samples and case studies and then widening out to some of the broader systemic issues.  So with that, I would like to invite our first contributor who wrote for Burn from Serbia about the impact of how algorithm removal of news content in Serbia is having an impact there.  Tanya, I will ask for you to kick us off.
>> TANJA:  Hello, everyone.  It is always nice to participate in IGF.  I want to thank you for the opportunity to contribute to the coalition report and I wanted to make a couple of key points about the algorithmic removal of the content in Serbia which I think can be very easily transferred to the bull kin countries and the countries of global south because I feel that problems that you're facing are some what similar.  So basically what I wanted to raise is an issue forum is actually how can we preserve the news content, public importance, reporting, investigative reporting in this situation where digital environment is hampering us in a way.  The situation on the ground in our countries is not shiny as well.  So you can only imagine that we're working in hostile environment in media systems that are quite captured by authoritarian or as we call it liberal government systems.  The only way to bypass the limitations of this system is to be heavily engaged on Internet, heavily engaged on social media platforms.  That means that we need to basically learn and obey the rules that social media platforms are imposing use and that we have to go along with the algorithms and content duration that is posed by social media platforms.  As you will see from some of the examples that I'm going to present now, that is not always going to have public interest and public informing, but what goes more into the monetization systems.  So basically in the period between 2014 and 2020, our monitoring efforts actually mapped 23 cases of algorithmic removal of the content in Serbia, which is fortunately not much, but these cases are quite pivotal in their essence.  So we are talking about 23 cases of removal of the content coming from independent media outlets, coming from social activists, coming from artists, human right artivists.  Among those three cases, you will hardly find case of content with our related to hate speech or spreading of this information.  But more often, you will find cases that are, for example, critical governance or some of their (inaudible).  So you will see that this is actually the part of the society that is long due reporting and prone to content removal.  In these 23 cases as far as the media goes and their sustainability goes, we found two let's say two models of content removal.  One is related to copyright issues.  And that is sort of content removal that is easier to handle because in that case, social media platforms simply cancel the monitorization with others.
In other cases, we're talking about much more sensitive issues.  For example, in our cases, Serbian case, those are the issues, for example, it will make it to Serbia (inaudible) disputes and (inaudible) case.  So you will see all the very sensitive topics but which are still crucially important for our social dialogue.  So they are ‑‑ I mean, obviously quite (inaudible) still quite important for social dial up.  We actually had the case of removal of our two videos which are basically proof of closed ally and closed friend minister material, bribing people in ministers name.  So that video was taken down in one day from the YouTube.  All the ‑‑ these two mechanisms like officially male, like official contact form that don't work or the e‑mails bounce back to us.  So basically we have no mechanism to dispute this decision from the YouTube and we actually have to ask for help from our international organization mart partners to help us to return the content online and it took more than a week.  If you know the media system and how it works one week (inaudible).  So the reach of this video was smaller than it would be if it was published on the time and similar time as the original article was.  So in the coming steps in the coming conversations, I would actually like to see ‑‑ to see media and especially to see media outlets coming from the small markets such as Serbia, coming from the languages that are not English that we would like to see more partnership relations with policymakers on one hand and more partner relayings with companies running storm media platforms or other companies that are actually running the algorithms.  We would also like to see how the new policy framework especially the ones that is now quite heavily debated, you can be transferred to the bull kin countries and to somehow try to close this regulatory and gap because as you can see, our domestic regulation has proper (inaudible) to this case.  Social media platforms as private activities, private companies don't have proper answers to these questions.  So we would really like to see somehow being more on board on this conversation and being more visible as an actor in this conversation.  In the long run, this is ‑‑ more and more people are relying on social media as a source of nude.  We would really like to see how can we sustain our work in that environment and how can we actually expand our stories which have the public importance which are important for social dialog, for political dialogue in our country.  How can it be more expanded through the online.  So I will stop here because I don't want to tame up much more time, but I'm here for all the other questions that you might have.
>> Courtney:  Thank you so much, TANJA.  You can see the bull kin visitative research network and the impact of political topics being removed from social media platforms.  The challenges as you say the smaller countries andinize organizations without access to the big company are not seeing as critical markets for them.  And that the impact of removal can have a detrimental impact on independent media like yours, like the others that you highlighted which makes it harder to sulticate an audience.  It obviously has an impact on sustain act.  I would ren courage everyone to take a look at that chapter when it is oil because there are a series of recommending as to dimple stakeholders and I can think we can get into a discussion of recommendations from that chapter and from others later on.  I want to move next I have a friend on from RNW media.  It takes a look at the love laters global network and again looking at issues of removal and what this means for their work.  So with that, let me hand it over to Anastasia and Ana.
>> Daniel O'Malley:  Actually, I think it will be Fiona presenting.
>> I would love to share my screen and the brief presentation we have prepared.  I'm unailing to share the screen.  I think I'll just go ahead with the ‑‑ just presenting.
So with more than 70% of the world's youth online digital technologies play a central role in young people's easy is with this information.  Independent media and media development organization such as (inaudible) media play a very crucial role insuring young people have easy is to diverse, reliable and quality content that is reflecting young people's needs in order to love, sex, relationships as well as hopes and ambitions they have.
>> We're not seeing your screen.  I I don't know if you're (inaudible).
>> Thank you.  Thank you.
>> Yes.  Wonderful.  Thank you.
>> Yeah?  So doing back to the presentation just a brief understanding of what level of matches is ‑‑ the love matches available network is part of the HRSIwhere organizations in India, Mexico, (inaudible) and Nigeria.  So the ‑‑ young people can easy is information and discuss the sexual reproductive health in a safe space.  This is evident and especially when it come to the inter60ive rates.  People easy is this on social media.  So we focus on the online communication channels to empower and go the few people.  The changing Facebook builts have the type of con10 we're able to offer them.  The ability to reach the audience is all the really decreased in receipt years.  Again, due to Facebook change and policies.  So in order to be able to insure why they teach on our cop tent or
>> We rely heavily on paid sad very tightments and sponsorship on the content.  Even the content is not have the will Facebook policies.
So the content moderation policies often run the risk of censoring content and limiting the right to access information especially when it comes to sensitive topics.  So from 2015 until 202020, we had the total of 1 again, majority of need advertisements took place in the countries where the program is located and DRC Egypt and Kenya, but then again in the instances of advertisement rejection in Nigeria and Mexico.  Look at naming system.  It produces one or two.  Majority of the reasons they give is because the content is considered adult content.  So this seems to be like mischaracterization at hand.  It is social media platforms are a safe place for freedom of expression.  Last year, it got blocked unfortunately.  And during this period, we really had to rely on organic reach in order to reach to the young people and just be able to inform them on their SR HR.  Another limbing factor is the nature of our content.  So somebody ‑‑ this can't be easily addressed or modified for saypack advertisement.  I see this covers roughly 80% of what we share.  So we talk about making love to sex pressures and LGBTF content.  Of and how much ‑‑ furthermore, several studies that have Facebook regulations on sexual and adult content this affect women and result in censorship.  So this varies from region to region if you see the examples of some ads that got rejected the results tend to vary and also previous research and add rejection on platform established that adds tell you that women were frequented ‑‑ but they all the perceived this impact something that was observed in our work.  For this reason, we as the editors for love matches adapt to find creative ways just to be able to try and escape this approval of ads and continue to be aim to be performed on the SR‑‑ there are not any clear conclusions to why Facebook does this.  This lack of clarity around the content moderation builts including application of the community guidelines, terms of service and advertising policies.  Facebook should insure their proximities are clear in line with international human rights standards especially with regards to HR.  There's need for transparency that's why advertisements are rejected and certain tools such as the algorightm play in this process.  The global network call up on social media platforms just to insure the builts of human right space is clear and trans parent and they have an effective appear in place.  Thank you for your time.
>> Courtney:  Great.  Thank you so much.  Seems there are a couple of similarities about how these removals are applied and framework for those removals and certainly a lack of access to remedy any meaningful way to contest those.  I think that the fact that such public interest content is being blocked by the social media platforms because they have labeled it sexual or adult in nature.  But it has a public interest goal should be something that everyone in the Internet Governance community should be concerned about.  And the fact that, that can back on the public information ecosystem.  So thank you for sharing that.
So I am now going to talk about the 30 chapter in the annual report which is one that I wrote coming out of an article I did to protect journalists called politics of labels and how tech platforms regulate state media.  So one of the things that this chapter looks at is how three mange platforms, Facebook, Google and Twitter have rolled out state affiliated media, state controlled media.  They're all using different terminology.  Extensive as an effort to fight this information and propaganda as a way to increase visibility and, um, information for media and information literacy of their users, but what I find is that these labels unsurprisingly are being rolled out in an inconsistent and often less than transparent way.  So for the past two years, you have unimplemented new policies for the state linked media outlets.  And I have a chart in this chapter which I'm not sure I can share my screen.  I will not try to do that.  So if you loom at the way the platforms have taken the approach, let's start with Google which ‑‑ stabling it state controlled media.  Sorry, state funded media and publicly funded media.  My analysis when they first rolled this out showed that it was rolled out first in the United States, but then even had ‑‑ if you went into the about section for the channel, there was no information that would link why it had gotten the label because those secs were attended by the outlet itself.  So Google wrote this out.  Neigh decided to make the decision based on the wicked media article.  Those people and organizations are not identified and c park J was included on that.  But one of the challenges with that is, of course, that Wikipedia is etch ‑‑ and will fact that it wasn't rolled out consistently and they're not collecting any data to look at how that impacts media information literacy or traffic to those websites.
We then saw over this summer specifically in the lead up to the U.S. elections and as well as in the wake of the protests in Hong Kong that both Facebook and Twitter rolled out labeling on their platforms within a few weeks of each other.  Facebook initially was going to roll out their labels back in November, December of 2018, but it paused after I think lot of organizations including media pushed back on their initial thoughts and they did 6 more months of consummations.  They did a pardon me list on who they consulted with.  That included CPJ and myself as well as several others on this call.  They opted for the term state controlled, which has a lot of baggage this comes with it and a lot of the news organizations that feared it.  Get the label especially Al‑Jazeera, RT objected forcefully to that label and nonetheless, they did adopt that terminology.  They have a long list of the factors they look at in terms of making that determination including editorial independent standards, looking at how what is publicly available in terms of that information it is sensitive and there is a team on Facebook that is doing that assessment, but it is not global and it is not consistently applied to all media.  In fact, one media organization called mathic which runs several Facebook and of everyone ‑‑ they filed a lute saying that Facebook's designation was inaccurate and defamer toy.  And so that lawsuit is still ongoing.  And interestingly when I spoke with the director there of the CEO, she wanted to find someone who will touch the ammendment for then.  So then we saw Twitter roll out a label to its users, but it decided to focus only on users in the main ‑‑ in the permanent numbers of the court council. so it gives them more wiggle room.  They roll that out to the the stayed media and state journalists and some political actors who have a represental roled that what person for that government?  The reason they focus on those countries is because they have an outsized impact on the global conversation.  These were labels I would apply to institutional accounts as well as (inaudible) for state affiliated media, which was a different approach than all of the other two.  Now both Facebook and Twitter also included limitations on amplification and advertising four new organizations that.  Can impact their visibility, their reach.  I think a lot of the ‑‑ some state media don't advertise much.  So it's still unclear what the impact is going to be.
One of the billing take aways from the research that I conducted is that we just have no idea what the impact of this is going to be on these media outlets other than them being very concerned about the rollout of the media labels because the platforms are not collecting the data that could potentially be used if they were to share it with other ‑‑ with researchers or journalists.  So I was really locked sufficient not collecting data go engagement, visitation, anything about perception to allow us to see whether it's hag the intended project.  Facebook and Twitter did not have any plans to either that data east.  That meet that the tech lock forms are roll will out builts that have the form term to have a series impact horizors perceive media as well as that able to monitor IRT said it doesn't see any impact on visitation and it likes to say that it is one of the most visited sites on social media, et cetera.  We're relying on self‑reporting by these media outlets which is problematic in itself.  Again, I have a few recommendations and included in here.  I also include greater transparency and access to remedy.  So I think we'll get into those in the organization and I want prop there and touch to this next chapter which is by stellar group, who drafted a chapter and how big tec machine is promoting to ‑‑ threatening democracy.  But we felt it was so important to the issues that we're discussing here that we asked they adapt it for this perforation.  We have elly to discuss the main points of the issues of media sustainability and how the reporter lying correctional disabilities of ‑‑ ain't to understand how target the adrear ticement (inaudible).  Turning it over to you.
>> Ellery:  It is good to see old colleagues and meet new ones.  I only wish we were all together in a room somewhere in the world.  One day.
So that was a game introduction, Courtney.  I will jump right into it.  I would love to share with everyone and I encourage to you read the two reports we did this past spring in which we took a critical look at the social and human rights implications of what drives profit at Facebook, twitter and Google.  This was ‑‑ although we're a global research organization, this was a focused project.  But the implications and serve everyone I am going to talk about here are completely as relevant.  If some cases, I would argue more so outside of the United States.  Much so all three of these tech giants have built their, models on targeted advertisement that can determine the reap of a message by targeting users who are most likely to share it.  As we all know, this can influence the view points of tens or even millions of people.  This group here I am so great of the surfaced ample evidence of how they have content for civil seedia, media as we put something some into that situation, this information about hill, can literally mean lifer ‑‑
So our first report lays out the problems at hand and shows how simply raining in content were trying to develop this seemingly unreachable perfect policy for content is not going to lead to better outcomes for the digital public sphere or for human rights.  Using algorithmic systems to filter content it won't solve the problems and it will create others as our colleagues have shown.  There is sort of endless collateral censorship of really important messages.  On this note, we also in our pain every urged U.S. policymakers to preserve section 230 of the communes decency act which protects platforms from legal sponge posted by users.  Our argument is that instead companies need to be held accountable for how content is amplified and targeted.  What we do know and colleagues here like Tanja and Fiona of helping us see is how content shaping algorithms actually affect what kinds of information people are able to see and access.  What is driving these is actually profit.  Companies use ‑‑ show users viral content, serve them ads and collect more data about them among the way.  This helps companies target or in their words personalize content and more ads and what becomes anentless iterative process.  In the targeting systems and general rely on these and other invasive data collection practices to create detailed digital profiles of users.  We all know that anyone who can buy ads on the platform to target specific groups of people in any number of ways including with manipulative or misleading messages that can result in unfair and sometimes illegal discrimination.  Reliance on revenue from targeted advertising incentivizes companies to design platforms that are addictive that manufacture verrallity and maximize the information that a company can collect about its users.  Our data shows that companies are unacceptably opaque about how the systems work as well as how political actors are using these systems.  As many of my fellow panelists have made clear, this lack of transparency makes it impossible to have an informed discussion about solutions and about how best to regulate this industry.  So our bigger call here is actually for government regulation in the U.S., but we still build in recommendations for companies.  We urge them to undertake corporate due diligence on the impact of these systems to set and enforce rules to prevent malicious manipulation and have transparency processes to understand who is influencing what kind of content they see online and why they are seeing it.  So on the question of regulation, we know think we can drastically reduce the power of harmful content if we focus on regulating companies underlying data driven and money making technological systems of the soy we argue they should adopt an international human rights framework for holding the companies account automobile.  And will we were again focusing on the big companies in the U.S., such a framework can be as applicable in many other jurisdictions.  Part overemphasis is using international human rights standards can allow law makers to determine how best to regulate the companies while prioritizing users rights to private and free speech.  We proposed a few areas where wed like congress to act to mitigate some of these harms.  First is transparency and accountability for all types of online advertising and requirements we have in the U.S. that currently only apply to print and broadcast political ads.  We argue those should just be due to the impossibility of question fining what is a political ad these days is just apply those standards.  And lastly, we're pushing for corporate governor an reform that would require companies to disclose information pertaining to social and human rights impacts of these systems.  Where we put our work and emphasis is passing a strong data privacy law.  If this were to happen and if it were effectively enforced, this could really make a big difference in the degree to which Internet users are protected from the types of discrimination inherent in automated content optimization and could also go a long way to limit the viral spread of harmful messages.
Communities around the world paying the price for companies failures to make credible efforts to understand and track their social impact is so clear from this group and to take responsibility for preventing and mitigating social harms that their business can cause or contribute to.  It is time to adjust course and design a resilient and equitable information environment that protects human rights and civil liberties especially in times of crisis and change like these.
>> Courtney:  Great.  Thank you so much, Ellery.  I think that's an important summary.  We'll delve into more ramp aidings, I think, again we're seeing definite themes here.  And as your chapter focuses on some recommendations for how U.S. policymakers might think about regulating platforms which are based largely based in the country that they have jurisdiction over, I want to turn now to the EU because it is also looking at how to regulate the platforms which though not necessarily based there.  They have operations there.  Nonetheless have a huge impact on their met ecosystems.  I want to turn over to Olaf Steenfadt.  This is based on a report hey did over the summer as well.  OLAF is looking at how social media has turned our ‑‑ any discussion related the clean up tech companies and looking specifically at the European Commissions, plans for the digital services act and new that can be used to foster sustainability.  I want to turn now to Olaf.  If you can give us an overview on the chapter, that would be great.
I think as a point of departure, we look at the whole situation currently as a big window of opportunity in many, many ways as it was said before, definitely the COVID situation provides a bit of a reckoning for all of us in many, many ways.  Particularly also at policy levels where currently I think trustworthy information is revalued again because it can literally save lives as it was mentioned earlier.  At the same time, quite synically, it pushes media outlets and operations further to the cliff edge economically as well.  At the same time, we see digital services act materializing which will become one way or the other quite significant piece of platform regulation.  Not only at the European level, but also for member states.  And in the inception of the digital services act, we also see a few platform and understanding of multi‑lateralism in this particular field particularly involving I would call them miss powers.  So countries like Canada, Australia, Japan and some of the EU member states looking at these issues with much more priority.  When we speak about legislative policy approaches, I think the trigger term is always market failure and obviously I think everybody would agree that we look at I think a range of different market failures along the value of change in the digital economy.  And this also interestingly and maybe also programming cod ins with the mandate off the European Commission off the field of competition.  So this is I think very, very important to keep in mind.  We speak about approaches and solution.  And when we speak about anti‑trust competition and trade irrelevant points here or approaches, in the end, it will come to one way or the other.  It will come through redistribution and, of course, also concentration on measures against concentration, market concentration as well.  As this will happen, we are asking ourselves how we can help to get it right or at least not totally wrong.  There was a lot of caveats and RSF we see this quite critically with lots of fun evidence that this is also limiting freedom of speech and human rights in some cases scientifically if this way of thinking is enforced in other places.  Move forward to more ‑‑ the legal technical term is due prominence logic and even regulation in this field.  Interestingly, particularly on the end of the European Commission, but also member states does have Legacy.  If you think of traditional must carry rules in broadcasting, which would oblige cable operators or EPGs to carry are for example, public service media or local media prominently.  Another example of due prominence is stipulation for a quota for European works in the auto visual network.  So this kind of affirmative action, if you wish, has already a Legacy.  It must be found kind of thinking in the digital world and how to do it technically.  What we are proposing and what we believe is kind of condition to get this going first of all is to have a unfeed list of criteria what we mean by the good and obviously this is not so much looking on individual pieces of content because we would believe this is terrible idea to try and rank and rate and judge content because it can asly be misused and turned into censorship, but rather look at the process level, the manufacturing level of journalism.  This is what we have tried to propose and publish actually as a European standard called the journalism trust initiative late last year.  So that exists already.  Publish another professional norm because an abundance of professional norms exist already, but to add additional level of compliance.  And as a journalist, I might say that when I speak about reconning that the whole situation we face is also a deep look into the mirror right now and as we all know a look into the mirror is not always pleasant.  So the underlying question here is:  Do we stick as a community to our own norms and what happens if we don't?  So this is what we mean by a compliance mechanism tied to unified criteria.  The third requirement would be to turn these cert fixing a or compliance level into machine readable signals, which then can inform both algorithmic and human decision making and the fourth and then I'm coming back to net governance and legislation.  The force let's say make use of these instruments.  This is what we're currently proposing particularly if you want a co‑regulatory approach which is a European especially.  EU policy instruments exist already to describe what we mean by co‑regulation.  And I'm not a lawyer or legal expert, but in very broad strokes means that you have a shell and out of shell of hard law, a legal obligation.  And then a core of self‑regulatory standards.  So to bore an example from another industry, you would have a law that tells you that cars must be safe, but no law in the world would explain or tell you what a safe car looks like.  You have industry standards that would deliver or provide technical specs and also because technology changes all the time and you don't want to change the law all the tie.  So the law references technical standards.  If as a manufacturer you sticky to those standards and you're in compliance with this and you prove it and get audits, you are automatically basically in line with the legal obligation.  If you choose not to in industry standards are volunteer, then your liability is much higher.  So this is in a nut shell how this logic works and this is what we saw to translate into the field interestingly, we got I think promising feedback and a level of:eration with advertising sector which also ‑‑ it shows quite a significant demand of the signals.  They call it brand safety which means to identify safe environments online.  And if we can manage to tie and spend to compliance with professional norms, we believe it can essentially help to remonetize trustworthy sources.  This is not only the ladies and gentlemen and policy, but also the I would say fungality and technical infrastructure we would like to propose and to implement in.  I think I will leave it to you.
>> Sure.  There are lots of questions about that.
>> Thank you so much and interesting in getting this into conversation without thinking about how we could bring together an approach that would cross the Atlantic.  Before we do that, I want to turn to our last but not least chapter.  I also wanted people to get ready for questions.  Put them into the chat.  Raise some of the issues.  We'll have 15 minutes after the final presentation, maybe 20 depending on Mike and Murrah.  We definitely could not make this work without Michael and the organization to keep us on top.  A little thank you from me and the other co‑coordinators.
You guys wrote the final concluding chapter on threats to media sustainability and freedom of expression, the digital age really taking a global look at some of the major issues facing journalism today, the pathways for addressing some of the core issues with financial sustainability, economic viability and the digital age and arguing for a wider more robust legislative conversation on the digital economy which sounds like it builds right on with what we're hearing.  With that, I will turn it over to Michael.
>> MICHAEL:  Thank you for that kind introduction, Courtney.  It's been such a pleasure working with you as well.  It's great to see how this was just an idea that came about at IGF2017.  And here we are.  It's launched and has co‑coordinators and excellent ones at that.  Now we're about to launch our first annual report.  This is the culmination of essentially a dream of ours, which to make this happen.  So thank you and obviously to everybody who made this possible.  I really am not going to speak long because I think the chapter ‑‑ I almost wanted to stand almost like a reference for the community going forward.  It's a bit of a departure from the rest of the case studies and analysis featured as it takes a broader and maybe wholistic, but laying out the lay of the land but that is specifically understanding how media sustainability and freedom of expression are closely InterConnected.  If you can take one thing away from my intervention, it should be this.  I personally really love this axium that's being developed.  It's not my axium.  It may have come from the international center for governance.  You cannot have press freedom without the press.  It's almost irrelevant if we have strong protects for press freedom.  If the press and journalism and these nudia in general cannot sustain themselves in the current market environment that exists around the world or even non‑profit media were not able to sustain.  I want to be as brief as I can.  That's over two decades changing in the political and social and compromised sustainability and the independent of nude media globally and then the ability for journalist and news media to even survive.  With COVID‑19 with amplifying the crisis, the coming years will be for the out of and one of the main pillars for many news rooms advertising it goes a little bit into this what we it guys into this problem exploring not just advertising revenue, business models which Ellery and OLAF go way into more detail, but we give an overview of some of those threats, media consolidation, media capture.  Obviously and then there are certain things that we don't necessarily mention by name.  But we ‑‑ we essentially of of much ‑‑ strategic litigation against public participation.  Something like Slaps are being used to essentially force or bring resources that could be asked for investigative journalism to now face, you know, long drawn out court procedures.  That undermines not just press freedom, but also sustainability of journalism.  Something like right to be forgotten.  Something very close to my heart that I worked closely with Dan on.  We are now seeing how right to be forgotten cases or being used again of there's already been closures because there is not the ability for news orals to sustain themselves especially going up against people that are very well financed and very well have many, many lawyers on their team.  The point of this is these are just examples of how ‑‑ we cannot separate one from the other.  So with that said, there's a lot more that I could be saying.  But I think that's a gad place to leave it for now.  I want to thank everybody once again for making this possible and I look forward to the discussion.
>> Courtney:  Thank you so much, Michael.  I think the fact that you pointed out the right to be forgotten which was really seen as regulating search results, but as you said, it has been riponnized against journalists and media.  It was a really interesting case in Italy why a media outlet end up shutting down because it could not comply and local authorities interpreting the right to be forgot tone then many the source, the journalistic sources are not then able to keep their arms up.  So loots to dig into here.  I want to invite people to stick a message in the chat if you'd like to to again, put that in the chat.  So while we wait for people to engage, I want to bring together a couple of things we heard here.  So the journalism trust initiative.  The idea of labels on media and political adds.  You have a comprehensive ad database.  All these aspects that could increase transparency.  One of the things that stands out to me in these chapters is that there really is a challenge with national level remedies because they're unlikely to be effective and we really need to look at something that's broader because of the global scope of the technology platform and the Internet.  So I want to turn to TANJA and Fiona to get some thoughts about what you heard from some of the ‑‑ in the centers of power that are regulating that have the power to regulate and impose regulations and legal frameworks on the tech platform.  So the United States are U.S. and the EU.  If we think about this co‑regulatory approach, if we think about increase efforts, increase transparency like this and using existing instruments, do you think that will have an impact in improving the situation on the ground for the type of media outlets that you guys are working with and the issues that you're seeing with content removal?  Let me turn first to op‑‑
>> Thank you for your question.  Yeah.  It is a bit tricky to say yes.  The correlation (inaudible) for it all.  But I think that some sort of regulation and some sort of policy dialogue really needs to kick off.  Somehow we are in the shadow of all these processes that are launched at the EU level as OLAF explained and theus explained it a little bit earlier.  So we are really open to all discussions that somehow see us as an actor.  If there are no regulatory mechanisms that are now ‑‑ that could be put in place and could be effective, let's try a different approach.  Let's try increasing our transparency and industry regiumer toy mechanisms and let's try to negotiate with the platforms to take a little bit more responsibility on their side.  So I'm not expecting that this correlation is going to be (inaudible) but I think that's one step towards the some sort of social.
>> Courtney:  RNW media is working in countries with problems with the exception of India which has probably more influence than some of the other countries where you guys work like Mexico, Kenya and Nigeria and Egypt.  What do you see?  Especially these countries do not tip really have a place at the table in a lot of these conversations over how to regulate, co‑regulate, et cetera.
>> Fiona:  I will say the first thing is give these countries a place at the table just for us to also have a better understanding of what is expected of us when you use such platforms.  As I mentioned before, each region has its own reasons as to why it adds up and being reflected.  Just having that better understanding by having also a chance to explain ourselves and say this is what we say for country.  If that level of transparency is maintained or increased, then even for us within the countries we would know this is good for us to post or I just saw a content in a way that would not have the policies and at the same time, bible to provide this information to our target audience.
>> Courtney:  A lot of cases you have raised would be interesting ones.  I want to turn to Rachel from UNESCO who has ‑‑ who wants to ask a question.  Please go ahead, Rachel.
>> Rachel:  Hello.  Hi, everyone.  I think I was there at the meeting in 2017 at the pre‑event.  And Daniel and we talked about ‑‑ really fan of thetic and Courtney is always a former colleague who is just brilliant everywhere that I have seen her.  First, this topic is so relevant and I think it is getting more and more attention and also within UNESCO something one the work on freedom of expression, development costs freedom.  We're being look more at media socio enact.  Hope of there be some aspect about that in the spring.
And also Courtney is familiar with media trends and we will have a focus on journalism as the possible good.  And information as a public good.  I think we can continue that.  In terms of questions, I probably only have time for one.  Maybe I'll throw out about three or four and you can decide which one you have time to answer.  Look will at the last year, it seems that there have been a lot of developments in this area of business mots and the platforms.  So I'm thinking first of the hate for profit movement seems like a long time ago now police violence and racism and the role of some of these platforms.  So I wonder what you think the capability of that was or could be of those kind of simple society mobile vacation and then now ongoing the discussions about anti‑trusts violations and the practices of various platforms and whether they may be regulated and new ways.  There's a side of the anti‑trust as well as viability for content and section 230.  Again, what impact do you think that might have?  Civil side or regulation.
On the issue of targeted advertising.  I read the report was moved toward back targeted advertising.  I don't know what your thoughts are on how likely that might to be pass.  And then as I said ‑‑ transparency and there are many different forms of transparency or aspects of transparency that we can talk about.  What sort of forms of transparency do you think are the most important are important and feasible and actually getting change in the near future?  So thank you.
>> Courtney:  I want to go to oh LAF to give us some thoughts and we have a question about what we would have to do to convince large advertisers to show more responsibility in their ad spending and whether imposing more transparency is a necessary prerequisite.  So Olaf, take a first stab at answering Rachel's first or second.
>> OLAF:  I think they have not voted on a law but just passed.  I think initiative report will then feed into digital services draft and discussion.  On targeted advertising, I can give you my personal take.  I think this is obviously the business model of large parts of the internet and taking this away just so it might have unintentional consequences.  I think the targeting is probably not so much the problem, but transparency and folds are misleading incentives.  I think the task is more to reverse the incentives in targeting and personal.  You can always say personalizing the Internet that's right than just abolishing it at large.  The apoff ‑‑ I was just reflecting from what I hear.  It might be easier to reign in just Facebook rather than having 10 Facebooks and race to the bottom of lowering the standards and dealing with them.  Maybe a more of so just basically of these ‑‑ so for example, shops and other services that Uber provides that integrated and treated preference in search, this is an anti‑trust issue.  Not so much having six search engines attend as a consumer.  Yes?
>> Let me go to Fiona on the issue of the advertising because I could see how something like stop for hate if they say we don't want our content to show up next to sex or anything to do with love or, you know, sexual reproduction, et cetera.  Is there the wreck of an unattended consequence?  What are your thoughts about this approach to paid advertising and the power of what the issues that Rachel raised in her question.
>> Fiona.  I would say like Facebook would be clear.  We don't want to see words such asking is.  We make sure that we don't violate such policies so that we make hour is our ads are approved and we share much needed information.  Even as much as we try to sensor our content and it's not that our content is completely explicit, but every time we try to sense our content, it still gets disapproved for some reason.  So the one thing we are asking or one thing we're hoping to see improve in the future is just the ‑‑ making sure the policies are sufficient and clear enough.  I feel like they're a bit vague.  Again, reach on base ‑‑ region focused something that would initially benefit my region would ideally be different from some of the region, but for Facebook to make that clear and again in regards to that need for transparency, I would say the most burning issue for me working a lot with Facebook ads is figuring out how much human content moderation is used while determining which ads are valid and which ones report.  We have no idea whether it's ‑‑ a content would not fit and then be disapproved and just also trying to understand what is the process of an ad being disapproved would know very helpful for us shaping our.
>> Courtney:  Thank you.  I know there's a lot more in Rachel 'questions, but I would encourage people to read the report.  I think there are some potential responses to that.  I do want to get to some of the other questions in the chat.  There are two related ones.  What role might NGOs and entities that support independent media worldwide, what role can they play?  That question comes from Laura Davis.  Just the consideration of whether, you know, are there alternative platforms that journalists and activists and front liners need and this is coming from Esther.  Are there other existing platforms?  I want to open it up and I will ask panelists that maybe I will go to Ellery to get your thoughts on that as an NGO yours.  And if you want to provide some input on that.
>> Ellery:  For a income of years before, I was the advocacy director at (inaudible) where we were encountering these kinds of issues both in a variety of ways, you know, the kinds of cases that Fiona and Tanja have raised and writing about.  But also, we're always struggling to keep up with the rules and the changes and algorithm so we can make sure people can see our stories.  And I just think that it's so important for journalists to report on exactly the kinds of issues that you two are raising.  And to find screwed, strategic ways to do that reporting when it will ‑‑ when it can be loud and heard by powerful actors.  I think the example of Miramar is one of them.  It's huge and has particularly horrifying characteristics, but the fact that in the congress in the U.S., there was a moment in these hearings where suddenly everybody knew about this role that Facebook had played in a genocide.  That's series impact that was achieved because of journalists and activists in the country working together and making sure this message was received.  And so I can't stress enough how important I think that kind of pressure is because the companies ‑‑ I deep know what is going to happen with regulation, but they hate bad PR.  They hate to look that bad and it is sometimes up to journalists to find the way to put on the pressure publicly.
>> Courtney:  Thank you, Ellery.  I want to talk to Mira that will address the issue if you wanted to jump in on the advertising question.  Please go ahead.
>> Mira:  Thank you, Courtney and everyone.  I didn't want to speak much, but just to follow up also on Lauren's question what organizations can do and then reflect and advertising as well.  One of our great achievements as international non‑profit community that works in this area is to establish this coalition.  And together, we have created many conversations that had fed into very important policy discussions over the last couple of years.  So for instance, all of it has been involved together with ranking digital rights and also CPJ in Europe upon with coordinate.  There was also a very significant contribution on the question and we have all signed a powerful submission calling for universal at transparency.  So this Dynamic Coalition has contributed to that and we feel there are so many other conversations that we are having at the moment where groups like this and also having information from all around the world including Kenya and Bullkins is allowing us to feed a better quality information into these discussions.  On the firstly, the brands have been named and named and it went to the of the direction, but back listing a lot of content they consider to be tricky to be next to.  So pored‑‑ it had created some the guidance included a lot of journalism as a risky category.  So there were so many fights and hills that we need to climb in this conversation.  So just to kind of cut this long story short in the future, we have top ask as the secretariat of the Dynamic Coalition from all of you.  First, let us know how we can also make all these conversations more inclusive.  So what are the ways and channels except from Zooming things where we can bring more of the voices from around the world into all the policy conversations.  And the second ask is forever all of you to send us contacts of organizations and experts in your countries and your regions that it involved with informing also international conversations.  We can have more exchange of best practices and ideas.  So that's so much for me.  Thank you very much.
>> Courtney:  Well, thank you so much, Mira.  I know we are coming up on the understand of our time.  There are other questions including Facebook oversight board.  It had not yet become operational, but I have very little doubt many of us will be discussing about how we are going to leverage that new entity.  So we are out of time.  I want to thank them for a really interesting discussion.  I think we can go on much longer and with that, I guess I'd like to ask HESBON if he would like to say a couple of concluding remarks.  I know he's also ‑‑ go ahead EHESBON.
>> Thank you ever have much, Courtney, and all participants and the panelists.  Is this is a great experience to join in and listen to the names behind the reports.  It's been great working with Michael and with tire marks ANJA and Courtney.  Still learning a lot about IGF.  It is God to meet all of us.  Could have been much greater if you were in Poe land, but they say technologies of a group (inaudible) because we can easily meet at a very interesting time of the COVID pan dimming.  We look forward to directing with this of all I can say right now is thanks to all of you and take it back to Courtney.
>> Daniel O'Malley.  Apologies there.  If you hear something, I'm fine.  But yeah.  We're going to have to wrap up.  I want to thank a couple people.  I want to especially thank the global form media for being or secretariat Mira and Michael in particular along with their assistants.  A also want to thank our captioner and our technical assistants from the IGF who are helping us make this happen.  We can't be there in person.  So they're making this work virtually.  Because we can't be there virtually, people are interested in turning on your video.  We can take a really quick screen grab, a picture to show that we were here and we have had really engaging discussion about needed sustainability.  If you want to, go ahead.  Fix your hair, turn your camera on and we'll take a quick screen grab.  I want to also just say we're planning this work to continue.  We'll be reaching out to you as the co‑coordinators to hear what members of the Dynamic Coalition want to do.  If you want to join the mailing list, join the website.  I will ask Michael if he can put the website back on the chat.  You will get an e‑mail from us soon as we think about what type of activities we'll be doing next year and also it sounds like world press (inaudible) day might be an interesting place where we can take some of this information and engage it.  And, of course, we'll be working on an annual report next year.  So if you are identifying new topics at the I. section of guarantee governance and media development, we encourage to you submit and become part of the conversation.  Now I will go ahead and take a couple screen grabs on the count of 3.  1, 2, 3.  Okay.  And now page 2.  1, 2, 3.  Great.  I think that we have to make do with what we can.  We're able to have a lot more participation.  It's really great to see your faces and have you all involved.  Thank you very much for attending today.
>> Courtney:  Thanks, everyone.
>> Daniel O'Malley.  Thank you so much to our authors as well.  We'll be circulating it very shortly.
>> Court:  Bye.
>> MICHAEL:  Thank you, all.  Take care.
>> Bye, everyone.   
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-dc-on-data-and-trust-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> Emily Taylor:  Good morning, good evening.  This is the coalition on data and trust.  If that's the intention you are trying to join, you're in the right place.  Very pleased to see your attendance today.  We will get started at our scheduled time in two minutes.  And continue is very good to see you in the crowd today.  I understand you have very many demands on your time.  Very delighted you've been able to join today.  We'll get started in 2 minutes.  Thank you.
Okay.  I think we'll get started.  Welcome, everything, and welcome to IGF 2020.  I want to do a few housekeeping things before we get into the substantive discussions.  Of course, for those of you who have been to IGF, we don't have the opportunity to all be together, neither do we have the tune to have the full round table experience where no voice is privileged and every voice is welcomed and able to participate.  We're in a constrained environment and I think we should all Thank the members of the IGF and the secretariat for doing such a tremendous job to get the IGF online fully this year.  We're in a sort of webinar format in Zoom.  If you, marked as an attendee rather than a panelist, we're not able to give you the microphone or camera on this occasion.  Oh, actually, enryet is saying we can elevate all participants to panel I wants if we want more inclusion.  Can I ask the remote moderators to elevate our attendees so that everybody can join the conversation?  That would be most appreciated.
Okay.  My name is Emily Taylor.  I am the CEO of operation labs.  One of the sessions along with Giovanni Seppia, if you would like to take the floor after we run through the initial panel presentations, please either raise your hand using the raise hand ‑‑ I don't know if we have the raised hand actually or type in the Q&A.  I think this is better.  Type in the Q&A if you would like to take the floor and then we can arrange to unmute you, I think.  We'll figure it out.
So back in 2006, I was privileged to be part of the first manage in the IGF under the brilliant chairmanship.  And that's where the idea of Dynamic Coalitions first took hold.  There is a lot in that concept.  It is both in the grouping of people.  They can come in and out according to the sent, also the themes and the label of the coalition for the willing who all want to gather around particular issues and explore them in the safe space that the IGF provides for discussion, exploration of issues without the strain and stresses of particular outcomes being held or the negotiation that is there in many environments.  What happened we wanted to do this year was to bring together people to explore issues around data and trust.  We have deliberately kept that to be a very open and very wide scope.  Data, if you're in the domain industry as many of us are here today, data would immediately take your mind to registration data, to accuracy, to issues of D, in S abuse arising from poor data and the impact that has on trust.  If you are coming from more of a platform environment, more of, you know, somebody like Lisa Maria from the Oxford Internet here, you would be thinking data has information.  The relationship between data points and bringing those together to form into information and also the impact that has on trust.  What is poor information, what is truthful, disinformation.  So what we wanted to do was to bring these two communities together, the domain name industry operating below the level of the application of content, but yet very connected with it.  And also the platforms which have been studied almost as an Internet in their own right whereas if they are all part of the internet that we are supporting in the Internet Governance forum.
So that's really what we had in mind and Giovanni will introduce these ideas and explore them further.  Let me just introduce our speakers who are going to kick off these themes.  First of all, I'll call on Giovanni Seppia, who is the external relations manager at EURid he's held since 2007.  He coordinates a team of 20 all over Europe who manage their relations on registrars and registrants in marketing relations and also liaison with the European institutions.  Prior to that, Giovanni was the general manager at center.  He was also involved for many years at the Italian registry and also at ICANN as well.  His background is with the masters in EU policies and programs will Venice international university.  So we're also hoping to have Pablo Belo who is a Chilean economists and has had a background working with the Chilean government from the late ' 90s to 2010.  He's working currently with what's app and has also had a number of roles including on the manage and also on the global global on Internet Governance.
Lisa Maria NEUDERT a core researcher in the propaganda project and has been exploring all aspects of public and private governance surrounding this information whether that's to do with elections, electoral interference or this year very much focusing on the so called info demic.
ANTOAN is a Ph.D. students studying with innovation and competitiveness.  He's joining us today as a member of EURideracy youth committee and he's very well coming in that role.  But he also is a man of parts having innovative founded three companies in the fields of innovation and information technologies and has chaired several non‑profit organizations and is a former representative of all students in the biggest university in Bulgaria.  Welcome today, ANTOAN.
And we have Roberto ‑‑ Alberto RABBAKHIN.  He tackles online misinformation.  So highly relevant to today's discussion and prior to joining the commission, Alberto is a research scientist at the Massachusetts institute of technology.
We also expecting floor points to be made by Peter van Roster of center who is the general manager at Center.  Very much welcomed today and also I'm hoping that Gran Bunton will say a few words, but I'm aware it's extremely early for participants from North America.  So that's the imroductions ‑‑ introductions.  Delighted to have you all here today for this inaugural session.  We're going to be talking about the impact of the pandemic and how that brings aspects of the DNS and all the platforms and I hope we can have a trillion active discussion.  With that, let me call on Giovanni Seppia and also ‑‑ Giovanni Seppia and also focus on the pandemic.
>> Giovanni Seppia:  Thank you for the nice introduction.  With your support, we have been joining IGF through many forms and this year with all the pandemic, we thought it was a good student to start a Dynamic Coalition which is two areas that are not so much covered by the Dynamic Coalition after assessing what are the Dynamic Coalition function.
So the optative of this Dynamic Coalition is indeed, to explore the difficult balance between data and trust.  From multi‑stakeholder perspective so not only registries as EURid, which is in Latin and (inaudible),  but also from the perspective of other stakeholders including youth and institutional perspective.  If you do not mind, I would like to open this session with a tribute to somebody who passed away in the last 24 hours.  It was Madeline Kate.  Madeline has been an active member of the IGF from the very beginning and she passed away and, you know, as I said, it's a difficult balance between that and thruster.  I remember that Marilyn was one of the strongest people I ever met when it comes to freedom of expression.  So many years ago during a public forum when the ICANN public forums were really live debates, she had a really strong and very vibrant exchange of views with Vincent who of the chair of the ICANN Board.  We're talking about 15 years ago.  And then I was working for ICANN in data.  I approached Marilyn.  I said, Marilyn, don't you think you are a bit too harsh on vicinity?  And she said, Giovanni, freedom of expression comes first.  And this is something important to acknowledge and understand that indeed, you know, freedom of expression is as important as making sure that there's a good balance between data checks and trust.  And results another sentence of one of the latest IGF.  She has participated in.  I am quoting this sentence from Marilyn intervention.  She said the skills needed to be discerning consumer of information sources on the Internet are not taught at any level in the education system regardless of the country you are living in.  And this is so much true because again, nobody is telling us how to let's say discern, assess, ponder the information that we are literally bond from theth net and this is, you know, about data.  So all the data we have received on a daily BASIS from different sources, from different online sources.  So, you know, just a tribute to somebody was contributed a lot to the IGF and to the old Internet dialogue.  So thanks a lot to Marilyn.
With that said, the originnistry manager of the Latin, Greek and (inaudible) when the old pandemic started, we were upon the European commission.  When the old pandemic started, there were great concerns about the data that may have been circulated about the pandemic and also may have been associated to the main names.  In our case, the (inaudible) domain names.  We have started a process at EURid to check the quality of the data.  The process led us to prevent the delegation of about a bit over today.  5,000 domain names.  Ukid has 3.6 million domain names registered and out of the several hundred thousand of domain names that have been registered in April, we delayed about 5,000 because those 5,000 contained key words that are and were associated to the pandemic.  It doesn't mean that those key words, those domain words were associated with abusers, but however, it was appropriate to check the data of the registrant and therefore, you know, so we did.  And we have to say that the quantity of domain names we have reported to law enforcement authorities that again possibly are associated to abusers and are also associated to the current pandemic is really minimal.  So we have seen that out of all domain names, only 0.71% of those that we have reported to law enforcement authorities are associated to possible abusers as well as to the pandemic.
We have also started a great dialogue with all our stakeholders to see how we can improve the quality of the data in our database and also to make sure that the data is seen as the domain name of a trust working environment.  We believe there are some take aways of the past months.  Those take aways are ‑‑ say take aways that are common whenever you start any assessment or any investigation or any action.  The first one being that the ecosystem of the DNS should be seen as a sort of family ecosystem.  It's back to work as in a family with a great level of cooperation among all the stakeholders involved.  So it's not just a registry operator job, but it is also a register operator and going back to Marilyn and educating also the end user.  The registrant and consumer to make sure they are aware that there is the need data quality for their own safety, not because somebody likes to chase people until they give confirmation of the data, but just because, you know, it's their own safety that comes first and because that comes first, they need to provide reliable data just in case something happens and you need to contact them.
And also another important take away of what we have been doing with all the checks and data is that there should be the definition of clear goals.  So let's say the effectiveness of any measure should be always linked to clear goals.  Otherwise you end up really fishing in an ocean without, you know, having in mind how many fish you like to fish and therefore because of that, you end up doing a small action which is not so much anec fect on the entire ‑‑ an effect on the entire system.  As I said, there's the need for greater cooperation and what I said we have had a great dialogue with our registered community to improve what we are doing.  I believe a great dialogue in data and trust environment is needed to make sure that in the future, all the actors of the Internet DNS ecosystem they work together to insure the quality of data, but at the same time, by insuring the quality of data, they also increased the trust in our environment.
So with that said, die want to take any longer.  I know there are other speakers.  I'm happy to answer any questions later on.  Thank you for the opportunity and thank you all for joining this Dynamic Coalition inaugural meeting.  Thank you.
>> Emily Taylor:  Thank you also for that wonderful trib university to Marilyn Kate who was, you know, such a figure in this environment and a friend to so many of us.  Thank you for, um, for mentioning her and bringing her into your comments today.  Very interesting efforts being made by EURid and for some other registries to try to spark domain names linked to possible misinformation.  I am going to come back to you in the chat on those percentages and also I think the, you know, the levels of cooperation and efforts to create data quality.  So thank you very much for those introductory remarks.  Pablo Belo is our next speaker from What's App.  I was just checking to see if you have audio and video.  If not, we can skip.
>> Pablo Bello:  Yes.  I'm here.
>> Emily Taylor:  Very warm welcome to you, Pablo.  Thank you for joining and to discuss COVID‑19 trends in the social media environment and particularly from your view point in your ole in What's App in Latin America.  The floor is yours, Pablo and welcome.
>> Pablo Bello:  Emily other for me at a pleasure to participate in this panel with all of you and be more involved in the Dynamic Coalition for me would be awesome.  Thank you very much for the invitation.  As a member, it's very ‑‑ I am very proud to participate in this new IGF in this we are complex year that we are facing now.  Very happy to be with you.
Well, the issues that we are debating today are quite important, of course.  And deeply linked within the pandemic.  Very much underneath the challenge we are facing are not new started many times before COVID and, of course, even many times before Internet at all.  We are facing a crisis in trust that is affecting the core institution of our societies and nobody can say that the current situation of the world has been caused by Internet or the platform at all.  Nevertheless, this information is a critical issue.  It's very important.  It has always assisted.  It is nothing new, but, of course, in the super connected world, this information could play faster and farther and this is a really important problem.  It's important to mention also that we still don't know how misinformation really affects our perception of reality and how in the real world how implications has been in our lives.  Some time ago, an article said Eco chambers are killing the democracy, but after that, this particular form is four years ago.  So after that many research have found that connected people are actually receiving information for more diverse sources of news outlets than the analog people.  So this Eco chamber and misinformation issues are a problem, of course.  But it is not totally clear how they have affected our real life.  I think there's a state of some sociological or psycho logic research that is needed to understand completely how misinformation acts in a different way and this is still inconclusive.  Nevertheless, we read this information to have a problem to all of us for citizens, for Civil Society governments, for communities and, of course, for platforms.  It's totally important and this is what we are doing is critical to fight against that.  So let me talk a little about COVID, the pandemic this year, this complex year for all of us.  What are we doing to fight against misinformation in What's Inn.  The first one is nothing new.  But lockdowns and quarantines have changed the way people international.  This is our new normal of business is connected and seated in front of a screen.  The Internet has been more important now than even before.  So to be connected is not the topic of our plan, but still to close the divide is pretty important and even more important because of that.  And these are platforms and what some in particular have an infrastructure to be in touch with friends and relatives to work for edge, to contact health services.  Some data that I want to share I think is amazing.  What's app at the beginning of the year surpass the number of 2 billion users worldwide.  And at the beginning of the pandemic, What's App surpassed and this is our new normal.  100 billion message by day.  100 billion message by day.  I think this is huge.  This is 5 times the peek of the S system has in the whole history of the SMS platform solution.  So it's huge.  And in many parts of the world, What's app has been a small and medium business in regards to the lockdown.  But still, 40% of the world population is isn't connected.  In many places of the world what's app and the platform are the old way that people can interact and to participate in the e‑Commerce and to buy goods and services and so on.
So COVID has accelerate the word economy and this, of course, makes our current debate about trust even more important than error.  I think the question that I think is the purpose of this ‑‑ actually the Dynamic Coalition is how can we restore in the institutions in the governments and our neighbors is not only a little problem.  It's a real problem that it is facing many, many parts of the world.  We will leave ‑‑ and What's App will address the first time the integrity and security of many communications.  And I don't want to spend too much time talking about it, but of course the foot print is everywhere.  We are doing so much more online.  So there is so much more we have to protect.  And this is What's app are making such a big push to protect the strong and to end corruption in front of policy makers around the world.  When you encrypt message end to end, it means only the center and the user can see message (inaudible) and we are facing pressure from some governments to develop back doors and balance promises regarding how the technology works.  From our point of view, there is no such theme as a back door just for good guys.  If there is a back door, hackers and hostile governments will find ways to explode it.  Working on encryption will work people at risk and we believe encryption is linked with trust and debate that we are facing today, but we need (inaudible) between privacy and security.  We lose private and we can have encryption in the name of security, we lose both.  We need to continue working in technical to be more effective in crimes without putting at risk one of the privacy and security which are both critical components on how trust is built.  So my first point is it's very important in order to protect trusts, in order to be ‑‑ to allow us to live in this world we are living on.  Security, safety, privacy are core components and encryption is a relevant part of that.
So over that, misinformation of core is one of our big most important challenge.  The word health organization called the info demic.  How are we dealing with this info demic.  Four points I want to Arise today.  The first one is the most powerful tool to fight against misinformation is to have trustable channels of accurate information.  So one purity to us is to offer these channels inside the platform.  The second one is how to improve the way of the platform work to minimize the risk and behaviors linked with misinformation.  Third, how to offer more privacy controls to the users in order to allow everyone asked to be more protected to misinformation that is spreading in the platform.  Andrin crease awareness and create more tools to manage to allow users to handle, to manage this information.  Coming to this four points.  Regarding the first one, I really believe that the most important tool to fight this information is to offer users accurate information to have this channel with official data especially in a held related issues of the COVID pandemic.  It is pretty important to have channels in an easy way to allow people to receive the right information against ‑‑ about the pandemic.  So this is why what's app worked with the world held organization to set up a chat bot that we launched in April this year.  A very easy to use chat bot on What's app on the main language of the world in all the official unit that makes the language which a lot of information about the more basic questions and more complex questions about the pandemic for the user.  At the same time, What's app partner held over hundreds of national and international governments and illustration launching this chat box with automatic size information that people can navigate on.  This was very important especially at the beginning of the pandemic.  At the beginning, Mass app received more than 120 million message a week on this particular channels.  And actually, some authorities in many parts of the world started to innovate using this chat box.  For example, Buenos Aires, they create a chat bot on what's app.  The world held organization, but then they added an option to create an interaction between medical held professional with the citizens to ask the results on that and even to start some treatment.  They implemented a 3 edge on the chat and the impact of this chat bot using the three was huge.  Especially in the content of the pandemic because, of course, the pressure over the health infrastructure was pretty high and they received and they will be able to manage more than 75,000 COVID related consultations over the chat bot in the first month.  But also and this is not 100% health related, but it's a critical issue in our time and that quest works during the pandemic.  Domestic violence has been a very problematic situation worldwide.  We work with the Chilean government and the Brazilian governments to develop channel on what's app that is secure and private.  It's protected by encryption and silent to allow women in danger to Connect with the authorities using what's app.  This was one of my most important projects for me this year.  I think ‑‑ the impact was huge.
Coming back ‑‑ I will finish very, very shortly.  I think ‑‑ yeah.  In the platform itself, I think this is important.  What's app introduced a lot of adjustments and feature to reduce the rally.  This is something that I want to mention because in April of this year, what's app reviews a number of messages that someone resent.  If a message is shared more than five times, the app itself reduced the ability to share this message to just one person per time.  Doing this change alone is the reviews in 70%.  The highly forward message.  So this contributes to reduce verrallity and of course it contributes to fight misinformation and finally, I think it is also important in terms of providing better information, operate information and partnership with checkers and traditional mainstream media in order to offer more tools, more channels, better information to citizens.  For us to protect the integrity of the private integration is itical and very important.  This is why we are fightingn scription and introducing a lot of new features and creating a partnership with different entities with fact checkers to offer better information to seek a sense especially regarding the pandemic.  Yeah.  This isma we are doing and ‑‑ this is what we are doing and very happy to be with you and if there are questions at the end, I am very happy to answer it.
>> Emily Taylor:  Thank you for setting the scene and looking with What's inn.  I can see your remarks are getting the chat very active and I hope that we will be able to hear from some of those people in a little while.  I'd like to come back to you on closed groups and how the contrast between what's app is sort of closed and encrypted environment compared to the more public environments and how you sparked veriality within that what the outside world has a close the environment.  I think that your remarks lead very well into our next speaker, Lisa Marie NEUDERT.  Lisa, you have been looking at all aspects of the COVID‑19 pandemic building on your units work in relation to electoral interference.  Thank you for attending today for your support to this Dynamic Coalition.  The floor is yours and please introduce your remarks.  Thank you.
>> Lisa‑Marie NEUDERT:  Thank you very much for an interesting start to this panel.  I will contribute a little bit on research about COVID‑19 using public data from social media and networks and I have also brought some slides with me today, which I will share right now.  And I think that works.
So basically I am start of a project at the Oxford institute.  We have been doing that since about 2014 and obviously got a lot of traction with our work in 2016 and more recently as Emily already said in the introduction.  We have focused on the spread of misinformation on COVID‑19 because obviously there has been a whole lot and I'll talk about some of the work that we did today.
So we are coming from, we are firm believers that misinformation is not just for an interference.  It is not just any sort of hostile actors that are during with that intention that we very much also have different culprits and algorithms and a big data enabled tools that are optimized for junk news and this information because it is so engaging.  We have alternative media outlets that are doing very well over these social media algorithms and that are also having economic incentives.  And, of course, and I think the last today has shown that again.  We really have a mainstream problem with this information.  Some have (inaudible) as politics of post truth, but we definitely see political leadership both in authoritarian regimes, but also in democracies disseminating all sorts of conspiratorial or preceding information.
So why COVID‑19?  I think by now the phrase info demic is quickly known.  It was phrased by Antonio Gutieres saying COVID‑19 is a pandemic, but we also have an additional later which is info demic of misleading information that is spreading on social media where we really have a lot of citizens seeking news and information and using the Internet and social media for it.
So our project at the DOI has been doing a bunch of different things.  One of them was we have weekly briefings on Corona virusmis information.  We have that from April to August.  We wanted to see what is the level of factual information, what is the level of junk we're seeing and also what is the level of state backed outlets reporting about COVID‑19.  So a stateback outlet is a rush out today, but we also covered outlets from China, from Iran, from Turkey where we do know they are funded by the government and they are certainly propaganda tools.  So please do look that up.  If you are interested in that, it's on our (inaudible) page.  There is also Ms. Information on YouTube.  We have a work paper on that and we also have a commentary paper on that.  Very interesting.  We also looked at how platforms are first enforcing their own terms and in terms of conditions.  So our platforms have taken content down and how long does it take them to take that content down if it's legal, if it's against terms of service and then the paper will speak more about today is your paper that I have authored with Emily Taylor which is on optimizing for an info demic.  What are web and search engine strategies that are making COVID‑19 this information so visible.
So going into this, there is a lot of misinformation that we're seeing on social media, but what about search and what about the web?  So search engine optimization is something that's been around for a very, very long time.  It has not been studied as much as Facebooks, the Twitters when it comes to the spread of misinformation.  The question was:  How can we see search engine optimization being used by professional news outlets and then by junk use and misinformation pages on the other hand?  And then what impact do third party links have on the reach of junk news sources?  I will explain that in a little bit.  And how are the major online advertising platforms helping to finance junk news sites on COVID‑19?  What we did is we looked at 830 domains that were actively publishing news and information on COVID‑19.  We had a sample of professional use and information and we had a sample of junk news and misinformation and how have we identified is we were drawing from sample that our team has labeled during the U.S. election in 2016 and also during the mid‑terms in 2018 and again during the European parliament election in 2019 and then we also screened all sorts of external fact checkers which were reporting on this information, conversation theories and having to do with COVID‑19.  We also used a couple of tools to look into content headers and commercial search engine called SEMrush.  So the first helpful stack is domain authority.  So domain authority basically is an indicator for how likely you are to see a certain page when you are trying to access it through a search engine like for example, Google and so we're seeing here on the left‑hand, we have a sample of performing best and the junk news and misinformation on the other side.  What you are seeing here is a lot of the junk use and misinform outlets were really getting excellent scores.  So for search engine optimization and authority above 60 and know it's a very good authority to have, which means you are very visible on the web.  And then something else that we thought was really shocking is that here, you know, these are the top 20 or so and we see an outlet like political or also German or Deutsche which has the same kind of domain authority as Russia today.  So that is really ‑‑ yeah.  Making it very tangible if you're using search, you are as likely to come across a political as Russia today when you are seeking information.
Next we also looked at back links.  So back links is something that is also going into search engine optimization and basically is a measure for how many pages are linking to your page and the more pages you have linking to your page, the better.  And even better if these pages that are linking to you are high authority sources.  So we did look into that and you can see here the number of backlinks that junk news and misinformation pages had.  80% of our junk estimates have more than 1 million back links and more than 30 had over 10 million back links.  So that is a tremendous amount of back links which means they are very visible and have a lot of pages that are referring to them and that (inaudible) means that it is easy to find these pages when you are seeking information.  We also looked a little bit into who are the pages that are linking to these junk news and this information domains.  You can see the top two referring sites listed here, which already (inaudible) was linking a lot for two to top ten sources.  We did another thing, which is we were looking into what are universities doing and, um, also what are pages like the White House and what we found is that a lot of universities including Oxford by the way and we're linking to those pages.  We've linking them as a credible source, which is the worse thing to happen, but then also for pointing to them and saying this is ‑‑ this is, you know, R, it got comor (inaudible), which is a terrible page that's been reporting this misinformation and we're still putting this link here.  But in turn it is more visible especially if you have a University of Oxford, if you have a Harvard or a Georgetown because you are linking to those pages and giving more authority and credibility to these junk information domains.
And the last thing we did is we looked a little bit into mark up and advertising.  So mark up basically is how is a site sort of formatted to make it more legible and to make it easier to pull out information for Google, for Facebook, for Twitter.  So that for example is a link review.  It can be how a picture is formatted.  We saw professional use and junk nail is optimizing for social media.  No surprise here.  Facebook was the most important mark up to optimize for.  Here we saw junk use optimizing slightly more than professional news.  I think no surprise given the state of the Internet in 2020.  And we also looked a little bit into advertising platforms that had space on profession use and junk news pages.  Here again, very wide sprint both among professional and junk use and this information pages, but it is still again very interesting to see that, of course, you have Google ads.  You have Amazon ads directly funding this information pages.  It is something that I think many inner community have pointed out as a problem that we don't quite know what to do about except for black listing and that is also coming with a lot of problems.  It's still, of course, very interesting to see that data behind that.
So to sum up, we have a high domain site that means they are highly visible and they are easy to discover.  They actually display evidence of professional search engine optimization.  We have major academic and major government sites that are back linking to junk news sources often unwittingly and boosting their reputation and we have an underlying layer of mainstream industry advertising that is funding junk use this misinformation on COVID‑19.  So that was it for me.  Looking forward to your questions on this later.  I more or less captured it.
>> Emily Taylor:  Great remarks and presentation.  I can see that it stimulated a lot of interest in the chat.  So hopefully we can get the interventions of some of the people responding to it as we move into the discussion.  Thank you very much for that.  I think it would be really interesting to come back not only to you, but to the other speakers for the sort of mapping across to what the domain name industry is doing.  Looking at the domains in the right‑hand column that is spreading in misinformation about COVID, not one of them uses the strings that we would be looking for.  But it might be interesting for us to come back to those differences and similarities and also, of course, the very important point about that you made in the end.  The junk use sites are really keying into the advertising ecosystem helping to drive traffic threw search and also from activities through advertising.  Thank you very much for that and let's come back to those issues and, of course, the questions being raised in the chat.  ANTOAN SHOHAROV from youth committee.  Great to have your participation here in the inaugural meeting of this Dynamic Coalition.  The floor is yours for your remarks.  Thank you very joining us and please go ahead.  Thank you.
>> ANTOAN:  Thank you.  I would like to share my screen.  I had to see and can you grant me access?  Okay.  It is granted.  I believe that you can see my screen right now.  First, thank you for the opportunity to participate here with all of you.  I thank you for your attendance.  This is my first participation in IGF event.  So thank you.
The opportunity to participate in this event and to have this meeting today showed a great possibility that Internet provides.  As we all know, the great possibilities comes with high risk and in 2020, the world has faced the COVID‑19 pandemic which caused dramatic things in all fields.  But if there is anything positive in 2020, I believe that this is the fostering effect of COVID‑19 innovation.  And this also digitalization.  It is estimated that ‑‑ it is estimated that 3 to 5 years of digitalization has happened in less than 9 months in 2020.  Now, more than ever, every business needs to be online in order to survive.  Also public structures needed and still need to digitalize fast to answer to the people's needs.  But through this rises danger caused by the issues that we already know like data leakage and fake news.  And in the digitalized world, leakage of data is one of the biggest dangers no matter if we speak for about personal or corporate or administrative data.  Just to give you all a sense of issue, I will say that in 2019, the economic was due to leakage of data globally.  It's estimated by IBM and (inaudible) republicans tight arranging between 1.25 and 10.19 million dollars depending on the country and the industry.  Between 2014 and 2019, the amount has raised from 3.5 to almost $4 million on average per country.  Again it is different for the different industries and different countries and companies.  And what about the fake news?  The University of Baltimore estimated annual was around $78 billion.  These figures speak for themselves.  In 2020, certain activities made this danger even greater than before.  I will share with you two very simple examples.  The first one is related to working from home.  Working from home the mainly of the countries in the world because of the pandemic advised their staff and their working staff to work from home if it is possible.  But also this is the danger because working from home is not as safe as working from office.  Because of the network, because of the Internet provider, because of the whole security infrastructure that is being used in the offices.  The second examples related to the health care innovation products have been launched this year because of the pandemic or related to the pandemic.  For example, people with health conditions and (inaudible) context of global COVID‑19 related examples.  All these services collect certain private data and it is very important for this data to be safely managed and used only for certain activities for which the different user has agreed.  Just imagine if this is breached by hackers and they will be able to know your health condition and also know your location which may endanger your life.  Another major danger in 2020 is related to fake news related to COVID‑19 articles which are spread worldwide.  The great danger comes because many people believe in them and this is the result not only negative or economic results, but also on live (inaudible).
Honestly speaking, we can speak many more about danger, but I would like to add and talk about a solution.  I believe that solution to these dangers come based on joint efforts by the stakeholders because these dangers cannot fight individual.  We need to fight them as a team.  And fighting fake news can be done through reestablishing the trust in the banking institutions of the democratic society, but understand this is not a simple solution.  It takes time and needs joint effort.  Great example of this is what Pablo said earlier about the joint cooperation and those of many governments.  This is how we can fight together.  And the issue about data leakage, the only way to be to fight it again is to join test and preparedness.  So think about ‑‑ thanks for the opportunity and thank you for discussions and questions.
>> Emily Taylor:  ANTOAN thank you for joint exercising and this is a simple problem to solve.  But you make an excellent point which really builds on Pablo's remarks about how the pandemic has also just create hasten digitation in a remarkable way.  For those of us who have been around for a while, we have been predicting the growth of interactions based on video convincing and yet we have been a bit puzzled about why that hasn't taken off.  Now it really is this sort of necessity being the mother of invention and the fact that people still need to communicate, still need to have togetherness and the digital environment is there for us, but at the same time, we need to restore trust.  Thank you very much.  I'm sure we will come back to lots of themes you have raised.
What I'd like to do before calling on our final speaker Alberto is to invite anybody to take the floor.  I have Paulinna and Rambuntin on my list of people who would like to make a contribution.  We have put you all as panelist.  Just write in the chat if you would like to make the list and then we can have the discussion started and shared amongst all of us.  With that, Alberto, can I call on you to take the floor for your remarks?  Thank you.
>> Alberto RABBACHIN:  Thank you, Emily.  It is really a pleasure and I listened very carefully to the previous presentation.  All speakers had a very interesting point.  I am here to give you ali bit of an overview and in particular, um, on what the unit that I work and following very closely, which is the practice on this information.  I think I agree with what has been said before.  Internet and social media provides greater opportunity also for making a democratic process more participatory and inclusive.  We are all aware of how this new technology can be misused to disseminate this information on a scale and with a decision of targeted that it was unprecedented.  This information is not a new problem, but the technology has made this problem very pervasive.  We need to do something and we started some years ago the commission on the finding (inaudible) to try to limit the impact of this phenomenal.  We are all aware that this phenomenal will not go away and we will need to work and continuously work because the technology's evolving.  So the policy needs to adapt to the technology.  Evolution.
So one of the signature initiatives originating out of the commission in 2018 communication taking the line of this information was the code of practice on this information that was after say laborous work, but very compressed work that involved several stakeholders lead to this code of practice this was signed by major online platforms.  So we're talking about Google, Twitter, Facebook and now we have also Microsoft TikTok and other platforms involved and also the advertising industry that was involved in the process and signed the code.  So the coated was let's say ‑‑ the coat was to let's say design to limit vulnerabilities of certain online technology and services throughout five pillars within this code.  And they look to limit the availability of website, increase transparency of political ads, and often involving this information campaign and power users to make more to make them more resilient to this information and the power research in order to better understand the phenofenna of this information.  So these are the five pillars of the code.  The code was signed and implemented in October 2018 and in two months ago, we published the assessment after one (inaudible) of the code.  It is done on the work between October 2019 and September 2011.  It took a while to make this assessment because it was ‑‑ we counted on a lot of contribution.  First of all, the self‑assessment of the platform.  We then have the report of the European regulators group for all your visual media which is maybe better known under (inaudible) and a study done by independent consultant and the commission report on the 2019 election to the European parliament.  So it was a very reach information that we have used over to generate a piece of this assessment.  Of course, the code is a unique example of self‑regulation on this information and applies in Europe at the moment.  Other parts of the world have interest on having the code implemented in their region.  And we have to acknowledge that the code has been an important and necessary first step to create a more transparent online ecosystem.  I think one of the issues that reduced the thrust on the digital media is a lack of transparency.  And certainly this code has improved on that (inaudible) because we have now a framework for a structure dialogue between the relevant industry actors, the commission, the national authorities.  Through this framework, we are better informed on the platform policies against this information within the European union.  So this is I would say a general positive achievement.  (inaudible) substantive progress.  The resources are substantive progress that's been made on the implementation of the code.  I don't want to go over a long list, but certainly most of you might be aware of the fact that in view of the European election, all the major platform created at the libraries where they included the political (inaudible) that were say used during the electoral campaign and then this library became also valuable for national elections.  So this was certainly an important achievement although we are well aware of this repository present limitation that needs to be counted.  Another improvement was regarding the integrity of services.  We saw that the platform took action against accounts using manipulative techniques to artificially amplify the reach and the impact of false and misleading information.  Also they started to provide more information, more detail under efforts for these accounts and they use (inaudible) and they also improve their communication regarding the action they have taken to limit coordinated information campaign by (inaudible).  So also under this point of view, we have data transparency of what they do, which is of course important also to understand their impact on freedom of expression, of course.
Empowerment of consumers they certainly improve and make investment to give Providence to more ‑‑ trust forward information sources.  I think here the user has been set by Pablo, not only What's app, but all the other platform have created spaces where they promote information coming from public health authorities including the world health organization and professional media also.  So this is something that they achieved during the crisis and was not achieved before.  So we were really pleased to see the prompt reaction during the crisis.  They also ‑‑ we have to acknowledge also have increased whole duration with a fact checkers in many new countries and in particular, this also happened during pandemic and the (inaudible) during the pandemic.  We have commissioners issue communication.  In June related to the COVID‑19 misinformation and one of the results of this communication is that we are now receiving monthly reports from the signatories of the code of practice where they detail what they have done to take online of this information.  So this is again another improvement from the transparency point of view.
Of course, these are the positive side, but also signature for short comings.  And in particular, there is Rinconivity isent and incomplete application of the code and platform and (inaudible).  So certain tools, for instance, for the citizens, for the user not available in the space and are not available in all languages.  So this is something that should be (inaudible).  We didn't see that much effort in limiting the online ads to appear on website that prevail this information.  I think what Lisa showed before is a clear example.  We see how the ads goes more into websites.  Say nor inclined to have low quality information than to websites that have higher quality information or information that is created according to professional and ethical standards.  So even if you have the list, it is quite long but I don't want to go too much into detail.  I want to emphasize an outstanding problem which is the fact that access to platforms data for purposes that remain a major concern.  There are only bilateral agreement between platform and university to access limited sets of data.  This is not enough to make the research ares and the conditions to better stab it.  The information phenomena on all platforms because we know that on certain platforms, it is easier than on other platforms.  Also the crisis, the info demic linked to the crisis shows the importance of better ‑‑ uniform definition of certain behaviors or certain let's say issues that are linked to this information because if we have ‑‑ we are having a better set of uniform definition will help also define a more (inaudible) set of policies to take over the issues that are at stake.  So that's very important to progress on that.
>> Emily Taylor:  Thank you, Alberto.  I'm sorry.  Is it possible to wrap up your remarks?
>> Alberto:  I was coming to an end.
>> Emily Taylor:  I thought you were, but I thought I would mention.
>> Alberto:  (inaudible) and in particular this area that is the lack of keeper format indicator and which is are missing.  So it is very difficult to assess in an independent way and by civil sort as well to what has been done by the platform if we are not able to define this and we don't update to measure the indicators.  And, of course, the (inaudible) approach so far has been limited to the signal which includes the bigger platform, but not all the platforms.  So this has created also an Asymmetry between those (inaudible) of the code and those that don't have a signature of the code.  So I'm done.
>> Emily Taylor:  Thank you so much and emphasizing the code of practice.  And also, you know, highlighting action, positive actions taken, but also the imbalances between the large platforms where we have had all of the spotlight and perhaps other environments which Lisa Marie has covered.
What I would like to do now, we have 15 mentor so left and what I would like to do is to call on first of all Graham Bunton and Paulinna MALAIA just to make a brief intervention for a couple of machines, but there are also many more who have been putting interesting remarks in the chat.  Maybe Megan Richards, Lori Schulman, Olivier Miguel.  If we can try for the 15 minutes if we have time, wrap back through the panelist of just very fine remarks.  It's great to have all of the chat.  So Graham, can I start with you?  Thank you for joining us.  I know it's early and I will go to Paulinna and maybe to Myra.  Thank you.
>> Graham:  I'll try and keep this brief and share a little bit about our experiences as a registrar in COVID and some of the issues we were having.  So my name is GRAEME.  Continue is primarily wholesale and we sell to other companies and not by and large the general public.
So we recognized relatively early on in the pandemic that this was pretty exceptional circumstance and that we needed to be a bit more engaged proactive and tried different approaches to respond appropriately.  So by and large as a registrar, but not a hosting company, we don't typically interact with the domains on our platform to look at them to see what content is on them that's really outside our purview and typically outside the appropriate course of action for us.  So, you know, pandemic hits.  This seems different and we should maybe take a closer look at what is going on.  We set up some queries and key words and began looking at the registrations since they were coming in every day.  This peeked in late march for us, but we were seeing something close to 300 registrations a day.  That is by the end of July, we have 17,000 total and as of today, something around 22,000 related, COVID related registrations, which is a lot.  So we were trying to assess them for harm because this is again such an exceptional thing.  So we were look will at them by hand, a team of people every day clicking on those demands to see if there's anything there.  By and large, 70% were just part.  They weren't doing anything.  There's a variety of stores selling EPE and blog websites with some information.  And the stuff we found was harmful or potentially harmful.  Say fake tests, fake cures.  For us harmful really presented an eminent threat to human harm was more than half percent.  It was a very small amount.  In trying to Ay is the demands, we had to look at making this process more efficient.  There were lists being circulated around the DNS community.  They were by and large terrible for the most part.  They included ‑‑ there was not a lot of robust activity in creating them.  So people wereut putting all registrations in with abusive registrations and then someone else would repackage that and add some more on to it.  So this list ‑‑ here's all the bad domains including things like officials in the south African page and things like hospitals and health care providers.  And so we were in a really tricky spot where we didn't have any reliable sources of information to act on.  So really did have to go through this exceptionally slow and manual process.
>> Emily Taylor.  Thank you.  One more thing?
>> GRAEME:  Those were often not at all related to the strings we were looking for.  So we had no make knowism to find them.  They were using sub‑domains.  If I'm thinking about what we can do about this sort of thing, it's better feeds and better data.  Better quality, more information and more evidence and then really the thorny bits of this for us were outside the world of the DNS.  Here's a blog.  It's got four posts and sort of generic COVID information and one that is clearly dangerous.  Who assesses if this is harmful and it really felt inappropriate that it was us as a DNS operator.  And know there was enough of that and no one sort of within our community and law enforcement or governments really felt like they were in a place to deal with those sorts of issues.  That was a real challenge for us.  Thanks, Emily.
>> Emily Taylor:  Thank you.  You highlighted the limits, but we were all part of the same ecosystem.  The different ways in which people are using these domain names sometimes harmful, sometimes not.  In fact very little and the importance of data quality on the lists circle universitying for people who want to take action to help.  Paulinna, thank you very much, Graeme.  Paulinna, can I ask you to take the floor?  After that, can I ask Myra to take the floor.  Very brief comments if you can, everyone, so we can fit in as many remarks as possible.
>> Paulinna:  Thank you, Emily, very much and thank you for this opportunity to speak up today.  I will try to be as brief as possible and just quickly I am Paulinna.  We greatly welcome this initiative and I would just like to also briefly highlight on the point about data.  Also Graeme spoke about and it is permanently highlighted in the name of this coalition.  Primarily we feel there is a need to discuss the issue of inconsistent reporting of the scale of the problem within the so‑called (inaudible) discussions.  And also specifically during the ongoing COVID‑19 pandemic.  So the research that center conducted at the start of the pandemic is fairly consistent with also the figures that ICANN has reported and also what GRAEME talked about before.  Only a few dozen domain names among the tens of thousands that got reported by some security companies were problematic.  It could be associated with some type of abuse.  And these domain names do pose a real danger, there's no doubt.  However, I need to measure the problem so that we can identify the best way to solve it.  We see that the low amount of domain names associated we have identified as part of our research.  This number is actually manageable with the regular processes that already are in place across the domain name industry.  And specifically namely with close corporation that comes with authorities which is law enforcement and judiciary processes, et cetera.
Lastly, we agree on the data sets that help support the public policy objectives and increase trust.  So thank you very much.
>> Emily Taylor:  Thank you so much, POLINA.  We very much wanted it to be a form in which they could be, you know, can generate evidence based for policymakers to help combat harms, but also not over reach into legitimate activities.  If I may ‑‑
>> Sorry, Emily.  I think you muted yourself.
>> Emily Taylor:  Thank you.  I did mute myself.  I wanted to give you the floor to either contribute to the discussion or raise a question.
>> Thank you.  So I worked as a public policy officer for the Australian government and I was leading the governments response on tackling the sharing of crisis attack that happened last year on social media platform.  We introduced a legislation that gave the Esafety commissioner powers to regulate and direct platforms to take down that sort of information.  But this was based on purely reporting method.  We then started working on tackling this information in relation to COVID‑19.  Surprisingly it came from the toilet paper issue that was in Australia.  So now my question to the panel is:  In building the relationship between data and trust, which the panel mentioned, is it just a digital problem, but a real problem, but often with COVID‑19, what we're seeing is Ms. Information from online is being shared amongst family members and neighbors on what's app platform.  How do we collaborate and tackle that because what's inn is a very closed off platform.
>> Emily Taylor:  Thank you very much for that.  I will take a couple more interventions and hopefully we'll get that answered.  A really key point there.  Thank you for that.  Can I call on you, Megan Richards to raise your questions or highlight some of the issues you have been doing in the chat.  Thank you.
>> Megan Richards:  Thanks, Emily.  Very interesting discussion.  It is similar to what HUMAYRA said and many others.  Packs are facts.  We sometimes have alternative facts.  I was wondering if there's a technical or legal or statistical way that one can identify back these facts out by foot noting.  There must be some ways and perhaps some of the participants have ideas of how one can show that this is really factually reinforced information that is being provided which will then, of course, lead to more trusts.  So that was really the question that I have.
>> Emily Taylor:  Thank you very much.  May I call on you Lori Shulman.  You have been very active and Miguel (inaudible) and I'll go back for some very final quick interventions from our panel.  Thank you.
>> Lori Schulman:  Hi.  It's Lori Schulman.  A few thoughts come to mind.  Of course the values.  I was very struck by the list of the fake news versus the non‑fake news.  The left and the right columns not even labeling them fake and non‑fake because there's huge spots of people and we have seen it this week with the U.S. elections.  News sources that have been viewed as trustworthy and non‑trustworthy.  Names we saw on the left.  I think it could be problematic to draw such great lines T. goes to Megan's point.  How do we verify?  How do we tell the world this is real when reality or the truth is looked at as something relative rather than absolute?  I think it's a fundamental question.  It's a question we see in jurist prudence.  Now we see it every day in our lives on social media.  Why do we put a value system against judging a fact number 1.  Pack facts are facts and now we're living in a world with (inaudible) facts.  How we verify is key doing it in an automated way.  A lot of people have talked about ways in the domain system of verifying ownership and we than can clap back against ‑‑ but (inaudible) to some of the concerns people have for individual privacy rights, but at the same time if we don't hold individuals accountable, how do we get to that truth element.  Again, being in the field that I'm in had in terms of trust and the trust crisis, one of the things here although we're talking about COVID, something that is clearly not something subject to intellectual property right or discussion, this does go to a broader issue of how do we identify trust, what trust is?  I do feel compelled given my advocacy to say that when the property rights are discussed in different context throughout IGF and any platform where we've talking about rights, it is very important that rights as rights sometimes are forgotten that they emanate from points of trust.
>> Emily Taylor:  Sorry to cut you off.  Everybody who has spoken today I can just ‑‑ I think we can all talk for hours about this because people are making such relevant and thoughtful interventions.  Really thank you so much for that.  I would just like to ask Miguel to take the floor if there is time and if you're able to and then I'm sorry we're going to probably have to wrap up.  I will try and put the question to Pablo if we have time.  Thank you.
>> Miguel:  Thank you so much.  My question is a quick question.  Do we have a lack of competition in several domains of Internet (inaudible) networks or what's app and then we need more competition.  We need to be more InterConnected.  We need to Connect the phone networks and intranet works and now we have socio network we need intersected in a way users can interpret user (inaudible) for example.  Specific question for Pablo.
>> Emily Taylor:  Pablo, you have a couple of questions about interconnection, but also I want to diagram back to HUMAYRA's point about sharing within family members on What's app.  Pablo, can we have your very brief remarks before we close the session.
>> Pablo:  First, we believe for privacy and security, but because of that, it's not possible to moderate content in an encrypted platform.  This is a key issue for that.  You can take down content on what's app platform.  This is what we can do and what are we doing.  First, reduce verrallity by design and reduce a lot of friction to reduce verrallity.  Second, combat messages because there are some providers spamming on what's app is something against our times of services.  We combat that.  Third, offer channels for information and fact checking I think the collaboration with fact checks are very, very important.  We have organizations and governments providing accurate information.  And finally, I think at the end, the most important are users responsibility.  So this very important to have a broader conversation and to teach actually users in how to be responsible using the tools and the platform of the Internet and technologies.  This is a key issue.  Regarding interoperability, it's not possible to interoperate platform that has different technologies and actually telegram is not created by design.  So it's a technical issue that is not easy to fix.
>> Emily Taylor:  Thank you very much, Pablo.  I would like to come back to all panelists and I would also like to call on many others in the chat.  Unfortunately, we are totally out of time.  But this has been such a wonderful start to this conversation and I hope that you will all join the Dynamic Coalition mailing list.  I hope we can continue our conversation on that.  Very much thank you to our wonderful speakers today and to all of the participants who made such great and thoughtful comments either on the microphone or in the chat.  Thank you very much, everybody.  Have a great rest of your day or evening and let's keep in touch.  I think there's a lot we can do together.  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-igf-2020-youth-summit^^

 
>> MODERATOR:  Ladies and gentlemen, thank you young people and supporters of young people.  Thank you very much for joining the very first Youth IGF Summit that is organized by the, collaboratively, Secretariat by our next host country, the Government of Poland, supported by so many Youth IGFs, National, Regional and sub-regional, capacity development initiatives and networks around the world.
The next 1 1/2 hours we will be going through quite a demanding but interesting agenda is a lot of several months long process, collaborative, open discussion process, that the organizers and collaborators have been carried with the young people from parts of the world.
It is through presentations that youth has spoken to us noting what do they need from the Internet Governance in order to support meaningful engagement of young people.
For us, professional evolved in the Internet Governance, involving young people in this formal process is extremely important.  For the past 50 years, we have been discussing the role of the Internet, digital policy, issues that are arising in that area, they also have been with us.  That means that one generation will not solve all the problems.
That is why this entire youth engagement process that will also extend next year, really aims at the fact that investment in youth is investment in a more secure, open and accessible Internet.  This is our investment and hopefully resolving our Digital Public Policy issues in a more effective and efficient way.
The thing that young people told us in these open consultations is that they do not feel necessarily excluded from our global Internet‑related processes but there is still an issue.  The issue is that they have a lot of space to meet their peers from other countries in the regions to speak to other young people, but the challenge is that they do not have enough space to speak to the decision‑makers, senior experts that can make a decision and be inspired.
We are in the mission, long term, all together as a team to, change that.  I think this is a remarkable opportunity at this Youth IGF Summit to start with that practice.  We are very fortunate today to have live with us His Excellency, Mr. Marek Zagórski, Secretary of State at the Chancellery of the Prime Minister Government Plenipotentiary for Cybersecurity Government of Poland, our next year's host country.  Excellent seeing you here.
>> MAREK ZAGORSKI: Hello, everybody.  This is such a great pleasure for me today on this occasion of the Youth IGF Committee; because it is in your hands that we rest.  Needless to say, it is you and people and most of the world's population who are engaged in all aspects of our lives.  When you first have access to communications and information, make you a main driver for work and change, engagement and missions and achievements building our future.
We in Poland attach great importance to this future, especially the digital space future, these issues very important domain of activity and the government, businesses and civil organizations and also for possible users, future leaders in the digital world.
I received the invitation today that I should share with you a quote of a very of known Polish science fiction writer, who we'll celebrate next year.  Most of you hear about Solaris and know his novel.  But in another novel he wrote that if people from the cave age hadn't believed only what seemed possible, they would still be sitting in caves today.
I think the youth who are able to do and who can do anything that looks impossible.  And please not stop from doing that.
Having said that, after those stories and science fiction movies similar, will always be one step ahead of scientists who often crazy ideas into real, with devices and projects.  For example, the description of the ‑‑ can be found in Greek myths and 1903 made the first (?) in the history of humanity.  The first movie about space travel, a trip to the moon, 1902 and the men stood on the moon in 1969, and the year when the history of Internet began.  In many movies about mass industry agent, James Bond, we see gadgets that seem completely crazy at the time of the making of him.  Many of them exist now in our reality and we use them on a daily basis, remote controls, et cetera.  I would like to stress the technology changes opportunities.
Digitization makes it possible to transfer part of a construction of Research and Development project to virtually and large amounts of data and comparing with historical data and enables important predictions such in this area.
But we need to use technologies carefully.  We all observe and increase the number of those that are interested in the digital society and label digitalness and develop technology and bring more new opportunities.  The role of technology in the digital space will be discussed during the next 30 minutes of this year's IGF.  We would also like to continue this interesting discussion with you next year.  We want the Youth IGF in Poland to continue to be a place of open and real debate, even if it's via controversial debate and to involve you young digital users strongly in discussion and in decision‑making processes.  I encourage you to get involved, tell us what you expect, your voice is very important to us.  Let's design the next meeting together.  Having said that, I'm open for your comments and some questions.
>> ANJA:  Thank you for a very powerful message and for this open call for collaboration and active involvement of young people in designing the youth engagement processes for planning the IGF 2021 next year in Poland.  As I said at the beginning, the criticism from young people we only received in one area that they do not have opportunity to speak to the decision‑makers, to senior experts.  Usually they just hear from them.
I'm so pleased to say that Minister Marek Zagórski has been with us and I'm thankful to his team for channeling this input from young people.  So the Minister will stay with us for a few minutes as his schedule allows and calls for questions.
The floor is now yours.  This is a unique opportunity to directly ask and suggest what could be done for next year in IGF 2021 Poland.  You can either inform me in the chat or you can raise your hand.  I do believe we have a question from ‑‑ a couple of questions but let me use a little bit of discretion and give floor to Mr. Joshua, our dear colleague from the West African IGF.  Joshua?
>> JOSHUA: Thank you very much.  Very nice to see you Minister.  What kind of government ‑‑ Internet Governance, we also want to know what the governments can do to meaningful include youth and Internet Governance discussions and good practices you currently have from Poland.  It would be nice to know.
>> MAREK ZAGORSKI:  More interesting solutions and it's natural and the future of Internet is in fact the future of young.  That's why we should listen and talk to young people because your expectations and visions are crucial.  In this perspective, this question which has to be put how we manage Internet.  It rules your life and seems that the very important question is, for example, what do you think about the freedom of speech in the context of this information of free speech?
But no idea if this question will be prompted in years, but for sure, it will be much better for us if we try to find an answer for this question together from young people.  Because the way how we try to resolve this problem might create a great embarkment.
Usually created around the world as a part of the good starting point for a broad discussion with young people such initiative has also been established in Poland.  Our young peer IGF (?) are here with us today, which I'm very happy about.  But we should involve even more high school students and academics to produce the future even greater results on Internet Governance.  However, we do not intend to wait that long and we like to organize a large youth conference together with you in 2021, which I am grateful.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much.  Excellent response and excellent question, Joshua, thank you.  There are quite a queue that I see here, but know that we are limited with time.  So I try to actually build a question just by the criteria who was the quick toast raise the hand and ask for the floor.  I see that Keith is with us.  Keith, you have the floor.  I think you were among the first ones that requested to speak.
>> KEITH: Thank you very much and thank you honorable Minister.  It's very nice to connect with you.  My name is Keith from the African Youth IGF and my question is, do you support senior (?) and what is your view and how to achieve it?
>> MAREK ZAGORSKI:  Of course access to Internet access, for example, the COVID‑19 pandemic has shown how important it is in our lives and day‑to‑day issues and access to data and the importance, not only for the users in science and so forth, for the entire economy.
In Poland, for example, we focus on the development of robot networks.  Many projects have been implemented and many more are on the way.  Our goal is to provide broadband besides fiber optic networks to every city in Poland but the entire European Union has the same goal.  However, looking globally, it must be realized that your construction might be difficult in poorer regions of the world.  For this reason projects are getting, for example, Internet provided by (?) universal access is also a question of user’s costs.  Here are possible solutions we have been introduced in Poland, such as free access, for example, education sites, administration portals.  We think it could be used as an idea in other countries.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much, Keith.  Thank you very much for excellent question Mr. Zagórski, excellent response.  Let's move on in the interest of time.  I know we have a couple of just a very few minutes left.  So Mr. Marek Zagórski, we like to tour the world because Internet Governance issues are very different across countries.  Let me allow to ask Elizabeth from Germany to pose the next question for you.
>> ELIZABETH: Thank you for giving me the floor and for hosting and thank you Minister for joining us and giving us your time to reflect.  I have a question on digital education, so we started doing the current pandemic and many people were unable to go to schools and classes transitioned to on‑line but some teachers and students do not have access to the Internet or devices that are good enough to connect or the skills how to use various platforms as developed.  How could governments help long term to overcome this and do you think on line schools are our future?
>> MAREK ZAGÓRSKI: Thank you very much.  Many schools had to switch to distance learning, in general and now we in Germany, I know that there is no need to use (?) to do everything we could do to help them, especially those to keep the process as smooth as possible.  It was in fact a new experience for all of us.  And as we can see, we must be prepared for such situations in the future.  At the same time, digital tools supporting the education process will develop and big assumption of school education will remain, such as book work, direct interaction with the teacher and other students.
Therefore we must think about hybrid model in which elements of additional school and on line school will coexist.  This assumption under lies the project of the national network we are building a free government access network in Poland that connects all educational institutions among other things.  It enables educators to come with great new curriculum and digital competencies and skills.  Access to this, we try to provide equitable education to students in Poland, especially those living inside those areas where schools have small number of students.
Let me repeat the main idea on this question.  I believe that the school will be in time, because in the school there will be a teacher, there will be students, but the tools will be different, will be digital, but the model will be I hope the same.
>> ELIZABETH: Thank you very much.
>> ANJA: Elizabeth thank you for excellent question and thank you for the response.  According to my timeline, we have just very few minutes.  So let's maybe conclude with a very last question with Elaaha is on my list for the last question and then we will move on.
>> ELAAHA: Thank you very much.  I want to ask how much will be the focus of Poland on youth engagement and IGF 2021?
>> MAREK ZAGÓRSKI: Thank you very much.  Yes, IGF organization in Poland they have also taken up the challenge of engaging the community to organize young people around National IGF initiative.  We have known many examples of grassroots, among them the project (?) young people for young people.  The main goal is to increase the activities of decision‑makers at different levels towards young people.  One of the many topics is now cybersecurity of the Internet.
We also, and as we have different ideas and projects they produce issues in the European area.  This year, and I'm very proud of this, for the first time in the history of COVID with the European Union where European countries compete in the number of organizing programming events and Poland was first place in this competition and once again, I'm very proud and once again would like the voice of young people, not only competitions like COVID and in the initiatives for young ‑‑ but would like the voice of young people including, of course, young people from Poland and to be strongly presented in IGF 2021.  We want to design next year's Youth IGF together because I truly believe that we can't do this without you.  I mentioned that the future of the Internet is the future of the young.  So from this we put a great attention to discussion during the IGF 2021.  My team will be in constant contact with you over the next months and I count on your presence and looking forward to great enthusiastic discussions and once again, I hope that we see in Katowice next year not only on‑line.  I hope that you will be there and many other young people will be fostered by this.  Once again, I hope that we will see you in Poland.  Once again, thank you very much.  My time is up.  Thank you to all the team and I wish you a great discussion.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much for staying with us.  I hope there is a change where decision‑makers will be speaking more to young people in this environment.  We looking forward to meet you in person next year in Poland and thank you for your encouraging words.
>> MAREK ZAGÓRSKI: Thank you very much.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much once again.  We will continue.  We have an ambitious agenda.  Before we continue, there were some excellent questions in the chat, as expected.  We worked together for the past several months and I know that this session in advance will be very interactive.  I want to thank the colleagues for posing the excellent questions, for putting them in the chat for Q&A.  I want to rest assure you we will address them.  We are not alone when it comes about the Polish side.  I see a number of colleagues from the Polish government that are on the score.  When we reach the third block of this session, we will have a more meaningful engagement with colleagues from Poland and discuss what could be done next year, announce some interesting programs.
Let me now please move us back to our agenda that I hope you all see on the schedule on the IGF 2020.  So as you notice, this session will go until 7:00 p.m.  UTC.  So we do have some time to dedicate ourselves to interactive, detailed discussion on the priority matters you have decided to be discussed.
So we'll have three blocks.  Each block will have substantive inputs from our colleagues from the Youth IGFs.  We'll be speaking in the first block about the digital divide and the importance of next generations working on building bridges to digitally connect people.  We will be moving to rethinking our education, what's our vision for the traditional formal and informal education; and then we will move to the third block which will relate to the developing capacity and Internet Governance for next generation of leaders and experts.
Each of these sections will feature senior stakeholders.  I'm very glad that I see some of my dear colleagues, senior experts, people that I have been also learning about Internet Governance matters throughout my work in the Secretariat for several years now, and I hope that colleagues will stay for us for that next period of time.
So I would like to start with the first discussion block.  Before we start, I didn't want to start without thanking ‑‑ the entire community is going through and quite challenging times, difficult, painful times.  We have lost one of our dearest colleagues.  And I was thinking, as in previous sessions, should the summit start with a minute of silence for Ms. Marilyn Cade?  I think she is a person that doesn't need an introduction.
And then thinking better because Marilyn was also my close friend and I think I know her well.  I know that her advice would be just please proceed with the best possible discussion because if there was a person that believed in young people, it was Marilyn I believe.  She worked so much with young people.  She supported so many young people.  I'm sure that many of you can testify to that fact.  Please let us continue with carrying out this discussion.  Let's have a good discussion with good outputs and outcomes, good plan for your better future, for all of our better future on the Internet in honour of our dear friend and colleague, Ms. Marilyn Cade.
With that, I would like to open the first discussion block.  We will hear from a couple of our colleagues.  Youth IGFs work very hard in preparing these topics.  The first block relates to the digital divide, to the next generations building bridges to digitally connect people.  We will discuss a couple of policy areas, especially about why do we need to have Internet?  What is the status in your local communities on digital and gender‑based divide?  Who are the marginalized groups?  What are the opportunities for full on‑line participation by everyone?  How do we achieve connectivity?  Can we do something from ourselves?  And what are the examples of good practices to help digitally connect people?
We have a couple of colleagues with us now.  I know somewhere challenged in terms of connecting.  Is Saka (sp) from Chad Youth IGF with us?
Or are we still waiting for him to connect?  I think we are still waiting.  I'm not sure that anyone from the Chad Youth IGF is currently with us.  They may join us.
Maybe I give the honour to the Youth Afghanistan IGF to officially open this discussion segment.
>> ELAAHA: Thank you very much again.  Hello, everyone.  I'm a coordinator and one of the founding members of Afghanistan's Youth IGF.  And coming to this topic of this session, I would say that as you can imagine, Internet has become an essential part of our lives and Afghanistan is no exception to that; however we face a different challenge in terms of connectivity, the Internet penetration in Afghanistan is still around 20% of the population and most of whom are on the social media users.  Between this, women and elderly and People with Disabilities are those who are disproportionately affected by this digital divide.
This pandemic has just shown us that how much vital the Internet connectivity is in situations like that when businesses need to run, but they can't and people lose their jobs and lose their sources of income, which in turn increases and exacerbates current challenge that is we have in countries like Afghanistan, which is affected by war and which deals with very complex challenges and situations.  The main challenges for the cause this digital divide are lack of affordability, lack of services and coverage, lack of local content and lack of basic electricity and digital literacy.  Literacy in Afghanistan remains at 30% for female, women, and only 55% for men.  So that is very low, which causes also a lack of digital literacy.
And during this pandemic, we have only very few number of organizations in Afghanistan that could range or work from home and the other organizations and businesses have to halt their activities and many have to social distance.
These are of the challenges we have and there is no single solution for these challenges and that is very complex issue.  But there are also roles that other stakeholders, other than government, play to close this gap and reduce the digital divide.  One of these ways I can say is fostering digital literacy and that could be very useful if it started from schools and then also universities are included in that.  For that collaboration is needed among academic institutions as well as Civil Society institutions.
Increase of local content is also very important.  Afghanistan, a lot of people do not or are not able to get information from the Internet because local contents are not available and English language is problem here.
As examples, good examples I can say in Afghanistan, advocacy movements have been proved to be very useful and we have very good example of that here, which is run by Civil Society and regarding Telecom companies are providing very low‑quality services at very high prices.  And that to some extent resulted in positive achievements after the government imposed lockdown a number of Telecom companies with involvement of Afghanistan's TeleCom Reg Authority, they reduced the prices of different services of Internet they provided.
Still we have a long way to go but that is very good start and have proved to be useful and eye‑opening for the government and for the companies and Private Sector.
Other community‑driven initiatives are also very important in terms of society, Afghanistan has been involved in these activities over the recent years.  We have had organized three additions of Internet Governance at the national level and one addition of Youth Internet Governance.  Which are very useful in building this connection between the estate and the people and giving people opportunities to raise their concerns and given their Internet Ecosystem, the opportunity to ask their questions and raise their concerns and interact with their decision makers and policy makers.
Other examples that have been proved to be useful in other countries, but we haven't tried it yet, is community networks which I think would be a very good start.  In Afghanistan we deal with a very complex situation, so good to start with would be urban centers and particularly universities and schools for that.  So that's something we can see if that could be a solution in Afghanistan.
So the whole point of the discussion is that youth engagement is very important and Civil Society so we can engage government and hold them accountable for providing Internet access to people and for digital inclusion strategies and activities that are being delivered and thank you very much.  Happy to answer any questions.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much.  I'm sure you're going to receive a lot of questions because you give such a good overview of what is hag upon in your country with young people.  Really the digital divide.  Before we move on and take any questions, Saka, I don't know if you're still available to speak.  Would you come in to tell us briefly about the situation in Chad Youth IGF?  It seems not that maybe we have some audio issues.  In any case, Saka, whenever you want to come in, please feel free.
I said earlier that for us in Internet Governance, it is important here from different perspectives and all perspectives.  And that is the only way you can build a comprehensive agenda that will be relevant tool.
That's why I would like to move geographically just speaking a little bit further from Afghanistan now and go to Indonesia.  I think the Head of The Youth IGF there is with us to give us an overview on the same question I asked at the beginning about the ways to digitally connect people, especially the role of young people could play there and the marginalized groups in the country.  You have the floor.
>> Thank you.  And good evening from Indonesia.  I like to express my appreciation to gather here today showing commitment on developing Internet Governance.  Indonesia has its very unique area and we actually have digital divide and digital issues as well.  From our Indonesian telecom communications has significant increase of Internet access for 28% over the last year.  In the pandemic.  Expenses is also increasing.  At any rate, Internet is really well used in Indonesia.  However, this dependency still has to be watched carefully because while we are ‑‑ while mainly in this region come alive, we have become more dependent and we need to assess our strategy with youth into the future while we absorb more technology and adopt more technology, we need tools prepare ourselves by always adding our skills, by always improving our competences to say what the world needs in the future.  This is what many Indonesia youth, many stakeholders do with digital skills.
Digital divide and universal access, the challenge of digital divide for cell connectivity to provide access for communities as well as empowerment towards managing the communities in rural areas, we have someone who is very far from the Capitol who can only be reached after seven hours flight and they do not have good Internet access.  This is a problem.  We also have our indigenous community, who by cultural belief, they refuse to have Internet access in their area.  We also have, of course, our friends from LGBTQ plus who maybe have still become target for any bullying or definitions or any attack from people who have different beliefs.  And of course women are still being marginalized in terms of accessing Internet in terms of having their own freedom in accessing Internet.  These are part of the problems in Indonesia and many of you have and still try to address.  And we are still a lot of room for improvement.  But we are working there.
In Indonesia, still needs a lot of our youth index shows we are still rank 173 out of 183 countries.  So we are still below.  This needs to be improved and this looks to bear result.  Many youth now has become more expert.  Many start up, many unicorns.  Many youth initiatives, and many other spaces are the target of the government.  However, we cannot deny the fact that there are still ‑‑ unfortunately where youth are being alienated where some stakeholders see that we need to have you employee and staff but the fact is they just serve as buffer for the government for the stakeholders, for the company who talk with youth.  So youth are still being excluded in some way despite of their expertise.
On the other level, youth has responsibility to assist digital migrant from other generations.  We need to push the transformation.  We need to assist the transformation because they are still adapting.  We need to provide them with incentives and how to transform their mindset digitally.
COVID‑19 has pushed this and hey how I start my Zoom session?  How do I make Zoom session?  How do I write in WhatsApp properly?  What digital signature?  This becomes more commonplace to those who have digital from the day we were born.  We were gathered by phone, computer, and signals.  We have responsibility to help them.  If we can do at the same level of playing field, at the same level of our relationship, it also will be difficult for us to communicate with them.
So, I think that is all basically how Indonesia looks in our position and our mission that the point.  I will come respond and feedback but to close, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you our members.  I trust commitment and dedication will keep inspiring us today and in the future.  Thank you.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much.  Thank you for these excellent inputs.  It truly brings youth perspective on the layers of challenges that you face in terms of the Society and reasons why people cannot be connected or honored and connected.  I think it's an excellent addition to what we were being told, it is different.  That is always my point with the Youth IGFs and also in general the IGF ecosystem.  Local communities have different issues and the only way how we can resolve and create Internet that is going to be open and accessible for all is really if we all work together.
This is an important step this topic.
We have heard quite a lot in terms of the facts, specifically in terms of the analysis and implementation of those facts.  I would like to now open the floor for a few minutes to hear your observations on what is being said.  And very specific question.  What particular roll young people can play in helping to cover digital divide and gender‑based digital divide.  Any components what we have heard so far ‑‑ any comments?
I especially encourage our senior experts to also take the floor but I do think that Daphne raised her hand.  You have the floor.
>> DAPHNE: Thank you.  First of all, thank you for the great talks on the situation in the countries.  What I was thinking about mostly when urn discussing the different points is I think that the youth has an incredibly amazing understanding of what is going on on the Internet and what is going on with regards to connect activity and everything.  So, I think what role we can play is definitely to make our voice heard and to have conversation also with other stakeholders because we want to get involved as well and we have great ideas to fix the digital divide.  So I definitely think that we should try to connect more with governments, technological companies and all of those and show what amazing ideas we have.  Thank you.
>> ANJA: Apologies.  I think I was muted.  Thank you very much Daphne.  Those are extremely important comments.  Before we give maybe feedback or see the commonalties between these comments, just to see if anyone else would like to take the floor and make sure ‑‑ I'm looking at the chat as well to see if anyone would like to speak.  Valeria, you have the floor.  And then Julianna and we'll need to move to another section.
>> VALARIA: Thank you.  For question, I think the youth can play the main role in education.  For example the youth can promote digital skills along with civil societies along organizations that work on a volunteer basis and to ‑‑ the youth can create platforms, for example such as these form a lot of volunteer organizations to come out on this issue.  Because unfortunately, to reduce digital divide, nowadays, in the national strategies we can see a lot of differences and to my mind, these differences preclude International corporation in this way.
So the main question that we should rise, what should be done and what is the role of International community in ensuring digital in inclusion how can the youth join approach and join the efforts that are made by International communities.  Thank you.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much for bringing the component of the International community in this context, which I think is very important because we can work alone in our silos.  We need harmonized frameworks and we have seen that through the discussions so far at the IGF on so many topics.
I think Julianna asked for the floor.  So I'd like to give the floor to her and then we would need to move to the second section.
>> JULIANNA: We also have a important role in policy making not only nationally but also Internationally.  If we do unite towards the case of connecting the entire world and providing the tools that are necessary for this and regulation that is necessary to achieve it, we can do this as a community of young people around the world.  That's what I'd like to say.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much.  And I do think the burden is really on us to have to a certain extent, dons create those conditions for youth so we can have exchanges with those that can make decisions and I cannot agree more with you.
With that, last comment and I have to do this because Christina has been such an influential and important person in Youth IGF ecosystem for the past two years that we know each other.  And I would like to hear from you about your question and then we will move to the second segment.  Christina you have the floor.
>> CHRISTINA: Hi, guys.  Thank you.  I feel very happy to be a Panelist and to hear about your experience.  One that the young people have is opportunity, so work, like I'm in the government improve ecosystem or help the stakeholders ecosystem.  Maybe some time and activities about Internet government are not like a little decision, national communities have so when we can do, what we can do after this, if you create a project, you try something with stakeholders, they can tubing you but then maybe they see that you have or what we have to do a little work, they gone.  And then what do we do?  That is my question.  Thank you.
>> ANJA: That is a very good question.  And it's been addressed by a couple of colleagues in the previous remarks.  Here is my suggestion.  I think this summit and this session definitely should go into the direction of concrete suggestions and ideas and exchange of already existing good practices.  I think our next discussion block really nicely fits to this.  It is about our educational frameworks.  Thinking formal education and what is the vision for next digital generations?  Some of you at the very beginning mentioned how important it is to invest in young people and that means investing into their education, whether formal or informal channels.
Now this is probably one of the most critical parts we are going to discuss today.  So I'm very happy that today with us we have our dear colleague and friend of the IGF, Mr. Alex Wong.  I'm quite sure that you would recognize Alex's face and name.  I had the pleasure to meet Alex while he was work other for the world economic forum and the International Telecommunications Union.  Quite a visionary and expert in digital innovation and digital policy and we are very fortunate to have him.  Let me quickly give the floor to Alex and then Alex can guide us to moderate and hear from young people about their views on educational systems and how can digital innovation support changing and making all of us benefiting more from our education.  Alex?  Thank you for joining us and your support.
>> ALEX WONG: Thank you, Anja and thank you for the kind introduction.  So I have a lot less hair in my photo because I'm an old person.  So I'm very pleased and honored to be moderating this session with you, all of you who are the young leaders of our next generation.
So yes, this session will be on education.  And I'll just start off with a remark that, one of the roles that the IGU that I have and I'm within the telecommunication development bureau, so for you that know the IGU or maybe don't, the U.N. agency on ICTs does have a development bureau that focuses on closing the digital divide and we launched a project a year ago called Vega, with UNICEF where our aim is to connect every school to the Internet.  And that is using a lot of advanced market commitments, development finance techniques but equally importantly pooling the demand across the schools around the world collectively.
So the project is very relevant for this topic and a lot of you are thinking, what is the use of connecting the school if you're not allowed to be in the school because of COVID?  Indeed, we believe that schools can be then the access point that can then develop and provide the connectivity to the surrounding villages and the communities and of course the young people and the children.
So, that is something I can talk more about later or address or answer any questions.  I'm want to pass the floor to our discussants and so, maybe with Anja's guidance we first have a Keynote input, if I'm not mistaken.  Do we invite ‑‑
>> ANJA: I would give a choice if peeled like to speak now or hear firstly from our colleagues and then give reflections after.  I'm aware of the interesting content that will come to the floor so I think it fits both scenarios.  So it's up to you what are you more comfortable with?  I don't know whether he be hear us.  Let me just quickly check I think we are able to.
>> JAKUB BORKOWSKI: Thank you for the opportunity to be with you and give my remarks.  I think you can also see me.  Although I'm thinking as this forum is your forum, it's for youth and I would suggest maybe it would be more appropriate to listen first about your activities and then maybe I could conclude if that would fit the scenario?
>> ALEX WONG: Very good.
>> ANJA: I think both Alex, and especially our colleagues, are happy with that.  We started with Marek Zagórski from Poland and we are hoping that the Minister, you, and pioneer a practice where young people will have dire opportunity to speak to decision makers and senior experts and really be the voice where changes can be implemented.  So with that, Alex, if you agree, let's maybe start from our colleagues from the youth Latin‑American IGF.
>> ALEX WONG: Very good.
>> JULIANA: Hello, I'm from San Paulo Brazil and part of the observe torte Internet youth (?) I'm going talk about education 4.0 in my region.  I was in those places around the world, there was no schools that were prepared to deal with the consequences imposed by distance and social isolation and of course countless sectors are struggling to adapt and find ways to overcome this difficult situation.  Of course it would be no different education.
However, I don't think we can actually talk about education 4.0 in Latin America without talking about the digital divide.  Latin America we are so far away from connecting the entire region and measures of social isolation in this sense highlighted inequalities that come with lack of Internet access.  Having no access to the Internet in a household in the context of this pandemic in Latin America means that the kids are basically going to miss one year of education.  In the context of rural areas where there is no Internet infrastructure, it means the entire communities are going to be excluded from the educational system while lasts.
So I don't think it's only a matter of having Internet access but also as a way to access education in 2020, depends directly on the quality of your connection as well as the devices you have.  So not only on having or not Internet; because education on line often means you have to stream videos, download content, type papers and you can not do that in a quality way using for example your parent's phone or sharing a device with four of your siblings at the same time, or with your zero‑rating services only.  So that is what many families in Latin America are doing, they are improvising because they don't have the appropriate resources.  I think this is the most basic point I wanted to raise but there are other issues I wanted to bring up.
Public schools in the region are not entirely prepared to provide teachers with educational resources such as educational digital platforms, methodologies et cetera.  Most schools before the pandemic did not have the necessary support to often on line education and with the pandemic, they had to adapt to that overnight.  So schools needed to find ways to adapt.
Some of the schools needed to buy licenses to digital platforms in education but this platforms are often paid and schools cannot afford them with their annual budget and the options that are not paid usually requires some technical work that has to be done and not all of them have the support that they need in order to do that.
What is happening a lot in this region is that teachers are having to improvise on their own using their own personal resources in order to teach their students remotely.  I have heard in many cases, for example, elementary schoolteachers don't have access to digital platforms to up load content so they have to send everything to their students by WhatsApp or messaging Apps.  So definitely not an ideal situation in terms of resources.  On both sides, most on the school side and on the student's side as well.
I know I don't have much time left but I want to say that although education 4.0 is already a reality and it opens many doors and opportunities for improvement in our educational system, however, I don't think Latin America is prepared for this at this point.  And it's necessary to us, the youth and the IGF ecosystem, whether you're from Latin America or not, to pressure government and International community for equality, universal Internet connection, educational resources that are open‑source or offered at reasonable prices and also adequate infrastructure and connective devices so no student or teacher is left behind during the pandemic and after the pandemic.  Thank you very much.  I'm open for your questions as well.
>> ALEX WONG: Thank you very much, Juliana.  Let's continue with our other Panelists.  I have a sore throat but not COVID.  I got tested and I'm clear but my apologies for my voice.  I'm losing it.  But let's go to our next colleague from Germany, Youth IGF, Elizabeth.
>> ELIZABETH: Thank you.  I can start by framing a message to the Youth IGF Germany put adds outcome to the meeting in September we also talked about digital education, and we concluded that schools and the universities are particularly affected by the COVID‑19 pandemic and the outcomes so the lack of technical equipment and preparation and lack of digital concepts have led to increased education injustice we see.
Students without adequate equipment need special support from the states or from the government and the stakeholders, and digital literacy among teachers and students must be promoted early on.  The progress we see in e‑learning and digital concepts should be maintained after the pandemic ended, maybe we can get some good learnings out of it.  The situation in Germany in terms of how we could like get through the pandemic and also see new forms of schooling with mix.  Some schools have really good methodologies and have the means to work with the students to cater to needs and open to new concepts but for many here we talked to students also in our Panel back in September, is that it's not working very well.  The German educational system is relatively fragmented as each federal state is in charge of their own educational policies and some of them are open to innovation and some of them are closed off so this differs from region to region and sometimes also school to school and we see those big differences.
From our perspective, we concluded that we need to see digital education and new schooling as holistic things.  So it's not only Computer Science but it's also Computer Science but it's also learning how to navigate digital spaces in an autonomous way.  So really I want to point out the importance of school but school as a starting point for lifelong learning.
We also need educators.  So teachers who are able to navigate platforms and devices in such a way that their students get the most benefit out of that knowledge as well.  And we see there is a language of education for teachers ‑‑ lack of education for teachers and educators.  We need more awareness for tighter security of students for example, so when we work in such a digital environment now, especially, so we need to be able to have data security.  We think resources is a good way to approach this and will help greatly in fostering open‑learning environment.
We see that collaboration would be amazing.  There is a lot of private initiatives and NGOs who are really innovative in their approaches and we also see openness from the government in Germany to adapt some of those ideas.  And the German government is also focused more now on fostering digital education.  So from what we heard or from what I heard, they want to make 2021 the year of digital education, actually.  So hopefully there is a way to go forward and really reflect on what we have learned so far.
Another point I want to make as my last point for now, is that we also need to see young people as a advantage, resource.  We have to ask young people about their educational journey and their knowledge because we see that many youngsters are digitally outsmarting their teachers.  So it could be a good process that educators and educatees learn from each other rather than having a very top‑down educational approach that you see in many cases.
>> ALEX WONG: Thank you, Elizabeth.  Now let's turn to West Africa Youth IGF, Joshua, please.
>> JOSHUA: Thank you very much.  I was just going to talk about the issue of the COVID‑19 and our education system from West Africa and a little bit say what we have done to make it better since then.
Coming from a place where we have digital divide in terms of connectivity and we have people, millions of people who really don't have access to Internet on a daily basis, it's quite hard for us to move from going out every day to go to the schools and then one day you lawyer you can't go anywhere.  For everybody to adapt to it because talking about low penetration of the Internet, we also have issues where there are more people over access who don't have access to devices either.  So there is no Internet and less devices.  So even if there is some Internet in some locations, there is too little infrastructure in regards to devices for the individuals to use.
So some of the ways that we saw is some young people, according to the last discussion we had at the IGF in some countries, what they did was on their own pathway were able to organize sections and be able to teach their communities little stuff.  So some came up with some applications that have some ‑‑ more like trainings in some specific subjects, and some young people took it as a opportunity to be able to use that to train their community.
Apart from that, we had television and radio stations that talk to people about some courses because we know it's easier to use the television and radio to get to people instead of the Internet.  So television or radio also have great way to reach out to people in some communities that don't have access.
Also coming from the area we values a lot of shot‑down where we invite the government to stop shutting down the Internet.  Some people don't see much need or why they need to connect.  And it's much of the name in this town, why you need to connect?  So there have been some kind of awareness during this lockdown also as a way to tell people that this is the importance of the Internet too because you need to talk to people, send money to people.  You can't do that when you're locked down at home.
That's where the on line banking comes in.  You might need to reach tout a loved one who is across the city away from you and you want to communicate with them.  So the COVID‑19, we have been able to tell people in the different communities why we actually need to use Internet.
And also locally, it also helps the government in different countries to be able to come up with policies that, where digital in terms of some of the curriculums in some countries are a little bit outdated because pretty much nobody sees the curriculum.  You see it in some community and no way to update the curriculum.  No general database where you can see the new updates that have to do with your particular subject or teachings.  During the lockdown it also helped some teachers to be able to get on the Internet because then you might not have like a central date at base and you might have to use some of the institution's database to be able to get the updates.  So some people also looked at other institutions and were able to copy some of the new stuff.
So the I talked about no Internet and the Internet shutdown and collaboration that happened between more young people to be able to get curriculums and let people in their community to be able to access more education.  Thank you very much.
>> ALEX WONG: Thank you Joshua for that.  Our last youth leader, Jena, please.
>> JENA: Sorry I was on mute.  Can you hear me now?
>> ALEX WONG: Very good.  Yes.
>> JENA: Thank you for have me here.  I'm the coordinator of the Asia‑Pacific Youth area and the Hong Kong Youth area.  It is already 1:30 here but I'm glad to be able to participate and share experience and ideas on educations and the futures from a more Asia‑Pacific perspective.  We had a workshop session conducted back in September of this year.  So hopefully I'll be able to bring those inside with some personal experience in Hong Kong to this Panel today.
So education 4.0 was an abstract zero before COVID‑19.  But, when it comes just like said, it becomes the reality.  Digital transformation and education is thought to be implemented when the schools announced to be suspended on such short notice when we had COVID‑19.  Many challenges phased by the teachers and students and also the managements of school but undeniably the pandemics actually impacted the way we educate and this has inference a lot in how the future of education will look like after the experience of COVID‑19.  
There are many challenges I'm not going to name all of them but I may need to bring out especially these are the biggest challenges faced in Asia‑Pacific like first comes to the transformation in on line learning, schools have to adapt and implement on learning because they have challenges because the redness of such transformations varies from school to school.  Adequate knowledge about digital technology might pose challenges to school in planning new learning models.  And choosing which approaches whether they should have a pre reported video or having live lessons for student and they have struggles and designing new time tables.  Main focus on dealing with the viruses itself and they might not have enough support from the government to measure the strategies deal with the situations in education, so school may have to deal with on their own.  So talking about challenges, students also facing some of the difficulties ‑ many lack physical and social infrastructure in Asia to support effective engagement in on line learning.
So for example, end users might not have access to the Internet, students and teachers might not have access to catch‑up with the transitions of learning approaches and submitting assignments.  But the schools, some like mentioned in our Panel in APRGF, students will have to climb mountains to get better signal just to attend a class or they have to climb up a try to get a better connection.  So there are some challenges faced in Asia‑Pacific.  But we can see digital education will be our futures and it is really time for us to learn a lesson from the pandemic and we think the educations of our future in this new normal.
Talking about rethinking education, it's not only saying we have to think about the new approach of new models we use in education, but also the meaning behind educations.  So students, you get to access to more resources.  You can have the animals on line.  You goat have different courses provided by different institutions.  Not only from your own country ‑‑ not only receiving education from your own country but to other resources also.  So it is really time for us to develop more critical thinking, the sources of education you're receiving in order to choose the best ‑‑ not choosing the best, access to more information and knowledge.  But not only limited to what you used to be taught.  It is actually a good opportunity for all of us to explore more, to rethink about education as young people.
In order to echo on what Elizabeth said earlier, young people should get involved as a source in this development process in education.  So, we can get involved so all stakeholders should get involved in designing what they should be taught and how education should be looked like; because education is like water.  It can nurture a new generation but 23 it's done wrong, it can destroy an entire generation.  So we cannot let a particular stakeholder to decide like what we should be educated, but young people and all stakeholders should get involved to design and make decisions for our educations and we have to do it right together.
For sure, digitalizations in educations will be our future but I do not personally think on line education will completely replace face‑to‑face class because it will lose a lot of physical and eventual cues and also important elements in some education for some young people at very early age, educations.
Of course, like so for other challenges, for sure, governments efforts is very important, especially in the establishments of infrastructure for connectivity.  Because on line learning highly depend on infrastructure and I think governments should put more in improving the connectivity people have and for other challenges.  If anything stakeholders think it clearly, instead of highly depending on their own government and keep saying it's their responsibility, we should actually take a step back to think if all stakeholders take their power to do it together for the community, we can do more.  So take an example in Hong Kong.
The Hong Kong government might not support schools too much or not even the citizens too much.  But because the Internet evolved every second, if the stakeholder, for example, student itself, the school or the educator they can actually not wait for the new policy announced by anyone but you can actually choose the best approach that is best for your audience, your own school will have some policies but it must be different for another school.
So I think it is really time for us to actually rethink not only the new approach for education in this new normal but rethink the new meaning of education.  So that is basically what I want to share here.  For sure I have a lot more I want to talk about but I will keep it short so we can have more time to have some Q&A or some other interaction.  So that's all for me.  Thank you.
>> ALEX WONG: All right, you thank you very much.  You ended it well with some very big questions.   I noted questions about how to get youth more engaged in general.  Some of you may ‑‑ also about how to make the digital education happen?  Who has the responsibility and how do we get the right stakeholders involved?  With that, let me pass to give your remark.  Maybe you want to touch on these themes and then maybe a couple minutes left for general questions and wrap up.
>> JAKUB: Thank you very much.  It's clearly pandemic situation that just hit us, it clearly amplifies all these challenges that you mentioned from different regions.  It's extremely ‑‑ listen your viewpoints from different regions indicating very critical pre requirements for education 4.0 and digital transformation, which is access to connectivity, which should be provided as a basic need today.  It's also very impressive to hear about the practices and also the opportunities that you see that this digital transformation education is bringing to us.  We are very proud to cooperate with you and youth today and we are committed to empower young talents by technologies to jointly contribute to the society.
It has become European company industry creating value and promote digital assistance.  Today despite all the channels that we are aware of, which are brought by COVID‑19 and also as you know, this macro environment, we are as determined as ever to continue to support you and drive and develop young talents.  Innovation is bottomless.  It flourishes through collaboration, collaboration and sharing is key in digital transformation in empowerment.  We will always focus in supporting innovation and young talents.
We believe young initiatives could grow faster and healthier with proper and more directed mentoring and targeted programs and hence to create innovative solutions not just regionally but also globally.  As we develop talents and education and innovation and corporations and also through number of our programs directed for innovation and targeted for innovation and aimed for developing local talents such for the future, notification programs, ICT and others.  I would like to ‑‑ my time is short over here.
For example, while we see the well program in Europe in 2011, global in 2008 it's already an old program.  We have partnered with over 208 universities globally from 96 countries all with mission to develop local talent in obviously ICT field.  And let's take Europe and since the program begun in 2011 we have supported already 1,300 European students from French European countries and we expect that by end of 2021, it's now we are moved this program to on line due to pandemic, we aim to support 3000 more Europeans in this program.
So, the intention is that we share our knowledge in all the relevant fields, including 5G, artificial intelligence, AI Cloud Computing, in a global business environment, passing kids to young people from different countries and aiming to build a bridge between the knowledge which is acquired during University classes and practical skills required in the industry to improve the knowledge transfer.
The partis nation this project is also an opportunity to experience virtual ‑‑ before it was physical, so people actually go to China for a training to see our factory and different departments, how we work to experience virtual interaction communication and experience science and future business commitments.
Strong commitment to Research and Development and innovation.  You have probably have seen those fields that we locate 10 persons of venue to investments in R&D.  So for example, in this year, in 2020, our investment has increased 20 billion dollars in R&D and a preparation for significance and partly brought by this pandemic for network infrastructure and services.  Our R&D tests are led across 23 different countries, 23 different centers in 12 countries in Europe.  So in Europe alone there are about 2.4 thousand people in our R&D mission and this R&D activity has generated over 10,000 registered with European office to date.
I also wanted to mention about our innovation research program, which in this framework we are covering partnership collaboration with universities.  At the moment there are about 300 universities in this program, joined this program, since 2004 with the proper investment of about 900 million euros.  In Europe, we ‑‑ European Union we have been collaborating with more than 150 universities.
As examples, in my country, in Poland, with Warsaw University of Technology, in this program Polish students will receive the latest equipment for working with artificial intelligence and soon in partnering with other industries.  We are opening a study program on the cybersecurity in Warsaw as response in lack of experience in this field.
Going deeper towards the business side, we also proud to in a partnership with star buck in Poland, also as example and activities are happening in other countries likewise in launching a competition program.  We call it #start up challenge across regions.  We focus on local talents empowered by technologies and their contribution to the society.  And then come back to those challenges you have indicated today of digital inclusion and access to connectivity, that is The Centre of team of the challenge this year is fighting with digital exclusion such that we hope to drive to, shake the ecosystem to industry and collect those interesting outputs, which will be finalized with the gala in March 2021 from our site.
>> ALEX WONG: Thank you.  Just one more minute, please.
>> JAKUB: So with participation in these events, we are reaffirming commitment to using technology skills and applications to create new value in digital inclusion.  In the future, we also want to education and development clearly, development of talent together with our Partners to promote what our industry has to offer and implement this initiative of full technology inclusion.
Together, we can go to the specific times and together we can innovate to make difference.  Collaboration and sharing is critical these days.  And Poland is hosting IGF 2021 next year.  I also want to conclude with one final sentence that we seriously looking to cooperate 8 with the you and see you next year in IGF 2021 hosted by Poland.  Let's contribute together for future of the digital innovation globally.  Thank you very much.
>> ALEX WONG: Thank you.  Anja, I know we are a minute past but maybe I could ask our four Panelists to answer with one sentence only so we address one of the questions that came up.  And I think many of you raised this.  What would be the one way to get more youth engaged in helping to rethink education for the next digital generation?  I think that was a question in the Q&A.  We'll start with you Elizabeth, but one sentence.  So 10 seconds each so we can get to the next Panel.  Elizabeth over to you first since you were asked that question in the chat in particular.
>> ELIZABETH: Okay, I will make it short.  I really believe in deliberative process system.  So, processes that allow for young people to be involved in the building of curriculum, be asked and work together with their teachers and policymakers to really in this deliberative process come out with ideas that go beyond what we do at the moment.
>> ALEX WONG: Thank you.  Juliana in Brazil.  Over to you, please.
>> JULIANA: Thank you very much.  In one sentence, I would say that creating more programs and building opportunities so that young people can actually feel like they are part of this process that they can actually improve it and make a better educational system for themselves and for the ones that come after.
>> ALEX WONG: Thank you.  Jena to you, please.
>> JENA: So, one sentence.  I think we should embrace creativity of young people with the experience of the power of all stakeholders for better education.
>> ALEX WONG:  And Joshua.
>> JOSHUA: I believe young people have a big role to play and in making the Internet accessible to everyone.  I think we should be given the opportunity to do that.
>> ALEX WONG: I'll give my final, a plug for IGU.  We see the value of the youth and we need the youth involved.  When we host our world Telecom development conference, every four years where we get our mandate from the members on what we need to do with it as a U.N. Nation, next November it will be held for the first time ‑‑ we are holding it in Ethiopia and a Youth Summit as well.  So I'll make sure Anja has the details to that so we can invite participants from the Youth Summit to join us as we address the challenges on ICT and digital development.  So thank you very much.  Back to you, Anja.  Sorry for being a little over the time limit.
>> ANJA: Not at all.  First of all Alex, excellent presentation and time management.  Great questions.  Food for thought for next block.  Thank you very much for finding time to be with us.  I know you're very busy and multitasking and the issues with your throat and you still decided to join us.  Much appreciated and I'm looking forward to receiving more sources on the event happening.  Hopefully colleagues can contribute.  Definitely you see there is a great potential already great expertise among all these young people and I'm sure that our future is bright as long as we support them and invest in their meaningful engagement.  Thank you.
I want to thank also Mr. Borkoski for being with us.  It seems you're working on a lot of projects.  Next year the IGF is hosted in Poland.  I'm sure you'll be there engaging actively and young people will have the opportunity to meet with you and your colleagues and discuss the projects you're working on.  Thank you for joining.
>> JAKUB: Thank you very much.  I am looking forward the next year and I hope it will be more normal times after this pandemic.
>> ANJA: We all do.  Thank you very much for joining and thank you for your time.
And special thanks goes to all our speakers.  It was such an inspiring input we received from you and I do think and I hope that especially this topic, which I have to say I'm very biased here, very close to me as well, that could be our topic to build on next year and to hopefully come up with concrete suggestions and ideas for improving our educational system.  So, formal or informal and equally important.
Naturally we are going to move to third discussion block of this summit.  I think all of you basically from the very beginning mentioned the investment, which goes in line with developing capacity of people to, various sources.
That is something we are going to discuss in the next, a little bit less than an hour.  We have excellent colleagues joining us.  I believe many of us we know each other and let me start, please, with asking ‑‑ I believe it will be Youth Argentina IGF to, give her inputs about how can we develop capacity and Internet Governance when next generation of leaders and experts?  What exactly needs to be done in Argentina that we have the next generation of leaders and experts?
>> EILEEN: Thank you very much it's a pleasure to be here with you.  I hope you can hear me well.  So the topic that is making us together to get‑together today ‑‑ tongue tied.  So the participants using the decision‑making process is very essential that youth can be part of that process.  In my country, I see that there is inclusion of youth in companies not in critical places like the process of builds related to Internet Governance matters.  It's also a challenge we need to address urgently and be part of local initiatives working on IG matters they should have a quota with the support of government and citizen scientists so we can be sure we are taken into consideration by the local decision makers.  
I think very interesting point that was raised yesterday that I forgot to mention, I'm part of the Steering Committee and also part of the Youth Authority.  And there was one point I think it's important to bring with you.  It was been a necessity of having more programs like the Internet Society, youth ambassadors and happy we have a lot of colleagues from that program.  And it's very essential that the point to have focus on leadership while we are building this program because young people should be equipped to be the next generation leaders and the leaders of today.  And about, in my country and Argentina, I want to mention I was part of the Global Citizens silo.  I organized that.  And we organized like three weeks ago where we have the opportunity to discuss in today's different topics related to Internet Governance and that process of collective deliberation we can see is very important to have a lot of people involved, not just some experts.  So we can see that that is the way to go.  Because it is relevant to us taking into consideration after all of that discussion that we hear from colleagues that we have experience and knowledge to share and we should be a key part of the process.
So basically on the intervention, I think it's very important that youth can be involved and can create a profound change in the Internet Governance system.  Because in having an influence in our societies and in the Internet Governance environment, it's a way to achieve more inclusive societies and I think that is all for myself.
>> ANJA:  Thank you for that.  Very concrete proposal. Very interesting.  Let's talk about Europe and Asia.  I don't know who is with us.  Let me just double check.  Is it Sonia or her colleague?  If colleagues show up, please take the floor.  But I would like us to move now to the African Youth IGF.  I believe Keith is with us.
>> KEITH: I'm right here.
>> ANJA: Please tell us, African continent is the youngest continent and biggest population.  So what is critical?  What is important to develop capacity and Internet Governance across the countries of the continent?  What are the challenges and what kind of investment the countries, societies need on that continent in order to make sure that we have experts knowledgeable about Internet Governance?
>> KEITH: Thank you very much who are joining today.  I think youth participation and decision‑making process is very important because for the longest time youth participation and policy‑making processes if testifies define that, I would say it's an action‑oriented process involving young people and have institutions and initiatives and positions and funding them ‑‑ affording them control of our resources that effect their lives.  So therefore youth participation includes efforts by young people to organize around issues of their choice, by adults or the grownups to involve young people in community agencies and by youth and doubts join together and I think that is where for me, the critical aspects come in.  The aspect of intergenerational co‑leading efforts.  And then Africa perspective, I think one of the key issues that young people struggling with is the issue of capacity.  The issue to ‑‑ the capacity to articulate key issues of Internet Governance, to bringing key messages in a way that responds to policymaker language. 
Since we started off the Africa Youth IGF, during the launch, we had the Deputy Claire person of the African Union and this speaks volumes on how youth are being regarded on the continent it nerves of trying to provide a space for young people to co‑lead different processes and those of policy formulation and decision‑making.  Why have seen a number of initiatives that are borne out of this this year.  Three initiatives in three different countries borne out of this process.  Uganda and Manibia and Zambia.  And some of the countries gone ahead to implement this, more critically, getting that link and connection between what young people are doing in day‑to‑day lives and especially those in ICT‑related fields.  Internet Governance from our area, young people who are in line around CT, and by what they are doing day‑to‑day or because they are tech savvy and therefore they see themselves as important stakeholder.  But most specifically we are living out many young people who are not necessarily within the Internet term or ICT space and this needs to continue to find ways of bringing young people in different fields into this kind of space and build capacity to actually articulate themselves properly.  That is where the big disconnect is.  Allowing young people not in this space to speak.
The involvement of young people and youth specifically in the decision‑making process and discussion can lead to better positions and outcomes and we have seen these through various IGF processes and the young people are making, very key and very solid and very futuristic.  So participation promotes involvement of young people, strengthens their commitment to an understanding of the Human Rights in a democracy and provides them a formal protection allowing them to take part in decision‑making processes.  
So looking forward for me specifically, I think I see self-organized youth activities for digital corporation that speaks to the five sets of accommodation that it talks about.  Building inclusive Digital Economy and Society, develop Human Rights and institutional capacity, protect Human Rights and human agency, protect digital trust, security and stability, global digital cooperation.
When you look at five sets of recommendations, the future of these recommendations are young people.  So I would like to see more young people taking the driver's seat as far as pushing for these recommendations and implementation on the continent.  On the continent we have an initiative with the AU to support Internet Governance processes and we hope that majority or most of the resources out of this will go to supporting the young people in Youth IGF initiatives because technically, those are the breeding grounds for next experts.
So as I conclude, I think looking forward, I see trailblazers, I see leading experts, I see youth initiatives are very key players in IG processes.  I also see a community in IGF forums way below the National IGFs, because when you talk about National IGF, it becomes an elitist group in the sense these are young people within the cities but we know that youth are not homogeneous.  We have youth who are literate, who drop out of schools, we have youth in urban areas, other areas and as my colleague just spoke about, issues of devices and issues of infrastructure, again that creates a gut in terms of young people to effectively contribute to these spaces.
So I think going forward, out of all of these programs that we have, great people and great young people and what they express, will continue to have more intimate spaces at community level to buildup and push for national conversations.  Thank you very much.
>> ANJA: Thank you, Keith.  You have outlined some very important aspects and especially one, which I have to say doesn't only relate to youth.  It really relates to also the participants that are coming to the IGF.  You will recall from 2018 that IGF in Paris and the call from Secretary General to involve those that are missing and marginalized that are not present additionally in our discussions space.  And mostly referring to inform those coming from all areas, especially those that are underrepresented.  I think that also relates to young people.  You're completely right.  In our community, we don't see enough philosophers.  We don't see enough anthropologists.  Medical staff is missing for instance, especially we are discussing health issues within the high‑level.  
Many topics will relate to other sessions because of the pandemic to how digital can help us to overcome this, and we are missing, like for example, that community.  So I think it's extremely important to speak about inclusion from a magmatic point of view, not to speak also about the countries that are underrepresented or in a local level, the cities or communities that are underrepresented, because usually I noticed that the meetings are concentrated in the capitals, also a huge problem for inclusion.
But it is very good we are aware and we have recognized that and it will give us opportunity to further work on it.  With that, I would like now us to move to the Ukraine IGF.  So here we share the same concerns.
>> VALARIA:  Hello.  And thank you very much for this opportunity I will try to be very brief.  My name is Valaria, from Ukraine, the Moderator of IGFUA.  We have already carried off our third Youth IGF in Ukraine.  It was fully on line due to the pandemic situation and despite this fact we were away, we were really together mentally and I want to underline that I'm really proud that today I have already heard great thoughts and in general reconcile with the messages which we discussed during our Youth IGF.
As all distinction shown, youth want to be heard and want their choice to be taken into consideration.  We want to be engaged in different processes from just discussion to decision‑making.  And at the same time, Ukranian youth is not fully aware of their opportunities.
In Ukraine we have a lot of different NGOs trying to promote Internet Governance issues as Human Rights and Cyber Security many, many others.  But at the same time, there is no community network or any kind of single point which would connect all the elements to work together, to be better but at the same time to be one big team.
In Ukraine, we are for lack of corporation between different stakeholders in the context of youth involvement.  Of course it is difficult and hard to just start multi‑stakeholder dialogue in some processes but we need to start this series of steps and encourage everyone to be more proactive.  Every stakeholder can bring in something helpful.  And by the way, this is interesting that many young people during our Youth IGF mentioned that they want our governance, our mental sector to be more proactive and engage in them in IGF processes through some kind of fair and open platform that will bring different stakeholders together on equal basis.  And I think that this could work.  Talking about future in general, I'm sure that Ukranian youth is already ‑‑ is ready to bring themselves together for digital cooperation, fortunately we can train due to pandemic, we have to be over the line and unfortunately, everyone has stable access to the Internet or Internet connectivity at all; even during our Youth IGF, we had such cases when Panelists were disconnected due to poor connect activity and this is the issue which can be solved only with support of government and businesses and this is only one point to many different others like digital education.
And again, I had my way of thanking for successful future.  We need to put our efforts together and this puts this efforts need to be treated equally.  Thank you very much.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much.  Excellent inputs you share the concerns and the vision with other colleagues that share the inputs as well.  I would like us to conclude this more formal part of this second and last block with the Indian Youth IGF.  They are hosted ‑‑ a few days ago was your Annual Meeting?  I was there for a part of time and it was fascinating, amazing work there.
>> Thank you, Anja.  Greetings everyone.
[ Audio Feedback ]
-- raise awareness of youth on Internet Governance and increase young generations to participate in Public Policy discussions and achieve build on new Internet leaders so they are engaged beyond Internet Governance.  India has a population of 1.3 billion.  The overall is 86 persons but the rural is 60 person.
There is a large population of India is yet to reap the benefits of Internet.  Further because of the pandemic, the classes shifted on line, businesses also shifted on line so Internet has now become critical for survival and will provide equal opportunities for everyone in the country.
So 65 persons in India are 35-year olds and necessary and critical to India section in the governance of the Internet.  Both are interesting issues that concern them and also interesting issue of Internet Governance for the benefit of our country.  The unique set of experiences and requirements that youth need to be incorporated into the policies and regulations in our Internet Governance.
So to build capacity, we organized a first annual for 2018.  We organized in 2019 as well.  So one was physical single events during the two events and the multi‑stakeholder of decision‑making.  Safeguards on the Internet and opportunities for the youth to engage and contribute in this way.
This year we organized the event virtually from 20 October to 1 November and we incorporated teams of the UNIGF where topics covering in addition like mental health and Internet, such as the psychological and environmental sustainability and ICT.
The 2020 fellows to a multi‑stakeholder format of discussion for proposed policy and recommendations on the issue of censorship and the rights to Freedom of Expression in India.  In addition to the annual events, we have organized webinars to discuss prominent topics of IGF.  This year we collaborated to organize a capacity building workshop youth advocacy weekend, where we aimed at empowering the youth with skill sets of effective advocacy and focus on policy making and Internet Governance.
So what are the challenges that we have come across during this process of capacity building?  So the first one is diversity.  Since India is a multi‑lingual country, how do we connect with the Internet and users and the prospective Internet and users who speak languages other than English?  And how do we connect with the population of India?
Second challenge, physically bringing people a challenge because of the costs involved and challenge of availability and access to Internet.  A lot of areas have spoken about this concern.  Then sustainable IGF engagement.
So during the three years we felt that Internet Governance is a phenom that is so thinking on the lines of coming up with post engagement that converse linguistic and rural inclusion recommendations and solutions.  Preparing positions and engaging with key decision makers.
So the youth need to provide the energy to bring this change in India and beyond.  A strong corporation between the stakeholders is the way to go.  I mean it's very important to engage non‑youth in the forums and the discussions that we have because it's important for them to understand the dialogues and discussions that the youth have and for them to understand the odd vision of Internet Governance.  Thank you.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much.  Thank you for bringing the concept of corporation, which is very important.  I have given earlier today the same example as you mention now the corporate project by the IGF and Indian Youth IGF.  So just excellent.  Very impressive and I think that is that concrete Best Practice that we can all do with ‑‑ and it's possible to do it what creates those connections.  With that, I would like to conclude this formal part of this section on capacity development and now open the floor for everyone.
I want to hear your views, what you do think is needed to build capacity of young people to be integrated meaningfully in discussions and Internet Governance and also in the decision‑making processes?  And another layer of that of course is what is needed to build capacity of young people to be able to maximize the opportunities that the Internet can give to all of us?  So two important questions.  It would be good if your response could be concrete.  What exactly, or maybe if you already had good things to share, rather than just going through generic statements as I think we need concrete examples to inspire us to follow them.  I think there is somebody that would like to take the floor.  That would be Daphne.  You have the floor.
>> DAPHNE: I also saw that Sergei was asking it before me so maybe you want to give him the floor first.
>> ANJA: Sorry, Sergei.  That was very kind of you Daphne.  So Sergei, you can speak and then we have Daphne.  Let me see if you are on mute.
>> SERGEI: Yes, can you hear me?
>> ANJA: I'm sorry.  Okay.  I think we can hear you now.
>> SERGEI: Thank you.  Thank you for giving the floor to me.  My name is Sergei Romanov from Russian Federation.  I would like to share two main things about the developing capacity.  Unfortunately, the youth stakeholder group isn't growing as fast as we would desire, although there are many really interested, versatile young people open to everything new.  The first theme I would like to mention of the basis of my experience of participation in both Regional and Global IGFs is that the voices of young people aren't heard enough yet in the process of policy making and Internet Governance.  Young people should be given the opportunity to express their opinions, to speak out on the initiatives of brilliant national and International organizations, to organize channels and change of expert information with more experienced holders.  Yes, there are programs that involve the youth in global processes such as youth ambassadors programs, newcomers programs, fellowship programs, and so on.  All of them implied personal initiative of young participants to find ways to enter such programs and this is not a very effective approach since despite the desire of young people to work in such a program.  Not all of them have the perseverance and persistence to answer them.
Organizers of such programs should interact with universities, conducting lectures and IG providers and provide financials and development Internet Governance in such a way N this way, encourage youth to attend and to bring contribution to Internet Governance discussion.  I strongly believe that national youth IG schools are a positive step in attracting young people to IG movement and they definitely should be organized.  This year, I took part in Russian IG school along with other young people from both Russia and other Russian‑speaking CIS countries.  And it was great experience.  I received new knowledge that I can successfully use in the future activities.
I improved my current competencies and the level of digital literacy.  I met real professionals in their field who made me look at the Internet in a new way and the second thing is that everything that is happening now in regard to the regulation of the Internet, the global and local levels, will determine the life of the next generation in many ways in almost all areas.  Those people who participate in the ongoing process will have to gradually step back from their positions and transfer them to young professionals in order to transfer smoothly.
Youth should be involved as early as possible in IG processes.  To do this, it is necessary to study this area and take part in relevant events and I think the main task of the senior generation is to organize such events and provide various types of support.  Thank you for listening.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much, Sergei.  Very good points.  I'm glad you mentioned the schools of Internet Governance and there are many, including myself as well, really see that as an excellent entry point for meaningful capacity development and entering this field as an expert.  Daphne, please you have the floor now.
>> DAPHNE: Thank you.  I think I want to build upon the points that Sergei made and I also want to link it back to the discussion we have been having since the beginning.  Because I realize that location is very important to create knowledge regarding IG and regarding leadership.  How can young people make our voices heard and how can they start projects and have inference on their field?  Also from the different disciplines as you saw in the chat earlier, ourselves being discussed.  I think this is important that it takes place on schools curriculums and throughout the different IG schools and to all the different projects.
I think for now at this moment, we should not wait until those projects are started until it happens.  We should advocate and we can already start it ourselves and prove or show a good example that something like this can definitely be set up.  So I think that Youth IGF should definitely think about how they can help with further education and also if people are not involved in the field, so they can get to know the field.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much.  Very good points.  I'm also following the chat and I see someone needs to leave and thank you very much for being with us and I know it must be very late or early for you if you are home.
I want to say that we are very fortunate, I think this year, to have opportunity to really discuss all together what could be the ‑‑ improving conditions for better integration in the Internet Governance ecosystem and to communicate that to the next year's host country.  At the beginning, I didn't tell you.
In addition to the Minister that you heard at the very beginning, there are a couple of colleagues that are with us on this call, some of them probably you know.  We have been spending so much time together over these past couple of months with consultations and I have a few things pending next year given ambition and plans that the host country has in terms of investment in young people for next year preparing for IGF in Poland.
So colleagues and some of the names you know, such as Monica, Marta, Anna, Shannon, some of the Youth Polish IGF, which I'm not going to name because I know they will take the floor very soon.  But let's maybe now ‑‑ I'm going to ask the Youth Polish IGF colleagues to come in just to give a reflection of everything that we heard so far.  We have different requirements but they all facility to one goal, better, easier integration to Internet Governance and easier way to learn more about the Public Policy.  So what are your views and what can you, as a host, tell these people next year to maybe offer to respond to those requests?
>> MARTA:  Hi.  I would like to share the presentation with you if it is okay.  I will share my screen.
>> ANJA: Let me see whether you can.
>> MARTA:  Welcome and everyone my name is Marta and I'm also from IGF Poland and I'd like to introduce you to our recently‑formed action plan provided by me and the rest of our Steering Committee.  And will so what we feel are the most important issues according to what you already said and our impressions to tackle with upcoming years of the Internet Society development.  So without extending our Polish chapter has been created just this year with the Polish min stir of digital and the Commissioner of the Research Institute.  For now we consist of three members as I mentioned.  And the council, the Members of the IGF of Poland, are about 20 people right now.  By our initiative, we primarily aim to rise the awareness of young people about various aspects of the Internet facilities and help them understand the most urgent issues that needs to be tackled.  With our generation, maybe you all agree about some people already mentioned that we should take matters into our own hands and participate much as possible in designing possible Internet Governance.  
So our first goal is to build local ‑‑ we would like to gain a platform in the country to exchange views on this situation.  We like it to the problem of young people and the Internet.  At the same time, we want to open up to the whole community of young people in Europe.  As the group from the next year's host country, we aim to create an Open Forum for the exchange of experiences and use among both young people and experts from different regions and backgrounds.  So now I'd like to pass the floor to Amelia.
>> AMELIA: Thank you very much for the perfect introduction.  And I hope that you can hear me well.  So, now I would like to tell our plans for the next year.  So as Marta mentioned, one of our goals is integration.  And we would like to see it on two levels.  The first is the original one.  Our aim is to strengthen the IGF structure in Poland.  We already have about 20 members of our team but we want to take it further.  And the second level is introduce people from other parties of the world and other initiatives and other ideas who cooperate to join the dialogue and to establish context with us because we really would like to hear voices in the process of preparing to the next IGF 2021.  Because what we believe in is knowledge acquisition, like we don't want to start the dialogue from scratch during the next year.  We really want to take part in the discussion that we already have this year because there has been so many breakpoints already made during that year's IG.
And this Summit.  We heard a lot of great overviews of what is going on in the different countries in different parts of the world and also during the last year's IGF, there were perfect mess annuals.  So this is very important to make it go harder and not to start from the very beginning because there has been a great work already made.  So that's why we believe in the knowledge acquisition, that in analyzing this year's topics, and issues that has already appeared and are going to appear during this year's IGF and to take them to the IGF 2021.
Another important thing for us is gather as many points of views as possible because diversity is the key.  And it has been mentioned a lot of times today.  And I can't agree more with that.  Internet is global.  So if we want to find solutions, if we want to have or create universal messages as young people, we need to have all the voices on the table, all perspectives.  Because it is the only way we can have this wide perspective of how to tackle with different kinds of problems, how to find the solutions.  So that is what it will be important for us to have this type of use, that every voice will be incorporated.
Also, we would like to make it our focal point to work out ways how to make impossible, to involve decision makers in the process to invite them to help us and also to support us in what we would like to introduce in the Internet Governance work; because it is something very significant that we as a people can be included in the decision‑making process.  And in creating policies.  And even we can become decision makers ourselves.  So that's why we would like to create this space, this platform to the discussion.  We are not discussing of that ever summit or after this IGF.  But we will continue to have this conversations to share these ideas within the next few months that we have until the next IGF.  And about the more specific plans for IGF, I will tell you later and now I will give the floor to my friend who is talking about topics we would like to focus on.
>> SERGEI: Of course, yes, we don't want to act against the evidence.  So first of all, thank you for IGF to make a consultation with youth people.  So we can see how to build a strategy that could be evidence‑based and we see here that the most important thing now is access and digital inclusion.  I think it's some kind of false problem that we are dealing now with this COVID‑19.  That is all of our activities on line and even importantly we see that for example when we are trying to do this, there are some teachers that have connection or for example, those living with their parents and only have one computer to access the Internet.  So even in Poland, we have problem with access and digital inclusion.
So we talk about this.  We want to make discussion about this.  Also we want to discuss about the digital education.  We know that it is also the topic for IGF.  And we also want to make a place for other stuff, for other subjects that are urgent and I think we have here on this presentation this picture, the most important things that you trusted that your people chose for us to prepare for this meeting next year.
So, we want to prepare the place where you have discussion about this stuff.  And more activities that we prepare for next year, that will be now continued, this subject.
>> AMELIA:  Thank you.  So I will just give you a quick overview of what our transaction will be.  So the first one is networking day; because we really would like to have this one day before the IGF itself, that will be dedicated totally to young people.  And will be both opportunity for them to get to know each other, to network, but also to get some guidance on how to move in the IGF environment.  Because we all know that IGF can be a bit overwhelming, especially if you're the newcomer and even if you are not first time, there is so much stuff going around in the same time that really you need to get lost.  So that is why we would like to have this day when young people can discuss, they can network or have some networking.  They can express ideas.  We will also sum up these previous mass of dialogue we will have.  Also, we would like to make it an opportunity to gather new skills or some knowledge and we would like to figure some panels with experts engaged in the Internet and technology or maybe also other sectors.  So, that is why we would like to have this is a to just to make young people feel self-confident during the IGF.
Also after that, we would like to create the space during the IGF itself where young people can meet and they can exchange their impressions, their thoughts, after IGF sessions and they will attend or maybe recommend to each other which sessions are for attending or maybe get some support if they need it.  So, that's why we would like to introduce the practice of ‑‑ of the IGF where young people can make and just grab a coffee or snack have a discussion about what is going on on IGF.
And what we see is the final conclusion of these all process is preparing rapport, which would include the statement that conclusions we will reach during the process, during the prepare Tory process and during the IGF itself.
So we will really like to invite all of you to cooperate with us both on preparing the event, because at the end, we are very open to hear your ideas to, hear your voices if you have some suggestions, contact us.  We are very open to hear them.  So don't hesitate because we really want the summit and the preparatory process and creating this to make it up to you, because we find it's really important that as I said before, all the voices are heard and no one is left behind and everybody will feel this is something that they want to take part in.  So now I will give the floor again away and he will say something more about important issuers connected with this process.
>> ANJA:  Okay.  Once again, thank you, Amelia.  As I said, we know that now there are subject to discuss and we also know that all IGF around the world have some ‑‑ they own strategies, long term strategies that they want to build some knowledge, some community, and to do some ideas.  So our idea is to look to the subject of Internet, to talk about possibilities that you can give us to build new, interesting and peaceful places for living.  We are talking here about smart cities and all their possibilities that the Internet give us to build such places.  But, this is a long‑term strategy.  We want to get know to prepare, to try to make the community that will also want to talk about this fix.  We know that for our global community now, there are subject that we need to discuss now.  And this is for us.  We understand this problem.  So this is only our idea for strategy.  Marta?
>> MARTA: So as I can see our screen time is running out, so we would like to thank our supporters so thanks to those who helped us with managing the governance forum for International aspects as well as the policy issues and research that support us in every really activity we decide to take up.  And according to what Amelia already said, and what I have said in the beginning of our presentation, we would like to invite all of the IGF members both young people and also some seniors, because senior experience is always the best knowledge for us.  The best possible and widely‑open for everyone, for every voice for the next year.  And if you have any questions or concerns or ideas so far, feel free to say it out loud right now or contact us through our social media platforms and we hope to see you in Poland in 2021.  Thank you very much.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much for this program it's incredible you're already prepared and ready for something that is going to come at the end of the next year.  So very impressive, which means we expect really an impressive organization and implementation of this program.
I think we are all very fortunate to be able to have opportunities to start cooperating with you much earlier than it is in a traditional setup of IGF preparations for the Annual Meeting, and that is one benefit of this COVID‑19 that we had opportunity to work with you for two years, not just one.  With that, let me give for the last time, the floor.  I do encourage also our senior colleagues.  I especially thank so many deer colleagues that were exchanging inputs with you and Chad.  I seen my colleagues, Lianna, Jennifer, Roberto and other names ‑‑ sorry, I wasn't there all the time carefully following.  But the names that I mention now work a lot with young people.  They are developing many capacity development projects.  They are work resulted in many young people being equipped.  I'm glad ‑‑ I think it was Lianna who mentioned about the Internet Governance school and the applications coming from teachers.  I think that is one of the critical messages that some of you said during the second block when we were discussing the education that the investment shouldn't just focus on students in whichever stage of education, but it really needs to focus as well on our mentors, especially those that came from traditional systems.  We need to make sure that we are all on the same page with same conditions in this digital ecosystem.  So I don't see any hands or request for the floor.
The questions in the chat are most valuable.  I want to tell you two things.  When Mr. Marek Zagórski was mentioning his team, his team has a number of wonderful colleagues, almost like family to us because we worked so intensively this year and continuing to work next year, and they were with us the entire time.  They are in charge for implementing and supporting youth engagement next year.  I know that Anna is here.  I have seen also colleagues from other areas and of course you heard from the colleagues of the youth Polish IGF.
I'm going to give the floor now to Anna, and Anna is going to summarize what we have been discussing and provide an overview of what are we looking for in IGF next year.  Thank you.
>> ANNA: Thank you very much.  For those we haven't met yet, my name is Anna and I'm part of the IGF 2021 team here at the Ministry of Digital Affairs who in the meantime, became a part of the Chancellor Prime Minister.  So we were really upgraded here in Poland.  And it was very, very interesting.  I had made a lot of notes.  A lot.  
So I have many ideas.  And it was really interesting to listen to your per suspect and I was Best Practices and your worries and to your best examples and there is nothing for me to not to agree that the pandemic chose how important the global access to the Internet is, especially in the sense of an education, in order to let us continue the education.  I'm a mother of three small kids so I know what it meant to go in line and how the access to the Internet, but also to simple to have free at home.  How it was important actually.  And then us working with my husband at home and it was really ‑‑ it was really different experience.  
So, I believe that for all of you also, having education, it was really different.  And difficult.  Also we have the education 4.0 is already.  I'm very happy so many of you, they raise the subject of the Polish IGF concentrating on that.  I really like the idea that the educators and educatee, they have to work together, which also all agreed today and there is nothing I cannot say about this has to be achieved and the reciprocities and have to have access to the resources.  It's very important.
Young people have to be involved in the education process.  That's for sure.  And there was also the issue of ‑‑ which is important in every part of the world.  Upscaling is needed.  In my opinion it's not only because it will speed up the process of development and technology but also because of the development of different technologies which are taking place like a block chain and we all know that there will be new hundreds existing which will need new skills and they will replace in many ways, the old and simply outdated skills.
So we also have to be prepared.  The other people, let's say, but also ‑‑ older people.  And also young people who are entering into the market, labor market.
So I was very happy also to hear that so many of you would like to involve in the dialogue of the government.  We are very open for the discussion.  I would like to invite you also taking the occasion to the flash session with us, which will take place next week.  So please come.  If you have vague ideas, please tell.  Let's speak about them.  If you have concrete steps to be taken, please also share.  Let's meet next weekend and speak.  At this point, I would like to ‑‑ I will finish.  I hope we will have the possibility to be healthy for the meeting into next year.  Thank you very much once again for so many of you coming and I hope to see you all next week so we can discuss in entirety on the next steps to be taken next year.  Thank you very much.
>> ANJA: Thank you very much Anna.  I think we are really looking forward to the next year.  What we have seen from the program and the enthusiasm and dedication from the team is very promising and looking forward.  Thank you very much to all the speakers, to all the participants, everyone that were actively participating through the chat.  Thank you to the floor.  Huge, huge thank you.  This has been a result of your work, actually, your hard work for the past couple of months through the consultations.  I also want to thank you for responding to all the surveys.  Too many probably e‑mails from me and other colleagues.  But it was for such a good cause.  This summit has revealed some new aspects, gave new ideas to all of us that are enthusiastic to contribute as much as we can within our capacity to build and strengthen engagement of young people and Internet Governance.
With that, I think we are quite short on time.  Really impressive on all sides the time management.  Usually when we have these types of sessions we go over time.  I think we are shy one minute.  Can I ask you for one favor?  I'm going to take a screenshot if you could turn your cameras on for a few seconds and I'm going to send you this photograph.  If I don't send, please remind me.  And I do advise that you also take a screenshot because I can be very clumsy.
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-nri-digital-economy-%E2%80%8Etrans-territorial-%E2%80%8Eregulations-and-the-%E2%80%8Eimpact-on^^

 
      >> MODERATOR: I am Sebastien and I will help this meeting to go well and with, of course, Anja all the work and I'm the last piece to come but I hope to do well to moderate the session. And as we discussed just before the beginning of the meeting I would like to ask you as we received this very shocking and we are so sad news with the news, I would like to suggest all that we take a moment of silence to think about Marilyn Cade and what she left behind her and how we can do -- how we can do better for her in the next few days and maybe few years.  Thank you.
     (Moment of Silence)
     >> MODERATOR: Okay, thank you very much.  I see many friends of Marilyn Cade in the room, and I would like that thank you for the time you spend to think about her.  And I am sure that you will deserve the help that she give us and what we can do in the future.  
     But we have some work to do, and we have a very short session of one hour, now less than one hour.  And we have a lot of speakers, and therefore, Anja, I suggest that we start if you agree.
     >> ANJA GENGO: Yes, yes, I completely agree, Sebastien.
     >> MODERATOR: Maybe you can introduce the topic because you work a lot on that and I think it's -- you deserve to speak about it a bit, please.
     >> ANJA GENGO: Well, thank you, first of all, Sebastien, for accepting to moderate the session.  It is a great honor.  And I want to thank our distinguished speakers that did not just devote this hour to this session, the preparations for this session started actually very early in this year.  
     We didn't even imagine that the meeting will go online.  We were preparing to meet onsite in Katowice.  And I recall in April we had already prepared, and our colleagues were prepared to deliver.  Of course, the pandemic has changed a lot.  It will impact the discussion on today's discussion.  
     But this session focuses really on regional and national specificities of the digital economy and the impact it has on digital sovereignty.  We will be focusing on policy areas through concrete inputs coming from local levels related to the contemporary challenges for our economies in digital age.  
     How did the pandemic impact our economies?  What is the vision for future?  How can we prosper from our economies through deployment of digital technologies in retrospect?    
     I may just, Sebastien, if you allow, would like just to quickly say that we have such a remarkable panel today with us.  They are not just coming from their own organizations which are from different disciplines, but they are really representing their national IGFs and regional IGFs.  They have been endorsed by their multi-stakeholder organizing committees, and they will be speaking from those perspectives.  So we will be looking at the commonalities, differences that we have between our countries and regions.  
     For the Southeast European Dialogues on Internet Governance, or SEEDIG, we have Dr. Olga Kyryliuk. 
     From Albania IGF, we have Ms. Irena Malolli.  From Panama IGF, Ms. Nayreth Gonzalez.  Bolivia IGF will be represented by Mr. Javier Gorostiaga.  And from Chad IGF we have Mr. Josue Koumnobeye.  
     And I'm apologizing if I didn't pronounce well the name.  So with that, I would give the floor, Sebastien, to you then to guide us through basically to tour the world on this topic and see where we stand and what is our vision for the future.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Anja.  And thank you very much all of the distinguished participants who will talk and give us a snapshot at what is happening.  
     As you have said in the agenda, you have very strict time.  And we need to follow this because if not, we will be late.  Therefore, I would like not to take much time as we already are a bit late, and give the floor to IGF from Bolivia, Javier Gorostiaga.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: Good morning, good afternoon, good evening, good night to everybody.  Thank you for the opportunity.  
     First, I would like to share two experience, two great experience in my country.  The first one is the occasion when Uber got in Bolivia market to operate in two of the major cities in Bolivia, La Paz and Santa Cruz. 
     There were very different approaches because the only city that took a regulation was La Paz, the city where I live in. We make a legal framework call it private passenger travel services hired through digital platforms.  And the decision took several months with Uber to try to establish a business model that fits in our local reality.
     The municipal government put a special emphasis on the rights of the users instead of the terms of use of Uber.  The negotiation was a balance between the lack of regulation and the Uber interests.  It was very interesting because we established a set of requirements to operating in this city.  
     So we got an understanding with them.  Nevertheless, it was it little complicated because we couldn't comply to Uber to apply to all our regulation.  For example, for some disputes between the users and Uber it has to be under the Netherlands regulation.  
     The other good experience is in the community we get roaming elimination revelation between Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.  Alongside with the Latin America, the bank, we make the study from 2017 to February 2018.  
     Until 2020, we have been in many several coordinations between the regulation of territories on the operator, our local operators.  We make different changes to the draft project.  And the very important thing that us as a group of countries, we coordinate and agreed a common understanding for this regulation, call it Decision 854.  
     The very key point of this regulation is that we progressively will decrease the prices of data in all those countries that I mentioned.  Until 2022 we will have the same carriers as we were on the home country.  This key point was important to coordinate so we can reach some agreements like we did with Uber and also we can do it with many other digital platforms as Netflix and so on.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Javier.  And three minutes, great.  Just right timing.  You are very good.  Thank you very much.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Now I will pass on to same topic of the floor to Josue from Chad, please.  Josue, you can take the floor.
     >> Hi for Josue, just I need to tell you that he will join us in two minutes.  He has issues with Zoom so he will be a two-minute maximum here.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay, then.  Maybe as we are very short time, may I suggest that we go to the next item and we will come back on that one if you agree with that, Anja, if it is okay with you.
     Let's go to the second item and see:  Are countries ready to respond and align their practices with the global friends of digitalization of the economies?  What are some good practices?  Learning from Panama IGF and Albania IGF.  And at the end of this part I will come back to Josue.  
     From Albania, we have Mrs. Irena Malolli, Director of Policies and Strategies Development for Telecommunications and Posts in Ministry and Infrastructure and Energy. 
     And I will give the floor to Irena, please.
     >> IRENA MALOLLI: Thank you.  Thank you for the invitation to participate in this interesting session to speak about the standardization of the economy and challenges and good practices of our countries.  
     I will take the opportunity of these three minutes of my speech to share with you briefly what is going on in Albania, what is good as example for others and what isn't going in the digitalization of the economy.
     The digitalization of the economy is linked with a great number of factors and developments starting from digital starting from digital connectivity, fast broadband, digital platforms, digital services, digital skills, and other aspects.  
     And in Albania we have a good progress in digital transformation of public services through establishment of the Albania government portal where a great number of online services are provided for citizens and business and with more than 700 online services provided through this portal.  And a great number of users are collecting or are using this portal to have services.
     Regarding the digital connectivity, we have good coverage with mobile broadband based on 3G or 4G, but we have no fixed broadband penetration and we recently approved a new national government plan for sustainable development of digital infrastructure broadband for 2020-2025 with pure objectives in order to address digital divide and to have broadband, fast broadband connectivity for all public institutions and education facilities in order to have all-inclusiveness.
     Regarding the digital economy, we know that regulation and legal framework is also important to create environment for development of digital platforms or free movement of content online or something like that.  We recently passed in the government a new law for open data and reuse of public information which aimed to promote innovation in the digital economy and using other developments of technology and applications for promotion of digital economy.  
     Regarding startups and innovation, also a new law is drafted, and it is under public consideration aiming to create a regulatory framework and institutional framework in order to promote and support startups in innovation and ICT.
     For cyber security, which is so important in order to promote or to develop the digital economy, we need to have trust.  Trust to use online services, trust to use platforms, go through online activity.  And we have legislation in place for network security on information and critical infrastructure to be safe and use task services.  
     And also, we are working to increase awareness and for capacity building.  Our national authority for electronic certificate and cyber security is organizing yearly a cyber academy in order to increase capacity to increase for pupils and students.  
     And for digital skills, it is also necessary to develop specific strategy for all basic levels from the -- any knowledge for citizens who are using the online services up to advanced professional knowledge or for the business community and for IT professionals.  
     This is briefly what is going on.  And a lot of other projects for development in the digital economy are in place and to be developed through different institutions which are working based on this agenda strategy.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Irena.
     And if I can give the floor to IGF Panama.  And Nayreth, please, can you take the floor.
     >> NAYRETH GONZALEZ: Thank you for the opportunity.  
     Well, we have to start with the fact that the digital economy a part of production and consumption that emerged with the introduction of internet technologies.  
     And that affect only not only the economy but also society because it is currently the most important engine of innovation and economic realm of the world.  Therefore, to improve the response and aligning of practice with global trends in the utilizations of the economy, in developing countries such as Panama, we must collaborate to find a solution.  
     Therefore, it is still imperative to work on, promote on issues related to ICT for development that contributes to enhanced capacity to quantify electronic commerce and the digital economy.
     We promote this by holding world meetings make up of multi-sector representatives. Collaborate to close the digital barrier as more than half of the world has limit or not internet access.  Inclusiveness is essential to build a digital economy that works for everyone.
     The case of this is the construction of infrastructure by the government of Panama in conjunction with the private sector on nearly 100% collaborative project which seeks to withstand the infrastructure necessary for internet access connectivity in areas too difficult access in the country.  
     We are also working on the Panama hub digital initiative, taking advantage of the fact that several fiber optic cable pass through Panama.  The digital hub has among its objective to provide companies dedicate to sale throughout the internet and digital platform to start the operation in the country.  
     To strengthen education as the digital economy we require a series for new different skills as well as protection policies.  It is necessary to make life-long learning opportunities for all as well as the deployment, training, all ways of working barrier and training personnel are needed for new skill.  Panama is working to promote the creation of knowledge in micro, small and medium-sized company and user through elementary programs and professional training.  
     We also have the creation of our association of entrepreneurs with the agreement of establishment of contact networks and training of their capacity related to electronic commerce and that technology.
     Shape the digital economy by establishing the rules of the game.  This task falls to the government in close dialogue with the other stakeholders.  These require policies that make the digital economy work for the majority or not just for a few.  Policy makers are working on decisions that current trend increasing inequalities and power imbalance caused by the digital economy.
     The growing difficulties enforcing national laws and regulation regarding cross-border trade in digital products and service must be taken into account.  In this, Panama has to work even more.  For example, it is debating a tax law for services provided and central in the internet digital platform.  
     Last, but not least, is not to forget that we must pay attention to the new threat for digital economy has create ranging from failures in cyber security to facilitation of illicit economic activities which closely relate to the establishment of the rule of the game in the country.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Nayreth.  Nice, well done.  And I will leave some time for Josue to be ready.  I will suggest that we go to the next item.  
     What are the concrete examples of good practices of cooperation for improving our economies on regional levels?  Experience shared by SEEDIG.  And I will ask Olga Kyryliuk from SEEDIG to take the floor.  Olga, please go ahead.
     >> OLGA KYRYLIUK: Thank you, Sebastien.  Good afternoon, everyone.  
     It is always a challenge to speak on behalf of the whole region, but I must admit that the digital economy that we are discussing today is of huge importance for the region of southeastern Europe and it so because leverage in digitalization is not purely an economic challenge for our region but it is also a matter of international security, of geopolitical resiliency, and of strategic relevance.  
     Indeed, increased cooperation between the countries in the region could help to strengthen their individual strengths and benefits and also to address their collective challenges.
     Moreover, joint policy and strategic regions could help to amplify the region's position at the international level.  But, at the same time, I must admit that joining forces is never an easy task, especially if we are talking about such a diverse region as southeastern Europe is.
     Our region is covered in more than 20 countries and these countries are very much diverse.  It is able to understand this even more if you can see that some of these countries are already part of the European Union while others would probably take an indefinite number of years to get the membership.  
     And also too often these countries find themselves in a position of direct competition with each other because very often they are competing for projects, for funds for investments.  And this also somehow creates internal competition instead of making them more stronger as one actor at the international level.  
     But on the other hand, our region could also use this diversity as its strength because instead of taking many years to try to reach fairly equal level of digitalization, our countries could instead combine unique resources that they have and try to become more stronger together.
     For example, try to imagine that the breakthrough in digital economy which the southeastern European region could make if you try to combine, for example, human talent in engineering coming from Ukraine and digital solutions in the field of artificial intelligence from Slovenia and Bulgaria.  And add on top on that, harmonized standards of cross-border integration, and then you have an ideal situation.  
     But for that, there has to be the willingness of the countries.  And I would probably try to make an assumption here by saying that maybe instead of trying to exceed already existent regional formations our countries could better focus on joining the forces between themselves and in this way become stronger.  
     And with its unique perspective, indeed, southeastern Europe could become a connecting brick between the increasingly polarized relations between the European Union, the United States, and China.  Moreover, it could become also the digital policy influence not only at the European but also at the global level.  
     And we should also bear in mind when we are talking about cooperation of the regional level that you can't push for strong cooperation just based on the geographical proximity of the countries.  You should always -- especially in the context of southeastern Europe, you should remember that these countries are too much diverse and fighting too hard to protect their identity and their sovereignty.  That is why we need to be very careful when we are coming with the ideas of some regional cooperation projects.  
     But also we should acknowledge that not every digital regional cooperation project requires engagement of every single country.  Some of these projects could be easily started just with few countries onboard.  And then they could be scaled up if proved successful and if seen as necessary.  
     And here I would like to refer to the example which encompasses four countries from southeastern Europe.  Namely, Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and Slovenia and seven other countries from central Europe.
     >> MODERATOR: Conclusion, please.
     >> IRENA MALOLLI:  Yes, sure.  As enhancing the cross-border interconnectivity and digitalization.  
     And as I am running out of time, I would like to conclude by saying that countries in our region should focus -- should look beyond the differences and they should unite their forces in order to become stronger and focus more on the cooperation.  And SEEDIG is always ready to be that platform for that discussion and decision making.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you again.  Sorry for interrupting you.  We need to try to focus on the timing because if not we will be very late.
     IGF Chad, now Josue Koumnobeye Nekoura is with us.  Can you take the floor, please.
     >> JOSUE KOUMNOBEYE NEKOURA: Thank you very much.  So I bring to Chad what -- hello, do you get me?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, go ahead.
     >> JOSUE KOUMNOBEYE NEKOURA: Okay.  So thank you very much.  
     According to Chad, as we have start talking about is the first thing that happened in Chad here is the changing of the minister.  
     Before the minister was called the ministry of past technology and new technology and communication information.  But now the new name is ministry of past of economic numerical economy.  
     So this is the first thing that happened in the period of COVID-19 and is the good thing for us.  According to the sector, we can say that the ministry, the government of Chad has a lot of area of low of internet with fiber optic of Chad, of Sudan, Niger, Chad and Algeria also.  
     We have also the great program as difficulties in the problem of geography.  We know Chad is a very big country so if it is not easy for us to connect all of the territory.  You know, we have one million of surface so it is not easy.  
     There is also the problem of the non-urbanization of the town and the problem of culture.  Culture, you know, a lot of people they don't have money enough or resource to buy a smart phone and to be connected also.  
     What is very, very, very interesting in Chad is that the government has just which is called workshop, we call it PSDNP, Planned Strategic Development (break in audio).  
     The goal of connecting all people by internet.  So I think maybe on the future.  As you know, it was difficult for me to be connected because of that situation of our connection is not good sometimes also.
     So according to about what we are going to do, the advantage is that Chad is on the way of numerical economy so we think that it -- we will achieve the goal of the government.  Thank you very much.  I don't know.  I'm so late, I cannot talk much.  So thank you very much.  I'm very grateful.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  You get it right and on time.  And thank you very much.  
     Now we have time for people to express themselves and discuss, to ask questions.  Don't forget to use the Q&A to put your question if you wish to write them.  Or raise your hand and if you have question you will be able to talk.  
     And there is no more people who are just listening, you are all now as speakers.  But before you decide to speak, please raise your hand and I can give you the floor.  Or if you want to ask the question in the question and answer place for that, as you can see on the bottom of your screen.
     Okay.  I don't see any hands.  If there are no hands and no questions, I will give you some time to ask question.
     >> Sebastien, people cannot use the Q&A part.
     >> MODERATOR: They can raise their hand, and they are not doing so either.
     >> ANJA:  Or just post in the chat, or maybe I can come in with a brief question.  
     I know that we have been debating about it when the session was -- while we were preparing the session.  
     And it relates to those that are left behind to vulnerable and marginalized groups, how do we achieve that we all benefit from digital economy when we are not all connected to the internet?  
     And in addition to the fact that even if we have connection in terms of the available infrastructure, digital literacy is also a huge problem for a large part of the world.  That is something that would be interesting maybe to hear from the colleagues that were speaking about the status of digital economies in their countries.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Anja, for your help.  Yes, very good question.  
     Anyone want to take the lead and answer the question?  Olga, Javier?
     >> OLGA KYRYLIUK: I can start.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.
     >> OLGA KYRYLIUK: Thank you, Anja, for this question.  And it is an important one and you raised to probably the most critical points.  
     And this is why exactly at the regional level it is especially complicated because countries have very different level of development in terms of infrastructure and access.  
     And even if it is requiring a lot of funds to put those fiber optic cables and to bring internet to every village, this probably would take more time and more funds.  But something that we can do right now, and this was your second point, is actually to try to educate people to give them those digital skills that they need so that let's say once they have that connection in their village or town they are already able to fully use it and to benefit from that connection.  
     That is why I believe that education at least requires less resources.  And the current pandemic showed that somehow even those who were not ready fully they moved to their remote learning, distance learning.  So probably the pandemic also teached us how to react fastly instead of just taking years and years of discussion and how to actually act in a prompt manner.  
     So yes, this is very important and probably this is why the countries are struggling to find a common ground.  But this is something that every country should address, these two issues.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Olga.  Anyone of the other panelists want to take the floor?
     >> NAYRETH GONZALEZ: In line with Olga, I think that the COVID-19 has highlighted the importance of delivering the digital technology to ensure a rapid agile and effective response to both the pandemic and economy recovery in its aftermath.
     The current crisis should be seen as an opportunity to bridge the digital divide among regions and increase broadband access to create incentive to adopt digital technology across all key government, industry, and service sectors and to promote a stronger digital culture across the population.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Thank you very much.  Javier, please go ahead.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think that increased the digitalization and penetration for internet more than -- I heard a statement that said that on those six months we got increased penetration of about six years.  
     And here in Bolivia, for example, we are getting a lot of requirements for getting the broadband internet connection.  But, you know, our geography is really, really huge.  And it is kind of impossible for them to get to all of the sites of Bolivia.  
     And I think that the very important factor for this aim is to try to develop community networks via free frequencies.  Because many volunteer entities, NGOs or public or private entities could use that frequency to get to the very, very remote areas to get the internet connection.  
     And also, it is very important to remember that the digital literacy is very important.  We need to teach the people how to use internet and how it can improve their social and economic life.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Javier.  I have a hand from Carlos Alberto Alfonso.  Carlos, please go ahead.
     >> CARLOS ALFONSO: Thank you, Sebastien.  
     I was thinking of examples following what Dr. Kyryliuk said of the difficulties of the regional cooperation or cooperation in countries with common borders, geographical borders.  
     One of the ways to help enhance the regional cooperation or collaboration is by picking up issues of common issues which are linked to territorial questions and which affect the development of the internet.  
     One single example but, of course, participants may suggest others, the need to organize spectrum policies at the edge of common geographical borders.  This is an issue we cannot escape from a regional cooperation with bordering countries.  
     Another example is like in Latin America, you have Indigenous communities which cross a geographical border, two different countries like the Ashaninka between Peru and Brazil.  And there are sever other examples.  
     Certainly in Africa, we have several of these examples and so on.  So these sort of harmonization of trans-border policies is interesting to consider.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Carlos.  Anyone else want to take the floor and comment?  Anja, do you have any other questions to the panelists ready in your pocket as you have done already, Anja?
     >> ANJA GENGO: This was a very challenging agenda to put together because it is such a broad topic.  And as you can see from the inputs received from colleagues, the situation, the conditions, and our vision seems to be also different for what we expect from our digital economies.  
     But yes, maybe my question would be -- and I do come from actually yesterday's planning call of this high level leadership track that will be happening at the IGF next year is in terms of the digital economy, when you look at your communities, in which sectors you see now currently that the biggest transformation that was caused by -- that came as a result of deployment of digital technologies?
     >> MODERATOR: Anyone want to take this question first?
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: Yeah.  
     >> MODERATOR: Javier, go ahead. 
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think the sector that suffered the biggest transformation in my country is the remote education or e-learning brought a transformation from the classroom to their houses.  
     So it was a very deep impact for families, for fathers, for parents because they needed to be on their homes to support their child.  And also the teachers had to learn how to use internet, WhatsApp and the other educational platforms.  
     So I think that much work are pending to do on this next years because the COVID will be -- will stay here in this world.  So we need to improve the new policies.  And as one said, transnational policies to try to get cooperation and support for these policies.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Javier.  Anyone else from the panelists want to --
     >> OLGA KYRYLIUK: I can go next.  
     >> MODERATOR:  Go, Olga, please.
     >> OLGA KYRYLIUK: I would also agree with Javier that it is definitely education is one of such areas. 
     And I would also name for our region the healthcare because it is everything happening and everything changing because of COVID.  
     As we see, any crisis actually can be an opportunity.  We just need to make sure that we are using this opportunity and catching the right moment to develop.
     And this COVID-19 pandemic, it actually revealed a lot of weaknesses and helped us to mobilize the resources.  Even though for me sometimes it was so much eye breaking when I got to know that some schools even in my native town don't have the internet connection.  
     And while I was sure that probably it is not an issue at all for Ukraine because, indeed, the internet penetration has very high rate.  But sometimes you just -- if you have to be in a situation when you understand this issue still exists and they are not that far as you could think they are.
     So and of course the healthcare where a lot of things nowadays happening where we are tending to telemedicine and the consultations online and all of these things.  
     So probably it will be even difficult for us to come back and maybe we will not even come back to pre-pandemic way of services because also e-government is developing in many countries and our regional governments are trying to increasingly provide services online.  And once the citizens feel this is useful and this is efficient, they would probably insist for all of those things to stay in place.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Olga.  Anyone else want to add something?
     >> ANJA GENGO: Sivasubramanian has comments.  
     MODERATOR:  Yeah, I know, but first I want to elicit from the speaker, want to answer your question.  
     If not, I have -- first before giving the floor to Sivas, there are two comments, and you may take that into account in your future answer.  
     How do we define digital literacy?  We also discussed this in the Asia-Pacific IGF.  But it is very difficult to define it.  It was from Ying-Chu Chen and from Angela Mison.  
     Why do you think everyone need to be connected?  I will give now the floor to Sivas and then if there are a last few words from the panelists, I will give them the floor.  Please, Sivas, go ahead.
     >> SIVASUBRAMANIAN MUTHUSAMY: Thank you, Sebastien.  
     I see that one of the questions for this session is about countries responding and aligning their practices with global trends.
     There are different countries and different regions who discuss and debate national on regional positions.  To what extent have they brought important differences to the global IGF and to what extent are they successful in aligning and harmonizing national positions to global positions, for example?  And national and jurisdictional issues being aligned to -- aligned as trans-border jurisdictional issue and global jurisdictional issue?  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Sivas.  Raquel, can I give you the floor and then I will come back to the panelists, please.
     >> RAQUEL GATTO: Thank you very much, Sebastien.  
     And I first reacted to the question that Angela and the comment that Angela made in the chat, and then I will go with the one comment to the panelists.  
     Regarding the question about connectivity and why it is important.  And I think Angela framed in the sense that people would be forced to connect.  In my view, I think it is important to get the connection available or giving people the options to connect if they are willing to.  
     And that is the very important nuance that needs to be considered in this case.  And then making them available is the entrance point for universal access.  And really we just see this especially in Latin America, but also in other parts of the world where this digital gap and the digital divide is really having a new meaning in terms of how you are included in the society or not.  
     And it is not only about forcing people to communicate, but it is about being fully as citizens or not.  So anyway, I don't want to extend too much, but I felt compelled to make some comments around it.  
     But my question would be on the topic of the panel more to the digital transformation and impact on the economy in a very pragmatic way also.  In your experience, how do you see connected to where we are discussing in terms of the improvements for the IGF in having these outcomes more clearly targeted?  
     And do you see that through your experience with the national and in some cases the regional IGFs, this really happening?  And how this comes together in terms of some of the best practices or lessons learned that we can replicate. Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Raquel.  It is a very important but long question, and I will just give them one minute to answer.  I am not sure that they are able to answer all of the question that were raised and specifically the last one because it is a very long discussion.  But thank you for your question.
     I will afford for each one of you one minute.  And then we will be going to the next section.  
     Who wants to start?  And I have to decide who will be -- is the one who didn't talk.  Do Irena want to say something?
     >> IRENA MALOLLI: If I would like to say something about what is the last progress part of digital transformation in Albania.  
     For the time being what I mentioned is the digital transformation and public services.  We have created the government portal as a unit portal.  And we have invested in this digitalization of public systems and development and digitalization of public services.  And it was a very good example during the pandemic situation that through regional agency of information society a lot of services helping citizens during the pandemic was developed and provided.  
     And I agree with what is discussed about the digital connectivity and how it is important in order to have digital economy and digitalization of the economy.  
     And it is a precondition since digital connectivity has great impact for all actors.  But I think that we can go in parallel and hand in hand with all kind of developments from digital skills.  We can advance, preparing new generation.  But not only new generation, we need to adopt the labor force with digital technology and to be able to use this kind of new possibilities, the platforms and applications and to be ready for digital economy.  
     And in parallel as policy makers since I came from Ministry, which is as policy maker in telecommunication, we need to prepare the relevant angle and regulatory framework in order to promote technology development. 
     This is what I can say based on discussion from other parties.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Irena.  Anyone else?  
     If not, we will move to the next section and you will have the opportunity to talk again, but short.  Javier, you want to say something?
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: I think as a developing country, it is very difficult for us to try to fight big companies like Facebook, Uber, Netflix, Microsoft.  
     So as a good practice that we have with the community making the trans-territorial regulatory framework, I suggest that maybe our small countries in Western Europe and Latin America, it is very good idea to group together to gather and try to develop some legal frameworks like the European nations did.  
     So I think it is very important to face this new trends alongside with the American companies we need to get together our force to make a better regulatory framework.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Javier.  Olga, please?
     >> OLGA KYRYLIUK: Yes, the last question.  I think for all of those things that we are discussing to actually become decisions and to actually make a difference, we need to have the decision makers around the table.  And we need to have them around the table not only once per year when we are having the annual IGF, regional, national level or whatever, but we need to continuously during the year communicate with those stakeholders and with those actors.  
     And this is something that we started doing at SEEDIG, not only the annual meeting but we also now are trying to launch various intersessional projects.  For example, we had the project dedicated purely to COVID-19 tracking data protection in the region as a result of which we have prepared a set of recommendations for policy makers and developers.
     And then we tried to reach those policy makers and decision makers to actually communicate to them these recommendations and asking them to react on that.  And I think this is important.  
     Because if we just keep the cycle closed and we don't bring new people in and don't get our results out to the right people, then basically we will just stay at the level of discussing the issues.
     >> MODERATOR: Okay.  We are late already.  I need to -- Josue, you wanted to say a few words before we move?  Or we can move to the next section.
     >> JOSUE KOUMNOBEYE NEKOURA: Here in Chad, our country, what is important during the period of this pandemic of COVID-19 is also the digital transformation in public service, which is called a call center trace-trace.  
     So it is also a good service that allow people, the population to call and to be in length with their medicines, in touch with the doctor.  So this is a good practice that we have in our country.  
     But the real effort is that we need to have a good internet connection and new policies to promote again ICT in our country.  Thank you.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And we are late already and therefore you will have to be very short in the next section.  
     The question is digital transformation of our economies, what is needed to be done in South Eastern Europe, Panama, Albania, Chad and Albania?  
     And Bolivia and you have less than one minute please.  Olga, very short speech, please.
     >> OLGA KYRYLIUK: Okay, so this is easy because after every SEEDIG meeting we have the key take-aways, the key messages which we are then sharing with the stakeholders.  
     And recently we also had the digital economy session.  And this is what the community has decided what is the most important.  It is to create the enabling environment which means to bridge the digital divide in terms of infrastructure and in terms of education.  
     Then you need to ensure multi-stakeholder cooperation between all of the actors involved in digital economy.  You also need to harmonize the cross-border regulations and make sure that everyone has to follow the same set of standards.  
     And you also need to incentivize innovation and to create the environment where there is a healthy competition included by promoting the public-private partnership.  So this will be the key points.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Olga. The next one is Irena, please.  Very short, please.
     >> IRENA MALOLLI: I will say that what is important for the region to go ahead in the digitalization of economy is to invest for cross-border services, interoperability of systems and services in order to facilitate citizen movement, capital movement, or business environment.  
     And, in addition, what Olga mentioned, to invest for, address digital divide, digital gap between urban and rural in order to have all-inclusive digital transformation.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Irena.  Nayreth.  Very, short, too.
     >> NAYRETH GONZALEZ: We must continue to enhance the technological innovation, further support investment in national broadband infrastructure.  Focus on scientific research and policy and legislative frameworks on the competitive cyber security industry.  
     It is necessary to address certain weakness to accelerate the country's digital leave.  For the above, all interested party we must continue holding working meetings with the various actor within the environment in order to monitor and promote the digital economy within the country.  
     We must not rule out seeking the support of the international community in commercial, financial, and fiscal cooperation necessary to place the digital economy in the world on a more sustainable path.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  And Javier, please.
     >> JAVIER GOROSTIAGA: Okay.  I think that this digital economy is not only the telecommunication infrastructure but also other stakeholders and other economic sectors like the local universities, local governments, or a type of ministries for economic issues and planning issues.  
     Because it is very important to foster the capacity building for the digital literacy and also improve new technologies that enable for digital content, a lot of local digital content and new technologies like cloud computing, 5G, IoT and so on.
     So we need to set up stakeholders and we need to coordinate locally and regionally.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Javier.  And last, but not least, Josue, please, very short.
     >> JOSUE KOUMNOBEYE NEKOURA: Thank you.  Do you get me?
     >> MODERATOR: Yes, go ahead, please.
     >> JOSUE KOUMNOBEYE NEKOURA: Hello? So we think that our -- okay.
     What we need in the transformational, digital transformation, we ask the government to accelerate under the fiber optic of Chad and Niger and Algeria.  Because we think with this fiber, we can have a good internet connection.
     And then also in the sector of education it is very important to continue to train, to train a new -- to train young people, to train teachers and in the domain of learning and ICT also.  
     So we need also -- it remains a lot of effort in that domain also.  And then we need also new policies as -- the same thing here in Chad also.  We need the new policies to -- for the question between the country and between the countries of CESE which is called ACRC.  This community is linked and the State, the members are linked so we need to increase the cooperation between those countries also.  Thank you very much.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  
     And I know that I didn't give the floor to Vrikson and he is upset so I will give him the floor but for 30 seconds.  
     And then we will conclude the meeting with a few words from Anja.  Do you want to take the floor?  Yes?  No?  Okay.  I tried my best.  Thank you very much.  
     I wanted to before to give the last word to Anja.  I wanted really to thank you all.  It is a very difficult exercise, very short time and very important questions.  And doing it all in English, and I know that your language is not English and -- your first language is not English, and that is very kind and very well done.  Thank you very much.  
     Anja, you prepared this roundtable fabulously.  I will give you the last word.  Thank you very much.
     >> ANJA GENGO: Sebastien, let me first start by congratulating you on impressive time management.  I know from experience, and I know my colleagues will join me, it is extremely difficult to keep time with the NRI colleagues because there is so much to hear.  And everything somehow is different, and many challenges are present in so many countries and regions it is definitely worth of hearing.
     So really impressive.  Congratulations.  This was really very punctual.  Thank you to all of the speakers.  I expected a good session because I know you worked on it very hard.  
     I'm hoping that in IGF 2021 perhaps we could build on the good results of this session and expand further.  And hopefully when we meet in person in Katowice to exchange on the improvements that were made in this next year on digital economies in many countries and regions.
     On the IGF website, there is the form, call for commitments, in case some of your NRIs would like to share plans or projects you plan to focus on to advance the goals of Internet Governance Forum or the goals objectives that were set in the road map for the digital cooperation recently issued by the Secretary General.  
     You can access that form on the website.  You can also reach out to me, and I will try to respond as quick as I can.  
     But with that, thank you very much.  And it was excellent.  Such a difficult day and sad day, but I think you brought actually the purpose why we need to continue doing what we are doing in the way we are doing.  Thank you so much.  Thank you, Sebastien.
     >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  The meeting is adjourned.  And have a good follow-up on IGF.  And thank you very much for participating.  Bye-bye, all.  Take care.
     >> Thank you so much.
     >> Great session.
     >> Thank you, everyone.      
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-nri-technical-aspects-of-content-regulation^^

 
>> PETER KOCH: Okay. So, with apologies for the delay, I think we can start this session.  My name is Peter Koch, I'm with the steering committee of the German IGF, and I'm a member of the technical community in IGF terms.
I would like to welcome the attendees and panelists for this session.  Before we start, I would like to give a short statement.  As many of you have heard earlier today, we are missing Marilyn Cade, who passed away yesterday.  Marilyn was an intensely engaged, passionate supporter of the Forum.  In particular, she was a member of many NRIs and a supporter of many of us across the globe.  We would like to dedicate this session to her memory.  Thank you.
So, I would now like to introduce the first panel.  We have contributions from four NRIs from France, from Brazil, from the United States and from Northern Macedonia.
I would like to give the floor to Lucien Castex, who will report from the France IGF.
We will have roughly three minutes per speaker.  This first session will run until roughly 1845 UTC, and we'll have a discussion afterwards before we go to the second panel.  Lucien, the floor is yours.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you, Peter, for giving me the floor.  Well, three minutes is quite challenging, indeed.  Try to sum up a bit what is going on in France and shed some light on obviously the European Union framework.  The first point I would like to speak of is basically, we have a reform going on which is the digital service act.  The current framework was changed since the e‑commerce directive, which was adopted in the years 2000. And in the context of a fast-changing digital world, basically, the reform is going on, and there is a lot of debate in France and obviously in the European Union about the Digital Service Act.
Well, basically, the idea, and still a draft, obviously, is to have new rules, for example, for gatekeepers, new entrants, observation, and also consumer choice and tackle the emergence of new actors, basically, online platforms and other big tech.
In France, we have a few initiatives.  First, we have the Digital Law aimed at combating false information online.  Passed in 2018, it aims to aid the removal of fake news particularly during the election campaign.  It's creating news transparency for the digital platforms, including GT, a corporation, to basically force online platform to introduce measures to eliminate fake news and this is basically the main idea.
The French regulators, the (speaking French) is in charge of checking for compliance.  And there is new legal injunction aiming and stopping the spread of fake news.  Basically, an interim judge will qualify what is fake news, and it's clearly quite difficult, and then, if it manifests and if it's disseminated deliberately on a massive scale, it can order its immediate removal.
So, second piece of legislation, very quickly, that I wanted to shed light on is basically the debate on speech and combating online hate trade.
We had a law about hate speech, which was usually called, (speaking French) but the French Constitutional Consul declared that the law wasn't Constitutional.
Most provisions, are basically invalid on the ground of freedom of expression, saying that freedom of speech and communication are not necessarily appropriate and proportionate to the aim, pursuit, and so most of it is canceled.
Last point.  We have a few points on terrorism.  Basically, there is an ongoing reform on that point but it's very early in stage.  It's just being debated.  So, that's about it. 
>> PETER KOCH: Thanks, Lucien, and indeed, we have a bit more time than I gave you in the first instance so if you have anything to follow up, you can do that now or in the discussion.  With that, I would like to ask Diogo Cortiz to share experiences from Brazil, please.
>> DIOGO CORTIZ: Right, so, good morning, good afternoon, good evening for everyone.  Here in Brazil, content moderation is a big topic now because there are a lot of events, and elections, that some fake news, misinformation content spread out of the network.
Okay. And also, some toxic contents being published on the web, especially on social media.  So, we need to try to find some way to deal with those challenges, especially misinformation, and also toxic contents, what we usually call hate speech.  
Here in Brazil, there is now debate on Congress, there is a bill that's called like Fake News Bill, to try to deal with this subject.  Especially, regarding messaging services.  For example, WhatsApp.  So, in the initial proposal, the idea was to kind of collect and store all the myths so from WhatsApp, so, in some way, to have a mechanism to track when and who we started fake news but it's not well accepted by the technical community.  There are a lot of issues on that proposal and this bill is under discussion in Congress.
Actually, I'm from the technical team so we are also investigating many different tools, many different technologies to help to deal with content moderation, especially I'm leading a project using machine learning and natural language processing to detect some kind of harmful content on social media.
And here, we are discussing a lot about some technical challenges and also ethical challenges, especially for our reality here in Brazil.
Actually, I'm working very closely with people from UK.  I was a visiting professor at Queen Mary University of London and for example, just to give an example, to train a module to recognize, for example, hate speech, you need like local data because you have different languages, but you also have different realities, different cultures, and so on.
And just to compare, for example, the teams in UK that were working with English, they were working with a data set with about 100,000 sentences.
For example, so, that could be used for machine learning, for training machine learning.
And here in Brazil the biggest one that we have now days is like 5,000.  So, it's pretty small.  So, we have what you call low resources to train all those models.
So, now, we are trying to invest our efforts to create new data sets together with some partners but we also have some problems regarding some ethics and also legal challenges because from the ethical problem, that we need to collect real data from social media because I cannot train a machine learning model to detect fake news or hate speech on social media using, for example, sentences and texts written by journalists.
Because the way that it's written is completely different.  It's like, canonical and noncanonical.  So, we need to collect the data.
So, here, we are facing also ethical challenge about privacy because some social media, it's okay to collect data using the API, but there is some ethical problem that this person published, for example, a sentence, just to express their feelings, their opinions and now we are collecting to train a module, for example, to do something.  So, it's like an ethical challenge that we are also discussing here in Brazil, and I can go further along in my next round.  Thank you.
>> PETER KOCH: Thank you so much, Diogo.  And this brings us to a slightly different theme.  We've heard about platforms and the way to assess and deal with content.
Now, Melinda Clem from the U.S. IGF will talk about potential standards for content regulation that would balance human rights and freedoms online and she will also dive into the question how content regulation practices maybe interfere with internet identifiers.  Melinda, please.
>> MELINDA CLEM: Thank you, Peter, and thank you for your kind opening remarks about Marilyn.  She's very much in all of our hearts, including Nola Cat here, a big friend of Marilyn.
Thank you for the time.  Obviously, this is a hot topic in the United States.  It was something that we covered in IGF USA this summer.  The guiding law in the United States is under the Communications Decency Act, section 230.  You'll hear that nomenclature.  You'll see it tweeted time to time.  What that does is provide what's called intermediate liability.  It's a protection for specific types of internet computer service providers that include platforms all the way down to the infrastructure layer of domain registries and registrars.
The ability to moderate content, and enforce terms of services with very specific, what are called AUPs, Acceptable Use Policies, those will define what is typically prohibited.
It will be very prescriptive about the types of content that are not allowed.  What we find is the application of those is where the, a lot of the distinction and concerns is applied.  It is how you balance what's acceptable and what's not.  And the, what, anecdotally speaking, I think the easiest way to define a solution here that is going to balance all of our human rights as well as specific legal rights we have in the United States predominantly around free speech is that the more narrow you define a problem, the more you define the content that's being targeted.
The relatively easier, again, relatively being, carrying a lot of weight here, the easier it is to police and moderate, identify that content, as Diogo just mentioned, it's difficult to broadly scan and review but we find it's a lot easier to have a very specific targeted action.
So, for example, you know, throughout all areas of the internet over the last eight months, we've been looking at how do we identify misinformation around the pandemic.
That falls into that bucket of very clearly defined actions that you can take.  You can do things like key word searches, things that have been around for over twenty years, technology that's advanced.
There's ways of looking at if drugs are being sold and looking at certain aspects of the sales process.  You can find, you know, ways that spam is being used to manipulate the DNS that's promoting these sorts of materials.  That's an example of a very targeted means of balancing motive raisin with our rights.
Another one we find works quite well is the eradication of CSAM.  There are several technical solutions out there to date, some, including by Microsoft and Rackspace that have been designed and licensed for free to review and find that federal to help eradicate it.  In instances where those are not used, we do have more manual processes available to us to be responsive to organizations, trusted intermediaries or third parties to help fill those gaps where we don't have technology today and we're still in the process of doing it.
Then that gets us into the broader scale of technical solutions.  And you have more proprietary uses of artificial intelligence.  I think the most popular and known is what Facebook does.  This is how they do a lot of content moderation, producing lists that then human beings can follow up on.  But, again, that is a proprietary solution open to them today.
I do want to note that several of these companies that we'll be talking about and that are of concern, we're fortunate enough to have as participants and members and financial supporters of IGF USA.  It allows us to have some very rich conversations that talk about both the policy and the technology.
This year, we talked a lot more about the policy aspect rather than, you know, to try to define what needs to be done, then we get to the how.
So, that was the majority of our conversation this year.
>> PETER KOCH: Thanks a lot, Melinda.  And this brings us to the fourth report, jointly provided, I should say, of course, from the Northern Macedonia IGF, jointly provided by Anastas Mishev and Boro Jakimovski, it's your floor.
>> BORO JAKIMOVSKI: Thank you.  I'm sorry for the camera.  I had issues.  So, today, what we will be talking about is the establishment of the national e‑learning platform.  Which was a short notice project that was developed during the, during the last month prior to the start of the school year.  It was a technical difficulty put on academia to technically deliver a national system for e‑learning for 200,000 students in primary and secondary schools.
This was mainly due to the elections that were previously scheduled during this summer and there were no decision makers available to support the earlier start of system development and this has proven to be a great collaboration in just one note to develop, deploy, and organize trainings and large, huge technical difficulties of scale‑up, of such a system.
And also, provide additional content as much as possible for the system to start functioning. I must say, it was a great (audio cut out) at companies.  So, I think that we, as members of IGF and being involved in such a project proved that the collaboration is a possibility.  It can provide very good solutions for the community.
And --
(audio breaking up)
I'm proud of the project that was done in very short notice.  And as I said, the school year started on time.  Anastas?
>> ANASTAS MISHEV: I would just like to add that content regulation is also a big part of this platform that what we are mentioning here because of the specificity of the target audience being the youngsters, the pupils of the primary and secondary schools.
So, based on the previous experience that we had that many of those social networks and communication channels were used as a media for distributing material that is not adequate or material that is not adequate for these groups.
So, now, we have to also think about the technical solutions that we also need to implement in these platforms regarding the content regulation.  But, that's only part of it.  I would say the content regulation from the technical point of view for us, at least for us engineers, always seems a little bit easier than the other aspect which is the policy aspect.
And when you hit the lack of policies, the lack of legislative to support all these things, it's much, much more difficult and it shows itself in a worst case during these pandemics being overflooded with all kinds of information, which, from nonrelevant sources using this to gain political advantage, using this to gain any other advantage, shows itself in a very bad light.
So, aligning for me, the biggest issue that we also need to discuss is that how to align the legal and the technical frameworks.  And when does the content regulation stop and the freedom of speech begins?  Thank you.
>> PETER KOCH: Thanks a lot, and thanks to the panelists, we now are back perfect on time.  And we have up to the top of the hour to engage into a discussion.
Some questions have already been submitted to the Q&A pod and there's also been a lively discussion and exchange in the chat already.  So, I suggest we summarize some questions and then we'll open it to the panelists to respond to and see how the audience reacts.
So, there's one request to differentiate between content moderation at the, say, platform level, or content layer, versus moderation or attempts of content moderation by way of dealing with the identifier system.
And that is the internet governance speaks for names and numbers, so, domain names, IP addresses.  There's the plea to differentiate that.  And also, since we are reporting here from the perspective of the various NRIs and some of you already have given the examples, it would be interesting to understand exactly how the NRI could be instrumental in either having a regulation in place or inform the regulation by national or regional legislator or come up with other models of stakeholder response or approach to potential content regulation.
And the last contribution, I think, was a perfect example of that.  Any of the panelists would like to go first?
>> ANASTAS MISHEV: Well, I think Melinda asked to answer the question so go ahead, Melinda.
>> PETER KOCH: Sure.  Melinda, please.
>> MELINDA CLEM: Okay. Thanks.  I'll start with the identifier system and disclose that I am employed by Afilias, the second largest domain registry.  I am the Chairwoman of the Internet Structure Coalition.  This is something we spent a lot of time lobbying and educating U.S. regulators in particular about the extremely blunt tool and instruments that the infrastructure layer has available when it comes to content moderation.
Because we sit anywhere from one to three or four degrees away from the content and the producer of the content, because we're outside of that path of content creation, our only tool is to remove the entirety of a domain name.
So, what that means is we've got, if someone is running a blog service and you have, you know, the example of blog.com, the only example is to take down all of blog.com and every blog that's there to cure one block that is clearly fulfilling the role of blog.com and making that happen.
It does put a different perspective on how we can address the problem, and it makes it very clear that when you come up with solutions, you have to consider both that that category of things that I call, refer to as the operating model that gets into the technical model, how you would proceed with action as well as the business model.  I think the other important aspect that goes unnoticed that needs to be more clarified is that the identifier label, we're not, our only monetization is about selling those domain names and hosting.
We're not in the business of collecting money on promotion, on prioritizing content, in any sort of way so we're not financially incentivized in any way to manipulate content or get you to it faster.  That's not in any way the DNS is built and we're not suggesting doing that.  So, we need to develop solutions, particularly in the United States, there's part of the concern around these proposed changes to 230 which, in general, the sector is stridently opposed to.
What we see as the better solution is again, targeted approaches for specific problems that we deal with standards and norms.  Specifically, again, because we're still in an election cycle here in the United States, we have specific aims taken and enforcement and review done by a lot of parties including the FTC here in the United States and working with the different providers and trying to define what's appropriate and what's not, what needs to be moderated, that sort of specificity, we think is a better approach where everybody comes to the table, defines what we need to be doing and how we can do it together.
You know, to counter specific issues.
>> PETER KOCH: Thanks, Melinda.  So, Lucien, may I put you on the spot to also elaborate on that distinction between platforms and identifiers?  Also, because you have a national regulator to deal with, but also, European legislator and you might have certain experience with that dual intervention.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you, Peter.  Indeed, it's quite a challenge.  I agree with Melinda, it's very difficult to distinguish between harmful and illegal content.  Basically, from a legal standpoint, there is a number of different legal areas, hate speech, slander, IP rights, child pornography and so on.  So, in France, it's under criminal law.  It's also under civil law.  Ongoing debates, also, with DSA and all the regulations on tourism for example, that try to increase liability of online platforms.
So, when you are in content, basically, it's a gray area.  You have some content which can be evaluated quite easily but most of it, it's quite complex.
So, basically, we would need an appropriate legal evaluation of the content to determine if it's illegal or not and when you are, I don't know, from the CCTLE, for example, standpoint, you don't have the power to actually establish the legality of the content.
And as Melinda said a couple minutes ago, you do not post any content, and no content actually goes through your infrastructure.  So, from a technical standpoint, you have no control over the content of the website, and taking down the website, well, it's quite a lot, clearly.
So, defining, actually defining legality of the content is a main problem.
And in France, the fake news, so, this information is quite a good example, so, AP law, as I said, was mostly taken down by the Constitutional Consul.  Well, that's it.
>> PETER KOCH: Merci, Lucien.  So, Diogo, may I come back to you and actually ask you to maybe shed a bit of light on how that multistakeholder discussion in Brazil worked from a technical perspective but also from other perspectives discussing the complex system that we've touched upon already now that spans from identifiers to platforms and how did that make your life easier or more difficult when it came to reaching a conclusion?
>> DIOGO CORTIZ: Okay. So, I work especially with the application layer, so, especially with content.  And my objective is to identify or to train or to research, if it's possible, to use machine learning in Brazil to help companies to identify some harmful contents, especially misinformation and especially hate speech.
Because as you may know, we have a lot of platforms in Brazil that are not Brazil based.  So, the team is beginning to reduce it so I'm working right now to investigate how machine learning can help in the iteration process.
So, from the, like DNS point of view, I'm not the best person to give an answer.  But, from the application, what we are discussing here is better.  Machine learning tools can help those platforms to moderate content or at least to, it's like, we use it for a flashlight for all the content to in some cases put a flag on the content and say, maybe here in this content, it's a hate speech.  Like he's racist.  That goes to the moderation team.
But, for this purpose, we have some, a lot of technical challenges that I can discuss briefly here the first one is that we do not have some legal definitions.  For example, for hate speech or for misinformation.  So, to train a model based on machine learning, to help to kind of content moderation, we rely on experts so for who is not familiar with machine learning and process, we need data.  
We say supervised learning so you need data set and the data set needs to be annotated, okay, by humans so one challenge that we have is who is annotating those data sets, for example, to identify hate speech.  And also, what is our model reflecting about hate speech content, misinformation, so, those are the two main challenges that we are facing here in Brazil.
So, for example, the web technology, the center that is hosted by the Brazilian Information Center, we worked with the Queen Mary University of London.
We train a model with a high occurrence.  It's about nine percent to the hate speech, and it's completely open search.  Everyone can use, it's on GitHub now, so people from different companies, private companies and also researching, they are using those systems to find harmful contents, especially on the web layer.
So, that's my main work.  So, the technical content in the layer, application layer.
>> PETER KOCH: Thanks a lot, now, back to the north Macedonia IGF.  Similar question to you, in your discussions, your internet governance environment, your IGF, what challenges do you see when it comes to distinguishing the content layer and identify the layer and complexities and interactions on the technical side.
>> ANASTAS MISHEV: I would like to take a step back.  A very weak point in the internet connectivity which was of course the lack of exchange rate, our traffic was going all around the country for a country that is less than 2 million that is 100 by 200 kilometers in size, the traffic to go all, to use and load the international links was something that was unfortunately happening up to very soon.
And this crisis actually revealed its very weak spot.  Here, since these organizations that was supposed to do that was Monday to do this, did not ever, chances as academia, University, took it in our hands, established the first international exchange point, ISPs maintained, we talked to operators, the CCTLD, and it seems that, the content is local now, the quality of the online lectures is better, which was what was most important from our side.
And then, I believe that our next pointer next natural step would be to go, then, into the, to talk to the operators, to talk to the CCTLD and of course to talk to, it's very important to talk to the policy makers which are also involved in our IGF.
And see this multistakeholder model, find the Best Buy to apply the content regulation, at least at the identifiers level, if not then later maybe using advanced, advanced technologies, even in the content layer, per se.
But, as far as the identifier layers, we are initiating this, initiating this conversation, initiating these talks with stakeholders in the country, especially the operators but now it's very easy.  They are there in our premises present with the Ministry element for the policy making, and the top-level domain in the country.
To see what are the possibilities, first from the point of view of protecting the youngsters from the harmful b content, and then, even make it more even more general.
>> PETER KOCH: Thank you so much.  So, meanwhile, there was, again, quite an interesting exchange.  People are deemed to do multitasking, obviously, which is great.  Interesting exchange within the chat and I'd like to go back to one question that Sebastian Swimmer introduced or maybe shared an observation.  Maybe find it.  So, Sebastian wrote, I understand the technical issues, that's me, for suggesting when this comes to content layers technically or identifying layers.  
And then Sebastian wrote, yet, content moderation is performed in brackets now, you notice a takedown mechanism by the trusted DNS, closing bracket, content moderation is performed, so, it seems the borders are getting blurrier in policy discussions.  Again, that's the borders between content layer and identify layer.  Melinda, can you discuss that from content, IGF perspective. 
>> MELINDA CLEM: Sure, so a couple of distinctions.  The dot, we've got to remember there were different regulatory bodies or oversight for CCTLDs and GTLDs.  It's a lot easier for a country code and their governing body to have very specific rules about how that CC is managed.  By contrast, it is fully outside of ICANN's remit who manages the GTLT space to in any way manage content or even beyond in other areas that people talk about having some moderation or very proactive role because they get into cross‑border issues, matters of state, you know.  
Helps with cryptocurrency, and having registry operators manage that, do takedowns, cyberterrorism, again, that's another space where a registry headquartered in a specific country you can adjudicate between to matters of state, some sort of cyberwarfare going on, nor should they.
So, I think first and foremost it's very important to keep those lines very clear and understand who has a remit and where those jurisdictional lines are, and the more we clarify, it's easier for us to start defining solutions and again, what is it we're going to work with.
One final point I had mentioned some of these specific initiatives, talked about DNS abuse, and this is another one where, again, we need to really keep this focused on technical abuses of the DNS, not these content related areas.  Phishing, farming, bots, all these sort of, fast flux, sorts of things we can see and manage and disrupt at the DNS layer, that's where we should focus those and keep those definitions clear and all of that inside of the, clearly, for GTLDs inside the remit of ICANN and manage those and again, not let these lines continue to blur into nontechnical content related matters where we can. 
>> PETER KOCH: Thanks, Melinda.  Lucien, before we go to the final round, anything to add to this?
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Well, I quite agree on the Frontiers, indeed, content and DNS servers are quite different.  Abusing DNS on one side and obviously having content on the other side.  We had a series of workshops in France led by AFNIC, which is a .fr registry, and one of the key points we draw from that was basically, most people don't see the difference, you know, and including, sometimes, experts and legislative authorities and there is a need to clarify who is doing what, clearly, content regulation, legal aspects, DNS abuse, malwaring, phishing, and so on.
And it is basically understanding how internet is working and what you can do effectively to actually have an impact on the regulation that you want to promote and it is a problem of education, clearly, and of understanding how our internet is currently working.
>> PETER KOCH: Thanks a lot, Lucien.  So, this brings us almost to the end of this session.  I see there's another question in the pod.  We'll answer that in writing, I believe.
So, time to wrap up.  The agenda suggests we do that in the reverse order but we don't need to stick to the script too formally.  So, now that we've had reports from various NRIs, and different approaches in a multistakeholder, in their local or domestic multistakeholder venue, the question is for each and everyone, what are the next steps?  So, what are the concluding commitments, as we call them, that are actionable?
So, what is your respective NRI working on next to either improve the understanding or to take your effort to next step?  And let me see.  Yeah, Anastas or Boro, would you like to go first?
>> BORO JAKIMOVSKI: Yeah, so, definitely the collaboration between the academia and government and companies as well will need to continue.  We are currently involved as members of IGF and in the building the national broadband infrastructure so we are talking actually with operators and also with Ministry of Information Science, on the establishment on this national broadband office.  And as well as managing CCTLD, collaborative with managing government, all of these aspects. 
So, academia tries to involve thought with Ministries and companies on building the infrastructure and also covering white zones which is also an issue here as well as in Europe so making internet available with the government to the operators to be able to be available on the, where there is no commercial benefit for the operators in order to make it possible for everyone to be available at the same price across the entire country.
>> PETER KOCH: Thanks a lot.  So, I think Melinda is next on the list.  IGF USA, what are your next steps or commitments, even?
>> MELINDA CLEM: We don't have firm commitments.  The plan was to continue the dialogue and host, we want to take advantage of all of the work that went into understanding how to put on a good virtual event and try to have some smaller, single topic events and this was one that we wanted to follow through on again.
We only spent seventy minutes and only really talked about the policy aspect of it.  So, a next discussion around specifically 230 and these approaches is something that we've talked about.
>> PETER KOCH: Thank you and I would like to apologize, I maybe put too strong emphasis on commitment.  The idea in these sessions, and I say that for everybody involved or listening, the idea is that the NRIs exchange ideas here and then also, yeah, prepare some next steps that are like actionable.
So, we say commitment, nobody is going after the NRIs.  We know that most all of the work is volunteer effort and can always be overtaken by events, but providing next steps that will also encourage the interaction between the NRIs because everybody can look at what everybody else does.
So, take it serious, but not too serious.  Nobody is getting after you.  Thanks, Melinda, again.
And next in line is Lucien for the France IGF.
>> LUCIEN CASTEX: Thank you, Peter.  Well, basically, in France, we have still a lot to, a lot going on because we had the French IGF not long ago on October 27th and it's quite a different session, and we have six different workshops to go in December of this year and 2021.  Just before IGF France 2021.  So, it's a lot to do and basically, the idea is to continue the dialogue and raise awareness.
>> PETER KOCH: Merci, Lucien.  And then finally, Diogo, back to Brazil.
>> DIOGO CORTIZ: Yes.  So, we have an ongoing discussion here.  We have launched, actually published report, named Internet, Information, and Democracy that was produced by members of the Brazil steering committee and also experts and we do not have a final commitment, but it's on discussion.
I'm working in one of the initiatives that is using new technologies to deal with those new threats for the content moderation.  So, from my perspective, I feel constitute that machine learning can play important role to help in the content moderation, not to give the final answer or to remove the content but to help the moderation team to find like harmful contents in this overloads data.
>> PETER KOCH: Thanks a lot.  And that leaves me more or less the final minute to summarize and end the session.  So, thanks to the panelists and the contributors.  Thanks also to the people back home in those various IGF structures, and for the attendees who engaged in the discussion by submitting questions or discussing in the chat.
I believe what we've seen is that there's a diverse and vivid community of NRI structures out there, tackling problems that are discussed at the global IGF level in this next week and during the year.  We've heard that people are continuing dialogues by setting up a series of meetings so in these pandemic times, obviously, national IGF structures or regional IGF structures are a very good way to perform intersessional work with the opportunity to breakdown the global problems into tangible or edible pieces at the local level and then report back as we just saw.
Again, I would like to thank all the contributors for their inspiring contributions and I think that gives all the other IGF structures and everybody else to learn and to continue the conversation across the different structures.
Thanks a lot, and with this, it's my pleasure to have had you here, and I'll close the session.  See you again soon.
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-of20-attention-economy-and-free-expression^^

 
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Good morning, everyone.
Good morning to all of you.  I hope you can all see us, which becomes the standard introductory phrase for any online conferences.  So dear colleagues and friends, a warm welcome to our open session number 20 "Attention Economy and Free Expression" which is co‑organized by the Hamburg Media School and the Council of Europe.  As we know freedom of expression is crucial for the enjoyment of other ‑‑ all other human rights.  It enables individuals to make informed choices, participate actively in democratic processes, and that's why also the European court of human rights and political decision makers refer to freedom of expression as a cornerstone of democracy.  We also have to ensure that this cornerstone is not crumbling.  I think that's a key role that we all have.
Freedom of expression, however, is among the human rights most impacted by the digitalization.  Digital technologies have significantly transformed the communication patterns and the behaviors of individuals, communities, societies.  So it has an impact on several levels, the level of communication between individuals, the context of newsrooms and media outlets, and also the broader societal level.  Communication between visits is obviously facilitated, structured and shaped by online platforms and social media.  But beyond the euphoria around virtually unlimited access to information online, and expanded possibilities to generate content, we now see that freedom of expression is increasingly shaped in multiple ways by technologies that rank speech for profit, seek to grab attention with sensationalist headlines and encouraged rights and shares.  Ultimately this crowds out analysis and nuance in favor of often hateful exchanges that silence many voices.
Second in the context of newsrooms and media outlets, microtargetting techniques have revolutionized the new ecosystem leading to the emergence and power of new media, including social media platforms and the prevalence of business model that prioritizes clicks over readers' trust.
This has reversed the flow of advertising revenues, prompting a structural shift within media markets and putting into question the sustainability of traditional media, and undermining even the conditions for quality journalism.
Third, at the broader societal level, including a political communication, algorithmic systems and data marketing tools shape our social and economic and political lives and affect our governance and influence the distribution of resources.
Faced with these unprecedented volumes of content, it is increasingly difficult for individuals to discern what is true and whom to believe, because this causes confusion, contributed to information disorder and impacts negatively on society's trust in the media and the democratic institutions more broadly.  But what is the driving force behind the complex plexus of causes and complications.  Does it lie in the technology itself or the way they are put to use?
Today, we will be looking at the attention economy, which embraces various users of algorithmic systems and processes to manage the attention of individuals and groups in the pursuit of economic or other interests and multilayered impacts on freedom of expression and on information environment.  We will attempt to capture that complexity of interdependence between business models employed by major social media and digital platforms and the draining quality information and public debate.
In today's debate, we will rely on Council of Europe documents and standards, in particular, our committee of ministers declaration on the manipulative capability of algorithmic processes and resolution on the human rights impact of algorithmic systems and of course on the outstanding expertise of our panelists.
I am Patrick Penninckx, I'm head of the Information Society Department of the Council of Europe, and I'm humbled to be able to present our panelists today, and I will give them a short introduction and then afterwards, I will ask them a question to start off.
First, we have Ms. Amy Brouillette, the senior researcher and editorial manager of the Ranking Digital Rights project for a fellow ‑‑ and a fellow of the center for media, data and society at Ranking Digital Rights, Amy is responsible for planning and managing the research and the production of the corporate accountability index and index‑related communications and outreach activities.
Joe McNamee is an independent consultant, Council of Europe expert on the committee of freedom of expression and digital technologies.  Joe has worked on Internet regulations since 1998, up to the end of 2018, he was executive director of European digital rights, the association of organizations defending online human rights in Europe.  He participated in the Council of Europe expert committees on the roles and responsibilities of Internet intermediaries and on human rights, as I mentioned, of automated data processing and different forms of artificial intelligence.
Professor Dr. Alexandra Borchardt, journalism professor, Universitat der Kunste Berlin, head of digital journalism fellowship, Hamburg Media School and partnering with us in the organization of this event, Alexandra is also the director of leadership programs at the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism at the University of Oxford and expert committee on the freedom of expression and digital technologies and also previously participated in our work on ‑‑ of the committee of experts on quality journalism in the digital age.
Last but not least, Mr. Aurelien Maehl, senior public policy manager with DuckDuckGo.  He was with APCO, worldwide and political intelligence.
Now, to start off, I will ask a question to Amy, and from Ranking Digital Rights, what is the attention economy?  How does it translate into the use of algorithmic systems, including targeted advertising by social media and digital platforms?
Amy, you have five or six minutes to give your introduction.  Thank you.
>> AMY BROUILLETTE: Thank you very much.  So the term "attention economy" is really what underlies, I think, the very problematic business model of surveillance capitalism, which is what we and others see as kind of the root cause of the infodemic viral hate speech and the disinformation and the other types of problems that the platforms are facing today.  I'm not an expert in the term or the scholarship around this term which spans many different fields.
But what I find interesting about the actual term is that it was first coined in the early 1990s, to explain how the over supply of information, which was interestingly seen as prevalent and problematic even back then, is actually creating an under supply of the public's attention.
So there are all of these channels of information and at the time, that was more about the 24‑hour news cycle, that upended the traditional print media as we knew it then, which was not only translating ‑‑ not translating into a diversity of new ideas or information but was also creating a kind of attention deficit disorder among publics.
For the news and information ecosystems, what this has meant is a decrease in quality in‑depth news and an increase in sensationalist infotainment style news and the rise of inflammatory talk radio, all of that we have seen over the past decades which has done a number on our political culture and fueled a lot of social divisions that we see kind of on full display today.
And then add to this problem that already problematic mix, in comes the tech revolution and social media, which brought unprecedented volumes of information, new channels for obtaining that information, which some ‑‑ many have actually argued doesn't make us any more informed.  In some cases and to the detriment of democracy, you know, in many places, even less in informed.  So we have more access to news and information ever before, but a far less informed electorate, is the idea.
And a lot, obviously, has been written and said about disinformation, particularly over the last few years, even though, you know, political propaganda as a phenomena is not ‑‑ is not especially new.
What is new is the speed at which this type of content can now travel, and the reach and how far it can go.
And this is due primarily to an excessively opaque combination of algorithmic systems and targeting that prioritize and amplify the most sensationalist content based on license shares.  So ‑‑ and while we know that algorithms are often the underlying cause of this virallity, we don't know much more about how these systems work, since companies are obviously fiercely protective of these technologies, despite their I measurable impact ‑‑ immeasurable impact on public life and despite calls from civil society and regulators for more transparency.
So the key question today is really about how to control the spread of harmful content without harming human rights in the process, without underlining the same human rights that we're trying to protect.
And so just to be somewhat self‑promotional, last spring RDR published two reports which we call the "It's the Business Model Series."  Instead of holding digital platforms liable for the content posted by their users regulators and advocates should focus on holding companies accountable for the underlying business model that generates and amplifies the types of harmful speech that is distorting the public sphere and threatening democracy.
I won't go into the "It's the Business Model" reports, but the point I would like to make is that those reports were based on some research that we conducted on indicators that we developed to evaluate how transparent and accountable tech companies are about their development and use of algorithmic systems.  These indicators were developed in part from recommendations by the Council of Europe, which set out standards for how private and public sector actors can develop and deploy human rights respecting algorithmic systems.
From the Council of Europe's recommendations and from extensive feedback from stakeholders we developed a set of new indicators that attempt to set global accountability and transparency standards, grounded in international human rights frameworks for how major publicly traded digital platforms can demonstrate respect for human rights as they develop and deploy these new technologies.
So circling back to the issue of the attention economy, hour Ranking Digital Rights, our new indicators ultimately try to address this underling business model of surveillance capitalism, which is based on the mass collection of user information, and targeting users to ‑‑ with content in extremely opaque ways in order to generate license shares.
And I will just stop there.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you.  Thank you so much, Amy.  That gives us a very clear picture about the speed and reach of sensationalist content on the one side, harmful content, and also the accountability for the systems and the business models that are behind it, and also gives us an idea already about the mass collection of information that comes with it.
Joe, our independent expert and member of our expert committee, attention economy companies, they curate news feeds, they rank content and make decisions on whether it will stay or can be removed.  They also collect data, and then employ to optimize the provision of content including by third party advertisers.  This sounds like a vicious circle to me, but what are the main interests and purposes behind such decisions?  What does this mean for freedom of expression?
I will let you answer that, but I will also tell the audience that they can send us questions and ‑‑ questions via the Q&A box.  So please send your questions to the Q&A box and after this round of panelists, we will then proceed with replying to the questions.
I already have some questions here.  So, Joe, please.
>> JOE McNAMEE: Thank you, Patrick.  Thank you to the Council of Europe for inviting me to this interesting panel.  The Council of Europe has done some very interesting work as was mentioned recently on the ‑‑ on algorithmic decision making and the roles and responsibilities of international intermediaries and Ranking Digital Rights if nobody has read their reports yet, they are really exceptional and move the debate forward some considerable distance.
I think what Ranking Digital Rights has done is all the more valuable because we as a society have failed to understand the multiple and the changing priorities of the attention economy companies.  And this means that we have failed to understand their influence on our information ecosystem, in particular with record to content moderation and content curation.  And due to this failure, policymakers have consistently, and I would almost say always underestimate the potential for self‑regulation by Internet economy companies for dealing with the harmful content that Patrick mentioned a moment ago.
So we have seen that the attention economy lives from personal data.  We have seen that as Amy said, controversial data generates more data and more data generates more profits, and this is the nub of the issue.  The customer in this ‑‑ in the attention economy market is the person that is paying for the data, that's paying for the influence and it's not the individual using, for example, the social media service to exercise their freedom of expression.
Freedom of expression is inherently in a subordinate role in this economy.  And whenever there's an issue that brings content moderation into the headlines, the call is never to protect our fundamental freedoms.  The call is always from policymakers to delete more and delete it quicker, delete it automatically, delete, delete, delete, quicker and quicker.
It drives harmful behavior and drives for calls of more content moderation.  As Patrick said, this is a vicious circle.  Such content moderation is not and will not be voluntarily done in a way that harms the personal data‑driven business model of the company.  So problems continues.  The cycle continues.  And ultimately without correction measures, unbridled correction, prioritizes this over speech.  We focus on deletion as the only solution, as if the attention economy actor was the neutral intermediary, or only had one set of incentives.
As Patrick said, the attention economy companies are multiple businesses at the same time.  They are social media providers, but they are also newsfeed providers.  They are advertising companies.  They are data companies and they are sellers of political influence.
And that takes us to the decision-making process.  In reality, while ‑‑ when they don't want to, intermediaries claim not to want to be the arbiters of truth and they restrict freedom of expression for any number of reasons.  They do it to ensure the business model remains valid.  LinkedIn might decide not to accept posts that are not professional, for example.  They do it to ensure that there's no content on the platform that would be displeasing for advertisers and would reduce revenue.
They do so to avoid liability for potentially illegal content and they do so because of the public relations value of being seen to do something good in the fight against something bad.
But what we see consistently is ‑‑ is in this area, self‑regulatory and co‑regulatory schemes are introduced, but without targets, without measures of success or failure, without key performance indicators, without independent review, without the underlying problems being assessed to see if they are changing or need a changed approach and transparency data are rarely complete, consistent over time or across industry or even in a standardized format.
In some, when it comes to freedom of expression of the digital economy, we fail to understand the nefarious effect of the business models involved.  We feel to understand the problems caused by our amplification profiling and data exploitation.  When content moderation problems arise, we fail to understand the vested interests of the companies involved, and we never insist on getting enough data to produce ‑‑ to assess the scale, nature and the evolution of the problems.
And all of that seems to be an advertisement for Ranking Digital Rights' fine work in this area.  So I will leave it ‑‑ I will leave it at that.  Thank you.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you so much, Joe.  Joe, I have known you for quite some time now, first of all as the director of European digital rights, and we were already very closely working at the time together at the Council of Europe with the guide for human right ‑‑ the human rights guide for the Internet user, which we published some time ago.
Delete, delete, delete, quicker, quicker, quicker, that is what I gathered from your input, Joe.  Thank you so much for giving us a clearer picture on who is ‑‑ on what are the mechanisms behind all of this.
Now, I have the pleasure then to give the floor to Alexandra Borchardt.  As I said from the Hamburg Media School and thank you so much, Alexandra, also for partnering with us in the organization of this event.  It's ‑‑ it's co‑organized between the Council of Europe and the Hamburg Media School.  So in this context, Alexandra, outside of social media, what does this mean for the business editorial choices of free media outlets that live from clicks and inside social media, what does it mean for them when they rely on engagement?  What is the overall impact on the media environment?  Many questions in one, Alexandra, and I hope to be able ‑‑ that you are able to give an answer to that in five minutes.
Thank you so much.
>> ALEXANDRA BORCHARDT: Thank you, mat trick, and thanks for having me.  So I have been a journalist all of my life and now I'm advising media companies, particularly local media publishers in digital transformation.  So I'm really close to what's been happening and what the impact is of the attention economy on the media industry.  I mean, some of this has already been mentioned.  I will still make a point of this.  The erosion of business models has been a significant ‑‑ has had a significant impact on the media industry, because the platforms, the big platform school, Facebook has absorbed the vast amount of digital advertising revenues.  So actually, media companies can't maneuver as well with the lack of this revenue.
Also the platforms absorb much of the attention that other media used to get.  I mean, people used to just, you know, tune into journalism because maybe they were bored or they felt like, you know, an obligation to do so.  So now they are just resorting to other stuff that's on their SmartPhones.
Most importantly, though, it's affected news consumption behavior, and I mean, it's already said something about this.  First of all, the distraction effect is quite massive because people get so many distractions on their SmartPhones that they don't necessarily rely on news just think about commuting on a train, you know?  People used to read newspapers.  Now they are just on their SmartPhones chatting away or gaming.
The drowning out of news and the news feed or in the stream or the constant stream of things that pick their attention has a serious effect and that also leads to a shortening of attention spans in news consumption because people just, you know, click themselves through stuff and distraction.  And that also leads to the erosion of news brands.  People say, oh, you know, I saw that news on Facebook, the Reuters Institute did a study on this.  They didn't see this on the BBC or "The New York Times."  They just saw it somewhere on social media.  So the brands have trouble establishing themselves.
And finally, the news consumption.  News avoidance is an increase phenomenon.  One‑third of the people surveyed say they admit to avoiding news at times because it's just too much, and it's just sort of, you know, too negative and too filled with an agenda.  So really news avoidance is a serious consequence because if you lose people on news consumption, then you have seriously lost them.
Obviously with the media companies, with the publishers, the attention economy has had its effects on content production.  News outlets are really desperate for what works.  So instead of investigating and investigations and producing exclusive content, are they just engage in copy and pasting what works with others to achieve fast gains and maybe grab some of that digital advertising revenue.  So the copy and paste kind of journalism is really been rampant and then that gives people less reason to pay for journalism, because they find the same content everywhere.
It adds to click baits and customers click on it, oh, I have to click on it, but it's basically like consuming sugar.  It raises the blood sugar, but you never really feel satisfied.  So click bait is just something that people click on and then they feel, oh, but I don't really need this.  This is really not good for me.  So it's actually eroding the credibility of journalism and sometimes ‑‑ by people, it's even perceived to be worse than fake news.  People actually label fake news sometimes as click bait.
The rat race.  Among media companies has accelerated because it's about, you know, grabbing attention, about being fast.  Even the digital sphere, collaboration is what it should be all about.
Another point is news outlets have lost control over curation that was already mentioned at news choice because they depend on the algorithms of platform companies at least on social media, when they display their news on social media.  And finally news outlets have given into producing their content for platforms of others, rather than creating the platforms themselves.  Just think about this.
News companies, they used to have newspapers or this was broadcast so they have their own ‑‑ they had their own platforms to publish.  Now they are depending on other platforms and this is a rat race also because they are just chasing.  Where do I have to be?  Do I have to be on Instagram or TikTok, where do I have to publish my news to reach audiences.
Misinformation has already been mentioned, the attention economy drives the proliferation of misinformation, and that has some serious impact because this leads to shift in agenda‑setting from news outlets to whoever spreads lies.  So it's mainly very often, it's politicians who spread lies or misinformation, and just to debunk this kind of misinformation, absorbs a lot of energy in newsrooms that could be spent or should be spent even on research, on investigations, on setting their own agenda.
And the attention economy, last but not least, has influenced language and tone of ‑‑ of publications because it rewards any kind of speech that stands out.  This can be funny speech or drastic or any kind of outrageous stuff that, you know, that gets grabbed by the algorithms.  So there's actually no reward on this for complexity of explanation.
Then also you have the effect on communities and on participation, because you have dialogue and community management on news sites and actually, social media and the comments sections give voice to the noisy few and that also means sometimes those who are really interested and who would like to engage get distracted also because, you know, hate speech is a serious issue for news outlets, and particularly female journalists are targeted of hate speech in massive proportions.
In the end, I don't want to be just so negative ‑‑ I want to emphasize some good things that the attention economy has also brought about to just not just let this get into a very negative tone here.  Actually the attention economy has ignited a debate about quality journalism, because maybe some journalism before didn't get the attention it deserved and that was for a reason, just because it probably wasn't interesting enough or it wasn't ‑‑ it wasn't made for the audiences that it's actually intended to reach.  So actually, I think journalism has gotten much better as a consequence of this debate.  So there's actually good news to this.
And the second good news is also the attention economy has also opened up new audiences that didn't consume news before on other media because they wouldn't subscribe to a newspaper or wouldn't tune into radio or TV, even though this is basically a theoretic possibility, since there is evidence that news inequality is rising and a serious issue, actually, that less people access journalism than did before.
So let me end with what to do about this.  First of all, and I will address what Joe said here, there needs to be indicators for quality journalism, because it shouldn't be just about deleting, delete, deleting, but also about ranking up good content, ranking up quality journalism after all and there's the Journalism Trust Initiative that run by reporters beyond borders that develops these indicators for quality journalism and it's been a huge collaborative effort and I think this is really a very hopeful initiative.
Also, what also to do is news media needs to attract audiences by focusing on quality content and by building stable and lasting relationships with their readers and there's actually an opportunity to really ‑‑ I said that before, rethink journalism, rethink the quality of the journalism and rethink the relationships with readers, audiences and engage much more in debate and dialogue rather than broadcasting, just broadcasting news from the top.
And lastly, news media needs to reassert control over technology.  They need to get, yeah, technology‑wise and develop their own algorithms and technology and platforms to really reach and address the audiences they want to address.
Thank you for this.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you so much, Alexandra.  You gave us a full overview.  And thank you also for drawing the attention to the digital news report, the Reuters News Report I think it is a very interesting source of information as well.  You spoke to us about the erosion of media companies' platforms that absorb attention, the drowning out of real news, the news avoidance as well.  The click baits which leave us with a bitter feeling at times, and especially also to lose control on curation, the editorial responsibility.  And taking energy away from the newsroom to ‑‑ in order to be able to respond to quite a bit of disinformation.
Thank you also for pointing out some of the positive effects and the way forward.
Now, I have a million dollars question for Aurelien of DuckDuckGo.  Can there be a viable alternative business model outside of the attention economy?  How would it function?  And can you share your company's experience on taking such a different route?  Go ahead.
>> AURELIEN MAEHL: Thank you very much.  Let me answer with many millions.  No, it's a pleasure to take part in the conversation that naturally has to see, we are an Internet privacy company, and because of widespread poor privacy practices, you know, that we have heard just before, too many people believe that you simply cannot expect privacy on the Internet, and we disagree to that.  And we have made it our mission to kind of set a new standard of trust online, simply by saying that privacy should be the default and not the exception online.
So people this is best for are search engine that doesn't track them.  We also offer private mobile browser and an extension for Firefox and Chrome that has our tracker blocking and protects people's privacy across the web.  So we are kind of giving users all the privacy essentials they need to seamlessly take control of their personal information just with one download.
And from that, I want to make one point clear from the onset, is that we provide a service that respects or protects people's privacy while at the same time being profitable and so since 2014.  And I can continue saying that it's a false dichotomy to think that a company actually needs endless amounts of personal information to run a profitable business online.  And companies like Google and Facebook have led everyone to believe their models, but that's just false.  Just that they choose to squeeze every bit of profit out of the users at the expense of their privacy rights, at the expense also of society and democracy as we heard.
So instead of relying on behavioral advertising like they do, we serve contextual ads to our users, in order to make money.  So it means that it's way less invasive way of making profit that works by showing people ads that relates to the keyword of their specific search, rather than to which websites they visited the week before or the searched yesterday.
And as we just discussed, harming privacy rights is not just a consequence in itself.  It has wide‑ranging societal impacts.  As you do on Google, you get results tailored to what they think you will be likely to click on, based on the data profile they have you from older tracking but such results are, in fact, dangerous in terms of their consequence, simply because they show you results they think you will click on which necessarily means it will filter out results that they think you will skip.
This is the center bubble.  They put people in the bubble, by filtering out the content that they particularly would not like.  And so to take this to the political dimension, that is just so critical these days, if you have political leanings one way or another, you are more likely to get results that you already agree with, and just less likely to see opposing viewpoints ever, which leads in total to increase the echo chambers that are significantly contributing to an increasingly polarized society.
And we back this with some research that we did.  We like to do research with our users.  We conducted tests in the US asking our users to search Google for several simple keywords steering controversy, like similar like abortion, or gun control, and these people received a wide variety of different results that appeared to be personalized by location and other factors and that was 2012 and 2018.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you.
>> AURELIEN MAEHL: You know, to conclude ‑‑ yeah, I just had a final word.  You know, we are just here to prove basically that business can be ‑‑ (Garbled audio) and the dominant model based on behavioral ads.  And so without sacrifice privacy, a good third of people are already ready to take action online to further their privacy and we are confident that more people will choose services like us if given a genuine choice.  But if I take Android, for instance, it takes more than 15 steps to set DuckDuckGo as a default search engine, and so, you know, we need regulatory intervention to provide these care conditions to operate, first through a menu, like a preference menu where the user selects the default that they would prefer and that would be a good step.
We have shown through research that if done right, this could decrease Google's market share by more than 20% and conversely bring more diversity to the market for privacy protective services.  These were the pointed I wanted to make and thank you again for having me.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you.  Thank you so much, Aurelien.  Thank you also for pointing out that privacy should be the basis of our work and that we can still have a business model that is profitable.  And pointing so the false economy that we would need endless amounts of data in order to produce excellent news and quality information.
I sometimes compare the harvesting data to the gold rush that is get as much as possible, which is what some companies seem to be doing, creating filter bundles and echo chambers and maybe also focusing on a polarized or polarized society.
Now, first of all, we have a very active audience.  So I will be able to ask you quite a number of questions.  But before that, I just wanted to show you that in Strasbourg, the sun does sometimes shine, for the ones who miss the Strasbourg sun, I can tell you that there is some here.
I have one of those active participants is Mr. Guy Berger who you know from UNESCO.  And the notion for attention economy, has the notion that human proclivities are the result problem.  On the other hand, different concepts like surveillance capitalism could put more stress on commercial drivers in the interest of driving behavioral change opportunities.  In this view, it is the system rather than the people who are the issue.  Which according to your perspective is right?
Now, I would like maybe Joe to start with this, and ‑‑ sorry to put you on the spot, Joe, but it's easier to be able to point to someone than ‑‑ than ‑‑ than asking everyone to respond at the same time.
Thank you.  So Joe.
>> JOE McNAMEE: Thank you, Patrick.  Well, I have known Patrick for ‑‑ Guy for quite a long time too, and he's invariably or almost always right and I think he's right in both of his assertions.  I think it's clear that human proclivities are being exploited in the digital ‑‑ in the information economy, and that that is driving an economic model called surveillance capitalism.  So I'm not ‑‑ I don't quite see the linguistic nuance that he's implying.  I think ‑‑ I think both have ‑‑ both terms have merit and both terms are appropriate depending on what we are talking about.  Attention economy is obviously much more focused on the human aspect of this, but I think ‑‑ I don't think there's a contradiction that needs resolving in short.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Okay.  Anyone else who would like to react to ‑‑ yes, Alexandra? 
>> ALEXANDRA BORCHARDT: I think it definitely is a structural ‑‑ a structural and systemic thing.  Obviously, there are human proclivities that contribute to that ‑‑ to that development, but, for example, if you look at, you know, majorities or minorities also of news consumers.  Actually, most consumers of news don't want to, like contribute or they don't engage in hate speech or ‑‑ this is usually just as I said for the noisy few.  So actually many people are actually ‑‑ they just want to ‑‑ they want to consume the news.  They want to, you know, live their peaceful lives.  They just don't want to polarize and drive people apart.  So actually, the emphasis on the noisy few is a thing that is actually ‑‑ that is increased by ‑‑ or that is driven by these systemic surveillance capitalism mechanisms that have been described.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you so much.  I have another question from Yannick who is the head of the digital development unit in the Council of Europe, who says, attention economy in the context of social networks is also based on a cognitive bias, especially likes, creating engagement but also a reward.  It's well‑known that they have based this system on slot machines.  So how to limit these effects?
Anyone feels ready to respond to that? 
I think I will let you sometime to respond to that.  First of all, I have another question for Amy, which is accountability for business models is interesting idea, especially if there are negative impacts on the wider environment, such as the fossil fuel industry.  Would the aim be to regulate a model or require offsets, Amy?  It's another question from Guy Berger.  So next time, I think we have to invite Guy on the panel.
>> AMY BROUILLETTE: Thank you.  Let's see, I'm not sure about the fossil fuel offset piece, but I do think that there's probably some overlap with the environmental industry.  From the perspective of RDR, we kind of look at addressing the more structural aspects of surveillance capitalism.  In particular, we would advocate for companies to be required, legally required to conduct human rights impact assessments on the development and the use of algorithmic systems and targeting, in the same way that environmental impact assessments are required in other fields.
So our research has also shown that very few companies are actually conducting risk assessments on these ‑‑ on these technologies, which is a fairly big deal given how much of a human rights impact these processes have across the different platforms.  So that's one ‑‑ that's kind of ‑‑ that's ‑‑ in our opinion, that's one the core ways to address the business model question is to assert ‑‑ to advocate for regulations that would require impact assessments.
We would advocate for other types of transparency‑based regulations that would require companies to disclose how they develop algorithms and what user data they use to develop the algorithms and to give users more control and choice over that information.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Okay.  Thank you.  Thank you, Amy.
I have a question from Ibraham ‑‑
>> AURELIEN MAEHL: If I may just ‑‑
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Yes, Aurelien?
>> AURELIEN MAEHL: If I may add something to Amy's answer.  Another solution is to also tackle the underlying root of the business model, and we have seen recently some good proposals from the European Parliament or at least some, you know, suggestions to ‑‑ to tackle the widespread use of the behavioral ads and move towards restrictions on the connection of data for the purpose of serving behavioral ads and, you know, this would be the kind of measures that would ‑‑ that would actually address the underlying cause of what we are talking now.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Okay.  Thank you, Aurelien.  Actually, I think the next question is also for you from Ibrahim, who says I personally love using DDG and encouraging people around to do so for privacy, but the problem is about its accuracy compared to Google Search.  What can explain this?  And do you think communities, users can do something to improve the DDG's accuracy? 
>> AURELIEN MAEHL: So thank you so much for being a user and a fan and spreading the word.  You know, I think it has largely to see with habits.  I have mentioned before the fact that Google uses certain ways to personalize content.  Google also adds large numbers of additional Google‑generated answers to its queries when ‑‑ you know, when people are looking for something, and so I think it's largely a matter of, like, habits of being used ‑‑ of having Google serving content that they think you would like if you come.  And increasingly, whether you are looking for something, the whole first page and even by scrolling down would be full of Google‑generated content and not as opposed to the nine organic links.
And we think it's also another tactic, you know to people inside the Google system and address it from the rest of the web.  So, yeah.  I think it's just a different approach to how we serve content.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Okay.  Thank you, Aurelien.
I will make use of the panel for my personal interest.  I will be speaking to the international communications and consultants organization this afternoon, which is basically gathers all the communication industry.  And what should be my key message to that industry?  What should I give as a key message to those service providers, service ‑‑ commercial service providers, obviously?  So what would you give me as an advice?
Alexandra, I see you smile.  So since you smile, you have to answer.
>> ALEXANDRA BORCHARDT: Oh, gosh!  It's all about quality content, really.  Yeah, I mean, we have been ‑‑ we have been facing this overabundance of news and misinformation debates or really making sure that, you know, communication is fact based and it's quality ‑‑ it's quality communication.  This is really the key message and not about he said, she said, all kinds of, you know, attention grabbing, polarizing quotes and snippets, but about facts and data.  We have been witnessing this and the ongoing presidential election in the US, that, you know, someone declares a victory, it doesn't necessarily mean this is true.
So really, be very factual and, yeah.  Produce quality content that would be my key message to communication ‑‑ to the communication sector.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Anyone else?  Amy? 
>> AMY BROUILLETTE: Yeah.  I mean, I couldn't agree more.  I do think that the message would be to kind of capitalize on their assets and their assets really are, you know, that they ‑‑ you know, they can be the provider of quality journalism.  So it's almost like back to the basics.  Back to the workshop and try to foster the original things that journalism does ‑‑ should be doing quite well.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you.  Anyone else, Joe, would you like to react to that?
>> JOE McNAMEE: I'm not sure if you can still see me.  My video ‑‑
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Yes.
>> JOE McNAMEE: I think the ‑‑ I think reminding the market of the value of competition would be good.  I think the economies of scale are driving these problems and they are also driving companies ‑‑ driving a market that is not a market anymore.  So I think talking to market players, a reminder of the value of competition is ‑‑ would be timely.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Okay.  Thank you.
One more question, because we are unfortunately already nearing the end is for Amy, also from Guy.  Accountability for business models is an interesting idea, especially if there are negative impacts on the wider environment.  I already read this one, didn't I?
>> AMY BROUILLETTE: Yes.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Sorry, sorry, for this one.
Okay.
Okay.  And then Alexandra, is journalism a victim of the net companies business model or a victim of its own institutional and historical inertia?  And if the latter, how can journalism and news outlets compete for attention without compromising content and without getting into the data harvesting and manipulative sales models.  You already started replying to that in the chat box, but I would like to hear you about this.
>> ALEXANDRA BORCHARDT: Yes, it's a bit both.  And I would suggest that all the parties that are mentioned address their own issues and their own works.  I said that in my initial remarks.  Journalism really has to reassert itself and to focus ‑‑ or to lead a quality debate, what is quality journalism, and has journalism been good enough.  Has it been interesting enough?  Has it been relevant enough?  And has the tone be right?  And to mention the digital news report, again in 2019 issue, there was a question the audience was surveyed.  What do you think about the news media that you consume?  And the lowest ratings that people gave were for ‑‑ for relevance of topics covered and the tone.  So that they just ‑‑ most people feel like ‑‑ they felt like the tone was too negative, and it's too much and it's just an overabundance of news.  So there should be much more selection and much more thought about audiences.
So there's a lot the media industry can actually do to improve their journalism.  Also, to be less preaching from the ‑‑ less broadcasting but more engaging and building relationships, stable relationships of trust with their audiences and their readers.
Nevertheless, it is obvious that the platform companies have their share of responsibility.  So I wouldn't want to let them off the hook, but everyone, the platform companies on one hand and the media companies, publishers on the other, should really address the issues they can tackle themselves.  He wouldn't let anyone off the hook here.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you so much.  So last question to all of you, is regulation the solution?  And if yes, what exactly would be the need to regulate? 
That leaves you ‑‑
>> AURELIEN MAEHL: Yes, on this if I can ‑‑
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Yes, please, go ahead.
>> AURELIEN MAEHL: Yes.  Thank you.  No, I just would like to ‑‑ I mentioned this before, what can be done on behavioral advertisements, but I would like to come back on what I said on competition, as a business here, we ‑‑ you know, we proved that it can be business models, qualities that rely on the business models that we have talked about, but right now, the web ecosystem is held, you know, by a handful of companies and it's us competing against Google.
We are in the first line of being affected by their exclusionary practices when they leverage their dominions on platforms they control, for instance, Android to push their own services and to give few visibility to rivals, and so I would say that one solution is to give consumer a fair choice when choosing their services and preference and then this would be first step towards a more diverse market share that responds for more privacy and more interest online.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you.  I have Alexandra and then we'll have to close unfortunately.  Alexandra? 
>> ALEXANDRA BORCHARDT: Yes, I mean, of course regulation is ‑‑ is important because there's no democracy without regulation.  I mean, this is the very core of democracy to come up with solutions to challenges and to problems.  The question is:  What we regulate and obviously that is a fairly ‑‑ a fairly complicated issue and, yeah, maybe let me get back to the slot machine thing, because none of us addressed that so far.
So actually, regulating design of platforms would be ‑‑ or coming up with standards how to ‑‑ you know, how to design platforms that they don't exploit certain human proclivity, wouldn't be an option.  I wouldn't really put the regulation in that direction of just, you know, taking down content and giving the powers to take down content to platform companies, but there's many ways we could regulate and hopefully not just in the terms of services that no one reads but maybe also making it easier for individuals to find redress or to ‑‑
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Okay.
>> ALEXANDRA BORCHARDT: To really voice their concerns.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you.  I'm sorry I'm cutting you off.  I want a one word answer of Joe and Amy which is very ‑‑ which is regulation yes or no? 
>> AMY BROUILLETTE: In a word, yes.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: And Joe disappeared from my screen.  I don't know, Joe, if you are still there.  Anyway, this was also an opportunity for you to give a last round and I have been moving away with the sun as you saw.  Thank you to all the panelists for this very insightful ‑‑ oh, Joe is there.  So yes or no to regulation, Joe?  I can't hear you.  Your microphone is switched off, unfortunately.
>> JOE McNAMEE: Competition is already regulated and transparency should be regulated, in relation to ‑‑ particularly to issues around content moderation.  So yes to regulation, careful regulation and regulation that's reviewed frequently.
>> PATRICK PENNINCKX: Thank you.  Thank you.  We will be cut off shortly.  So I will try and sum up.  Thank you so much to all the panelists for this very insightful interventions and thank you also to all the participants in this early hour for the interest in the session.  I think this was a very rich and fruitful debate providing a lot of food for thought for all experts and institutions working on the ‑‑ this intersection of freedom of expression and digital technologies.
The outcomes of the debate was certainly also feeding to the Council of Europe expert committee on freedom of expression and digital technologies which is right now preparing a draft recommendation on the subject, on the impacts of digital technologies on freedom of expression.
So at a later stage, we will organize public consultations on this draft, where you will be further ‑‑ where you can further provide your input and expertise.  I also seize this opportunity for you to visit the Council of Europe booth in the IGF virtual village and we will see each other later in other sessions.  Thank you so much.  Thank you for your participation.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you very much.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-of21-strengthening-implementation-capacities-for-ai-ethics^^

 
>> SASHA RUBEL: Good morning, everybody.  And welcome to our open forum on "Strengthening Implementation Capacities for AI Ethics.  My name is Sasha Ruble.  I'm with UNESCO.  I will talk about concretely how to translate ethical principles into practice and the work that we are doing with other international and regional organizations on this panel, but also academia, and civil society.
As many of you know, in 2019, in November, UNESCO's general conference mandated the organization to develop a standard‑setting instrument in the field of artificial intelligence.  And my colleague, Dafna Feinholz will share more about that.
This conversation specifically will be looking at how to translate macro level principles into practice, and the challenges that exist but also best practices and opportunities that exist in this field.
I would like to highlight that prior to the general conference in 2019, UNESCO's Member States in 2015 adopted what we call the Internet universalism framework which argues for a rights based, open, accessible and multi‑stakeholder approach to digital guidance and this is guiding our work in the Internet, emerging technology and artificial intelligence more broadly.
Over the next hour, we will be looking specifically at how ethical principles or AI can be implemented and how do we translate high‑level principles into policies and what kind of human and institutional capacities are needed to govern a responsible and human‑centered artificial intelligence?
I'm happy to have with me here today by colleague Dafna Feinholz from UNESCO, and Leonard Bouchet from EBU, and Jed Horner, and Jan Kleijssen, and Nicholas Maiihhe, and Clara Neppel, and Sophie Peresson.  Without further ado, I will pass the floor to my colleague, Dafna Feinholz.  Now over to you.
>> DAFNA FEINHOLZ: Thank you very much for this invitation, first of all, and I'm very clad to share this panel with all the participants.  Many have been part of the process in one way or another, either during the consultation part or after now that we have been developing the first draft.
I just want to make a short introduction which is to explain that what I will explain ‑‑ to show to you and share with you is the current text of the recommendation that we are developing and that is going to enter now into the face of intergovernmental negotiations, but still, I wanted to say that it is very important for us to say first of all, that in this crowded universe of many initiatives while UNESCO wanted to take or was mandated as Sasha mentioned to undertake this endeavor.  It's a true global institution.  Also because the impact of AI is affecting all parts of life which is the mandate of UNESCO.  This is something that we need to take into account on the cultural and all the diversity when we speak about AI, and this is exactly also part of the mandate of UNESCO that is multidisciplinary mandate including culture, education, et cetera.  So this is why.
And then the last reason is because we have more than 30 years, almost 30 years of experience in dealing with ethics of science and technology and impact in the life sciences like bioethics and we have already a number of standard setting instruments out there in the world, which are unique in their kind.  So just to frame why.
And so the ‑‑ and before I start with AI, I will share my slides and I hope I will still see you Sasha with your signs and otherwise, you just go ahead and tell me you have two minutes or something and I will stop on time.
So just to tell you that ‑‑ so you will make ‑‑ you will understand better what I'm going to say, because I'm going to try to stick to a text otherwise my enthusiasm will not allow me to stick to my ten minutes.  So just to let you know that the first ‑‑ this first part of the process is a very independent process, and very inclusive process, because the draft that I'm going to present to you was elaborated first by 24 experts in their individual capacities, appointed by the general director of UNESCO, with a gender balance and with a lot of different backgrounds in disciplines and also in ‑‑ well, basically all the backgrounds that are needed, either from the professional and academic point of view but also if they had experience with private sector, with civil society, et cetera.
Then we had a very wide consultation process, in different mats.  There was an online consultation in which we gathered more than 50,000 comments and then we organized 11 regional partners with UNESCO and we also got a lot of input and we got some inputs from the deliberative workshops organized with MILA.
So I will start now sharing my screen with you, and please let me know if it works.
It's okay? 
>> SASHA RUBEL: Not yet.
>> DAFNA FEINHOLZ: Oh, I already shared my screen.  Let me go back. 
I will make it very quickly otherwise I will do without.  Okay.
>> SASHA RUBEL: Perfect.  We can see your screen.  You can play the slide show. 
>> DAFNA FEINHOLZ: Okay good.  Now I don't ‑‑ okay.  Is that ‑‑ is that fine? 
>> SASHA RUBEL: Yes.
>> DAFNA FEINHOLZ: Great.  Okay.
So artificial intelligence may radically change the world that we live in as we know, but what will really determine and shape what the world would look like is the ethics behind the artificial intelligence.  So it is clear that we need a global normative umbrella that will help us to be truly united and coordinated in our efforts to tackle the digital divide, to eradicate bias and to simulate multi‑stakeholder governance and cooperation and ultimately simply put it to build AI in that works for everyone's benefit.
UNESCO has taken on the challenge, mandated by its Member States as we just said to develop this first global normative instrument in the form of a recommendation of ethics of AI. UNESCO brings together an extensive state of academic institutions, civil society organizations and private sector partners from around the world.
It represents an optimal platform for establishing and promoting a global normative framework for ethics of AI and therefore, has the global legitimacy and unique mandate for these purposes.  UNESCO involves a group of leading experts and it results in a normative and future looking document, that provides an anticipatory framework and offers concrete policy options to emerge the challenges.
It translates to what of ethics into the how of the relevant policy action offering concrete pathways for the realization of the ethical framework of universal values and principles which is what we are trying to discuss in this session.
The recommendation is a normative and valuable because of its global scope, because it has a very strong language, which is one of the things that was the result of the consultations, in ‑‑ and it has an emphasis on the how policy area, and it also offers concrete tools.  And lastly, because it focuses on the entire life of AI, the life cycle of the AI systems which is not always the case in the all the initiatives.
Rather equating ethics to law or human rights or a normative add‑on to technologies they consider ethics as a dynamic basis for the normative evaluation and guidance of AI technologies, referring to human dignity, well‑being and the prevention of harm as a compass, and rooted in the ethics of science and technology.  These recommendation aims to enable to take shared responsibility based on a global and intercultural dialogue.
The recommendation is based on the interrelated set of values, principles and policy actions and while the values inspire the desirable behavior and represents the foundation of principles, the principles impact the values underlying them more concretely so that the values can be more easily operationalized in policy statements and actions.
Foundational values have a role of necessary preconditions for principles to work, and in effect, to ensure ethics of the ethical AI.
The document highlights four search values.  It must be noted that environmental concerns have been deliberately elevated to the level of values and the reasons of an enormous effect and ‑‑ and the reason is the enormous effect of AI technologies have on it, and because it is being neglected elsewhere.
Further, diversity and inclusiveness have also been moved to the level of foundational values to underlying the problem of discrimination and bias, including on the bias of gender, as well as diversity, digital and knowledge device.
The value of living in harmony and peace is a normative notion for this kind of document which brings typically African and Asian approaches to the table, balancing out the prevalent agenda.
There are ten principles in accordance with which all actions must be undertaken.  Although many of these principles are similar in the name to the ones identified in other documents, their substance is enhanced by a UNESCO approach.  Although many of the documents provide for a principle of the trustworthiness, in this recommendation, it has been framed as an outcome of the operationalizations all the principles and the proposed policy actions are all directed by promoting trustworthiness on most stages of the AI life cycle.
Critically, the recommendation is not meant to be a beer declaration of values and principles, rather it is being developed as a powerful and transformative framework that operationalizes these values through impact oriented and normative impacts within ten policy areas.  The approach through which these actions are to be implemented at the national level is to pluralistic, multidisciplinary and multicultural and multi‑stakeholder.
The recommendation also takes a firm stance on some of the yet unresolved issues, for example, ethical and legal responsibility.  It can be attributed to natural and legal persons.  Gender equality, features prominently in the recommendation.  It is also one of UNESCO's two priorities.  We are concerned that it's in the digital industries including the AI systems where one of the most acute gender disparities persist.
Among the innovative elements of recommendation are the capacity building instruments to help countries step into the power of AI.  These instruments include the AI readiness evaluation tools for developing custom tailored national AI strategies and plans of action.  The capacity building initiatives also include advanced ethical impact assessment tools and due diligence and oversight mechanisms.
These instruments will be designed by UNESCO in a collaborative effort all over the house and involving also other partners to help countries identifying ethical impact, in particular on the rights of women and girls, vulnerable and marginalized groups, labor rights and the environmental systems.
As you can see, and I don't know if I changed my ‑‑ yes.  I don't know where I am.
As you can see the recommendation ‑‑ so as you can see the recommendation represents a comprehensive ethical framework that encompasses the full spectrum of ethical, from inclusivity, fairness, equality and nondiscrimination.  And it does so my maintaining focus on all stages of AI life cycle.  This is crucial because often bias and discrimination manifested downstream as experienced by the users is the product of the structural inequalities and exclusion that is upstream, such as the lack of diversity in the management or the technical teams.
So our aim and interest is ensuring all the work for that AI works for everyone's benefit, converged with those of other participants of this forum.  So either for ‑‑ we want very much to learn about your ideas and discuss how might this work further and to continue the conversations that we have already started bilaterally in other ‑‑ in other opportunities.
Thank you very much for this.
>> SASHA RUBEL: Thank you, Dafna, for that very comprehensive presentation of the draft recommendation and also the process and, again, thank you to you and your team, Tee‑Wee, maxim and others for all of their cooperation in the field of UNESCO.  And we have in the fame work of the multi‑stakeholder process where input was solicited in into the draft recommendation.  Thank you to all the colleagues here today would have contributed and particularly continue to cooperation very closely, notably our colleagues and friends from the Council of Europe and the OECD who respectively had their own processes for developing or have developed principles and frameworks and standards in this field, as well as the IEEE and IEC, and trust going forward.
The other Clara Neppel in prevent of the IGF mentioned something that comes from the European Commission's conception which is this idea of ecosystems of the trust which is essential to ensure that we cooperate and move forward with the development and translation into practice of responsible AI.
So Dafna mentioned this idea of AI ethics and translating practice into principle and I can think of no better visual image right now than Sally Radwan from the government of Egypt who is currently in a car and will be speaking to you from a car going to a ministerial meeting to talk about the implementation of ethical AI.  So Sally, welcome and very happy to have you here with us in transition from moving from principles into practice, which, again, visually represents this commitment of this panel here today and our work all together more broadly.
Sally, you are not only an advisor to the minister for AI in Egypt but a key actor in the Working Group of the African Union, as well as one of the experts of the ad hoc expert group of UNESCO, presenting what Dafna just presented.  As someone who works on the national and regional and international level all at once, what do you see as the main challenges that exist in translating ethical principles into practice?
And what in your opinion are some mechanisms and tools that are needed to translate principles from the international to the regional and national level?  Please, Sally.
>> SALLY RADWAN: Thank you, Sasha.  I will try very quickly before I get ambushed here and get dragged into the meeting.  I think obviously the main issue is achieving consensus that on something that is generic enough for everyone to agree on, but yet specific enough to still be relevant and possible to implement on the ground.
And the truth is these are two mutually exclusive requirements.  So what ends up happening in most of these recommendations is you keep watering down the language, it becomes too vague and, you know, to be of any kind of practical use.  And for me, the key elements here are relevance and applicability.  For example, we need to acknowledge that there are huge differences between, say ‑‑ I like to pick on my Finnish friends because they are always so nice.  So if we compare Finland, talking about capacity building for AI and Egypt talking about capacity building for AI.
On one side, you have a country with a population of 5.5 million people with 100% literacy rate, and practically everyone has graduated high school.  On the other hand, you have 100 million people, only 70% of whom are literate, according to official figures and we are not even talking about digital literacy.  So when you talk about ‑‑ so you can't set a metric like we need to educate 1% of the population on AI and have it be prevalent worldwide.
If Finland, you are talking about 50,000 people, in Egypt, you are talking about 1 million.  And before I teach them in AI in Egypt, I have to teach them how to read and write and digital skills and then teach them AI.  So the starting points are very, very different.  And it's impossible to Celt a global measure that is equally applicable for everyone.
In addition, of course, budgets, education budgets, for example in a country like Egypt are limited.  So what do you do?  Do you shift budges from basic education to AI?  Let alone AI ethics?  It's a tough call to make for any decision making.
And then secondly, whose ethical standards do you employ?  Of course, there are things that we can all agree on, but there are also nuances across cultures and across political systems.  So in some countries, we have more of social equality approach being things like safety nets for employees at risk are highly important, whereas, in more capitalist‑minded countries, the stance will be that you are stifling innovation and entrepreneurship.
So how do you reconcile the two?  And also applicability in terms of, for example, asking governments to put in place laws and regulations for ethical stewardship of AI, for example.  Some countries won't even have the legal and legislative frameworks to do that.  And many, many other examples.
And that's why I think when drafting the UNESCO recommendation, it was important to acknowledge the differences between countries, situations and needs and starting points and to propose a tool for making the recommendation relevant and implementable and that's the assessment tool that we are proposing.  It identifies ways in which UNESCO or other organizations or countries working together can help to bridge those gaps.
We realize this is a bold step, but we are hopeful that Member States will see it the same way and want to cooperate with us to ensure that this recommendation gets implemented.
Finally, I would just like to say in terms of aligning view points that what we found is that a bottoms up approach really works.  For example within the AI Working Group in Africa and in the Arab League one hasn't started yet but in the African one, we discussed different points that could form a potential African stance on AI, and we used that input in the UNESCO discussions which I think help present a somewhat unified front.  This was just very experimental and informal, but I think if we do more of that, it will really help in terms of the final negotiation of these recommendations because then you are potentially trying to reconcile six different voices in the case of UNESCO instead of 193.
So that's all I have to say for this morning.  Thank you again very much and sorry about the abruptness of everything and eager to listen to the rest of the speeches.  Thank you very much.
>> SASHA RUBEL: Thank you very much, Sally, for starting this conversation off with such concrete recommendations and particularly, the need to change our gaze as it concerns ethical and responsibility AI and stifling entrepreneurship and the need for how we can have a human centered and ethical artificial intelligence which could not stifle entrepreneurship but there's a lot of advocacy and the need for legal frameworks at the national level, as well as a bottom up approach that principles should be driven by practice.
Please don't apologize for being in a car.  I think it's a perfect image to start off our conversation because we are not sitting behind our desks talking about this.  We are doing this in action and everyone around the table is doing this in action.
Speaking of action, I'm happy to turn down to Jan Kleijssen of the Council of Europe and I would like to recognize the great recommendation from Jan to standard setting process and the affiliation with UNESCO.
There have been a lot of exciting they adopted seven reports concerning the impact of AI applications and various fields.  So these reports focused on among other areas the need for democratic governance of AI, the role of AI in policing and criminal justice systems, preventing discrimination caused by AI, and ethical and legal frameworks for the research and the development of neuro technology.
The work specifically to develop a legally index‑related binding instrument was supported by PACE which underlined that the instrument should ensure that AI‑based technologies comply with the Council of Europe standard and ethical principles such as transparency, fairness, security, and privacy.
Can you tell us what needs to be done to effectively build institutional capacities that govern AI at the heart of the Council of Europe's work?
>> JAN KLEIJSSEN: Thank you very much.  Good morning, good morning, everyone.  I hope you can hear me.  Does this work?  Yes?
>> SASHA RUBEL: Perfect.
>> JAN KLEIJSSEN: Good.  Very good.  Thank you very much for this opportunity and very interesting to be listening to the presentations.
The Council of Europe, perhaps I set out in two words what PACE and the Council of Europe means.  The Council of Europe is an international organization in Strasbourg which has 47 Member States and its mission is to promote human rights, Rule of law and democracy.  We do this through setting legal standards, many had of them binding.  We are at the origin of some 200 international treaties and a variety of fields from human rights to data protection, to corruption and fight against corruption, obviously, protection of children, fighting domestic violence, just to name a few.
And also dealing with technologies.  Already in 1981, the Council of Europe, had the mother of GDPR and we have the only legal, Budapest treaty, just to position us.  The organization is made up of governments but it is also ‑‑ it has a body which is call a parliament assembly, the PACE which you kindly referred to which is made up of national parliamentarians.  They sit in their national parliaments and then five or six times come to Strasbourg for sessions and adopt recommendations which often lead to treaties.
In fact, of the 200 treaties that the Council of Europe has, including ones in domestic violence, or the fight against the sexual exploitation of children, or data protection, they all found their origins in the parliamentary assembly, just to explain our business model, if you like.
The text which you refer you are indeed very, very relevant to the work of the Council of Europe in artificial intelligence.  We are at the moment working in two ‑‑ on two parallel tracks.
On the one hand, we are trying to establish a global legal framework, and, again, that sounds like jargon.  I actually hope it will be a treaty, a convention, with general principles that should apply to all forms of AI, are or users of AI, that directly have an impact on human rights rule of law and democracy and there are, of course, quite a few uses of AI, applications of AI that do so.  Not all, but a number of them do, and therefore also constitute a risk to this.
And CAHAI, which you kindly mentioned is looking at this together with our partners because you said what can we do to ensure that we have the human ‑‑ the human resources, the capacities, one of them is, of course, to team up with others and we're very happy to have UNESCO, OECD, and the European Union, all working with the Council of Europe to see whether it's possible and then how to establish this treaty.  The answer to whether it's possible should be given at the end of the year, if it is a yes, which I strongly hope, we will start negotiations as of the beginning of next year.
So it's all getting there fairly quickly and, of course, we will be basing ourselves to a large extent on the work also carried out and was just presented, for instance, by UNESCO, but also by the OECD and by the European Commission and others.
But we take it to a legal ‑‑ to legally binding standards, and I think that's something that perhaps unique contribution of the Council of Europe to translate the ethical standards which have been very carefully prepared by many of our partners into a number of legally binding standards which means that governments will be ‑‑ can be held to account that it's not just a commitment, that it's actually an obligation.
That on CAHAI, and in addition to CAHAI, the second is the criminal law aspects of AI, and if you ask me what is criminal law has to do with AI, think about self‑driving cars.  Judges and a number of countries already had to decide on cases for accidents were caused by automated driving systems.  And there is at the moment no international legal standard ‑‑ in fact, there are very few national legal standards on the specific criminal law aspects of AI.  And this very week, in fact, yesterday, we had a specific committee of experts on criminal law decided to pursue work on a binding legal instrument.  So, again, here a treaty but then a specific one on the criminal law aspects of AI.
A number of you may have also heard of the work on the AI in judicial systems which was prepared by the Council of Europe.  That is not a treaty.  That's a recommendation, but it was drafted by professionals, working in a judiciary to guide them as regards very complicated questions to what extent can you delegate to automated decision making to algorithm, if you like, decisions, that traditionally are taken, for instance by judges or prosecutors.  That raises a lot of ethical issues.
It raises a lot of legal issues, of course, and the charge that was developed helps to provide guidance there.
And a number of other fields we will also be ‑‑ be looking at the translation of the general principles into ‑‑ into specific fields.
As regards to give you also some concrete examples, what we think is important for the ‑‑ for this development, human rights impact assessment prior to rolling out an AI application.  If governments did e side to delegate to machines what is normally done by humans, we think it's important that an assessment is made of the impact that would have on the citizen.
A second is the question of certification and IEEE are the expert in certification and I look very much forward to Clara's thoughts about this.  But we think that certification of algorithms and AI systems is an important issue.
And thirdly, an example I would like to give is when you go to see a doctor, you trust that this doctor has actually finished his medical studies, that he actually is qualified to examine you or operate on you.  The same goes for pilots, when you take a plane, you would like the pilot to be a qualified pilot to have done his flight school.  Yet we trust more and more also AI applications who govern our lives and have huge impacts on what we do.  And therefore, the question arises should we not also give careful thought to the training and the qualification of professionals who design, develop and apply AI systems especially to those AI systems which have a huge impact on our lives because you mentioned human resources that also is a question we will be ‑‑ we will be looking at.
I leave it at that and I look forward to taking part in the rest of the discussion.  Thank you so much.
>> SASHA RUBEL: Thank you very much, Jan, for that overview of the very important work of the Council of Europe and UNESCO looks forward to cooperating with you both in the development and the deployment of the tools that you have mentioned, including the human rights impact assessment, but I would also like to ink that the council of 50 you are rope for their cooperation and the framework of our joint work in training the judiciary on this subject specifically, and on particularly predictive justice and artificial intelligence.  So we look forward to that cooperation going forward, building the capacity of judges here.  It really represents what we believe at UNESCO that the question is not only sharing for example, and training the judiciary in digital literacy but training the technical community on the ethical aspects and we thank you for your cooperation in that field.
I would like to turn to Karine Perset from the OECD with whom we have the pleasure of working with her and her team for several years now, both in supporting their OECD policy observatory but also the OECD principles on artificial intelligence.  Karine, in May of 2019, OECD principles on AI, they published a book that looks at the technical, economic and government landscapes and highlights key policy questions.  Then in November of 2019, you guys are very active, the OECD a working paper "Hello World" that's used in the public sector.
Shortly after in February, the AI policy observatory was launched to provide resources to policymakers and at the same time the OECD AI network of experts which was also launched which has Working Groups dedicated to different aspects of AI policy.  Specifically, one of these Working Groups is dedicated to tools on guidance on values based AI principles and another specifically on implementation guidance on national policies.
Can you tell us a little bit more about the outputs of these Working Groups and specifically, how they support Member States priorities to facilitate trustworthy and responsible AI policies?
Karine, over to you.
>> KARINE PERSET: Sure.  Hello to everyone, and thank you very much for inviting the OECD today.  So I would just like to.  First congratulate UNESCO and Dafna and Sasha for all the work you have done so far which is promising to be accompanying the UNESCO principles with the concrete implementation guidance and your focus on capacity building tools is really critical also.
So back to your questions, I will give you just a brief overview first of the AI ecosystem we have on building at the OECD with our partners, and an image is worth a thousand words.  This is not the simplest, so I will just illustrate what I'm talking about with a slide.  I don't know if you can see it.
>> SASHA RUBEL: Yes, perfect.
>> KARINE PERSET: Okay.  Great.
So as you mentioned, the AI principles that we ‑‑ that were adopted in May of 2019, those are 10 principles that are really at the core of our work.  That's the circle ‑‑ the red circle in the middle of the chart.  And those were also used in the G‑20AI principles in June of 2019.  So those kind of are the core of our work.
And then we launched the OECD AI policy observatory.  That's the multiculture around the AI principles.  That's not a group but an online platform that we launched in February of 2020, as you said, to provide resources to policymakers and anyone interested on, one, implementing the principles; two, AI in different policy areas from agriculture to text or ‑‑ or education or SME policy, et cetera; three, trends in data.  That's a really strong focus for the OECD, trying to find the evidence base and trying to assess what's going on, where, how fast, how fast is it developing and what's happening, what's happening on the job market front, what's happening in research, et cetera; and four, data on national AI policies and on stakeholder initiatives.
And so the next circle on the left is what you mentioned is the OECD network of experts on AI, that we call ONE AI.  And it's really structured guidance and good practices on these 10 principles and it's doing that with three Working Groups that I will mention in a minute.  But I just wanted to mention because this is fairly new.  The global partnership on AI was launched in June of 2019.  This is under the leadership of France and Canada, two advanced ‑‑ the group aims to advance cutting edge research and pilot projects on AI priorities, and we are hosting part of it Secretariat.  That's a complimentary stream of work that we're also engaged in.
And lastly at the bottom, is the OECD global parliamentary group, which is a large network of legislators around the world who are working on A I.  They are working with the Council of Europe and the European Parliament very closely to form a legislative hub and learning resources for legislators.
So it's really important our participation in these critical and complimentary initiatives some of which UNESCO's initiative, in particular is ‑‑ and the Council of Europe's are particularly important and the European Commission.  And I would like to stress those.
And I think it's important to say like Sasha pointed out, that there are really strong linkages between all of these initiatives that have really similar objectives, but come from different, you know, organizations with different mandates, and these different ‑‑ different organizations bring different ‑‑ very different memberships and different strengths to the table but we are all moving in the same direction.
Now to just move to the ‑‑ the OECD's work on policies for AI.  That is a multi‑stakeholder work that focuses on really three main areas.  The first priority and that's on the left is really ‑‑ it's a classification framework.  It sounds boring, but it's actually pretty fascinating.  This is a framework to help policymakers assess what types of AI systems, raise what type of policy issues, by using four core dimensions.
The context in which the AI system, is that's the sector, that's critical nature or not of a sector.  That's the risk to human rights, to the risk to well‑being.  The second dimension is the data and the input, the data and the input and how the data are collected and what they are, and what type of data, domains, et cetera.  The third is AI model itself and the last is the task and the output of the AI system.  So based on those four core dimensions we are coming one a framework that we think can basically identify really key policy considerations and can help policymakers assess the risks and the opportunities of specific types of AI systems, at a much more granular level.
So the second Working Group which is on the top right, developing tools for AI, that's really identifying tools that can help decision makers, actors, policymakers implement trust worthy AI and to do that we have leveraged what is already taking place.  So kind of ‑‑ it's first stock taking.  We have distinguished different types of tools.  First, process-based approaches, and so this is like corporate governance tools or risk management approaches.  The second type of tools are the technical approaches and here these are standards and tools for bias detection and explainable AI and research program and IEEE has a lot of initiative in this category.  The third is education and capacity building approaches and obviously UNESCO's work is critical nor this type.  Work.
We think not one tool is enough.  We need all of them depending on the circumstance, the context.
At the bottom right, is developing practical guidance on national AI policies including things like governance of AI systems at the national level, and how our country is doing that, and what seems to be working well, and we're taking a deep dive into over 60 countries, what those countries are doing through the working group, and looking at AI R&D policies and compute and software and governance schemes and test beds skills and labor markets are a big focus as is international cooperation.
So with that, thank you very much for ‑‑ I hope I didn't go over for your attention.
>> SASHA RUBEL: Thank you very much, Karine for that overview.  I don't think anybody on this call or on the other side of the screen participating thinks classification systems are boring.  So thank you very much for that the exciting work that the OECD is doing.
If people are not aware of the AI wonk coordinated by the OECD, I invite you to follow it, where it's regrouping a lot of very exciting thought leaders, thinking about artificial intelligence and we are also very happy to be contributing to that online as well and thank you to your team.  Luis, Laura and many others with whom we have the pleasure of working closely and for highlighting the fact that we are very complimentary in our mandates.  I think this is something that we are saying to our Member States that there's a misconception, that we are in competition but we are complimentary and working together in our respective mandates to reinforce each other, but also to build on each other's work.  So thank you for that spirit of cooperation here today with the OECD and, of course also with the Council of Europe, the ICC and the IEEE and many others.
We talk a lot about translating principles to practice but one of the key stakeholders responsible for translating these principles into practice is not only public sector but also the private sector and I'm happy to have Sophie Peresson here with us today.  In cooperation with UNESCO and other partners, the ICC had principles to action.  It focused specifically on the role of the private sector in the framework of developments of the ethical AI.  From this conversation what are some of the best practices of private sector counterparts that have developed ethical guidelines for their companies in line with the existing frameworks and standards?  In your opinion what are some of the barriers to adoptions of principles and guidelines, as well as potential incentives or motivators that would encourage more wide spread adoption or also help unify some of these recommendations globally and ensure that they are translated into practice?
>> SOPHIE PERESSON: Thank you very much, Sasha.  It is great to be here.  Thank you for the invitation.  Good morning and good afternoon, and good evening, I work at the international chamber of commerce.  For those of you who don't know us, we are the voice of business.  We represent 45 million businesses across the world, north and south, multinationals to SMEs.  We have an established track record in this area.
We have been advocating for the potential digital technologies to act as a catalyst for accelerated implement of the unit sustainable development goals and for that we have observer status at the UN.
The importance of this agenda and the foundational notion this cannot be underestimated in the context of the COVID pandemic, both in terms of containing the pandemic enabling a systemic economic rebuild.  We are committed to working on AI, and we acknowledge the opportunities and the challenges that come with that.
AI technologies are transforming all sectors.  Economy, creating new opportunities for productivity gains and economic growth.  Profoundly changing the R&D life cycle by significantly accelerating R&D which I think you will agree is critical when it comes to the clinical trial process to develop a COVID‑19 vaccine.
But like any transformative technology, it's creating new challenges for society, particularly around the role of human agency, transparency and inclusivity.  What is our response to this as Sasha is asking me this very easy question today.  Thank you for that.
Well, we are responding by developing a foundational paper on human centric and trustworthy AI, partnering with Oxford University.  This project is seeking to develop a set of principles supported by industry case studies and best practice examples that will help business implement ethical technologies.  Concretely, how are we going about this we are gathering information to form collective business positions among the international chambers of commerces membership which is made of national chambers across the world.
We want to bring to the table and gather perspectives from actors just starting out in the space, especially in developing countries, SMEs, and groups such as women and minority‑led businesses.
We want to demonstrate through case studies how business around the world already active in the field of AI are implementing the principles.  And we want to, of course ‑‑ and this is key, identify both challenges faced, but also good practices and applicable solutions on the implementation of principles give than we have UN observer status and we work with many international organizations and regional organizations that are here on this panel and in this ecosystem, we want to inform our advocacy efforts in the international and regional fora.
Ultimately, we aim to bring the principles to life through studies, that are taken from diverse sectors and geographical locations, the objective is to build an evidence‑based that goes beyond policy statements.
So Sasha, you asked me the question of what are some of the barriers to adopting some AI principles.  This is obviously a complex question.  I think Sally brought it to life today, we ‑‑ I'm going to provide you with a relatively general question because unfortunately I don't have the opportunity to get very granular.  According to our findings, policy and regulatory discussions concerning AI have either been subject to sector‑specific considerations and here I have in mind healthcare and finance, or issue specific, namely data protection, cybersecurity and antidiscrimination laws and guidelines and establishing our policy frameworks.
Arguably one of the barriers to the adoption of AI principles and guidelines could reside in the plethora of initiatives in this space.
Given that there are currently an increasing number of policy initiatives, spearheaded by either governments or coalition of governments international organizations, this could lead to regulatory gaps or create inconsistent or misaligned compliance obligations.  This could also negatively impact companies especially when it comes to the role and obligations in implementing such guidelines.  We should not underestimate the complexity of navigating through these different Molly is frameworks.
Business has acquired knowledge and gone through challenges that come with AI implementation along the way.  We believe that the international chambers of commerce' principles have the potential of supporting the entire business community to good practical guidance and for businesses to learn from one another.
We feel we need to create a common language, public sector needs to work with the business community to develop and further refine AI principles that the business communities subscribes to.
To reach the best end result, the policy initiatives being developed should be discussed in further refined in partnership with the business community, which is at the front‑line of implementation and practical applications on a daily basis.
There's a need for unifying voice to create a policy environment at the international level to foster trust in and adoption of trustworthy and rights‑based AI.  To continue to fuel innovation and increase the societal and the economic benefits of AI, while mitigating harm, such policy environments must be flexible, human centric and globally compatible and market driven.
And I would like to just take an opportunity ‑‑ the time to pause and to thank UNESCO, all of why you are colleagues, Sasha, Dafna, and the others who are online for including us, indeed, in this exercise that you have, which is looking at the drafting of the recommendation, the capacity building dimension which we can't underline enough, and to include the business voice here.
We feel we have a unique opportunity to convene the business worldwide, to provide a common private sector perspective and gather input from people already involved in this space and bring to the table would have not been heard, especially from the global south.  We want to gather the perspective from a global unified aspect.
If I could add one other barrier or hurdle that we could also think about, is that while business is spearheading such developments, in the field of AI, we know that not all business is equal here.  If you look at SMEs, obviously, they don't have the same type of resources to develop and to engage on this front, and that's why I feel that the capacity building dimension that you are developing at UNESCO and in other fora will be absolutely critical on this front.
Thank you so much for your tune.
>> SASHA RUBEL: I love your emphasis on needing to develop a common language but also highlight some of the innovation and work coming out of the innovation south.  Two of the colleagues that your colleague and you highlighted from the pre‑event that we had yesterday, which particularly struck me, is this idea that just because it's technologically feasible doesn't mean we should do it and secondly, that we need to stop speed dating between international and regional organizations and the private sector but instead invest in long‑term, perhaps not monogamous, but long‑term relationships between international and regional organizations and counterparts from the private sector.  So this is something that I take away in building these ecosystems of trust is the need to inscribe these cooperations in the long‑term both between international and regional organizations but also the private sector.
I would like to turn now to Leonard Bouchet from the EBU.  The AI and the data initiative of the European Broadcasting Union for which you are a chair has been convening a Working Group of broadcasters to see how to translate values of public service including diversity and accountability into AI deployment into the media sector.
You have been working to develop case studies and best practices and practical guidelines to translate ethical principles into practice such as for example, the BBC check list of ethical machine learning to support accountability.  Can you tell us a little bit more about some of these best practices you have identified in the media sector which is one of the core stakeholder groups of our work at UNESCO and what lessons can be drawn from them to ensure that principles are translated into practice? 
>> LEONARD BOUCHET: Yes, I can.  I can try at least.
What we have learned ‑‑ you have mentioned one of the main thing I want to talk about is the great work of our colleagues from the BBC.  They have done ‑‑ they have done, I think, great work of putting what are their core values as media into principles for machine learning.  I think there are several interesting things about that to mention.
First is that they actually didn't use AI wording anywhere in this principle.  They just used machine learning engines principles and that's it.  And that's interesting to me, because actually, in the field right now, that's what we are really experiencing.  That's ‑‑ that's all the real tools everyone is using now and that are really trending.  It's, of course, not the raw feel of AI.  I have think one of the lessons that we have learned when you bind the principles that actually use, and then it goes to them more.
And the other important and interesting lesson, I think, that they have learned in that ‑‑ in that process, is that they really used their values, the value and the ethics a public service media and they try to implement this type of principle into the new tools and new technology field.
And that's, I think, what makes this principle quite strong, quite efficient and quite practical to be implemented elsewhere in order of public media service sectors.
So they have made it very specific and according to ‑‑ it also resonates with one of the questions in the Q&A session here today.  According to what they have done in terms of avoiding biases, for the moment, honestly, I think ‑‑ I would love to share lesson learned and best practice about how to avoid biases in machine learning systems right now.  But actually, I can't, because we are all facing this more as a challenge.  It's really a challenge.  It's a real one.  We are now starting to discover it and trying different ways of trying to circumvent around this challenge, but for the most, honestly, technically speaking, it's really a hard one.
And I don't really have the answer on how we will tackle and succeed this challenge.  The only path I can see right now amongst the members of the EBU we are talking.  We are talking about sharing what we are do.  We are talking about integrating what others do and the hardest thing that we try to do is also try to collaborate, to collaborate among the institutions and with the private sectors and the scientists and also with the general public and also within the EBU and people from the south or anywhere in the world, even though we are Europe brand organization, we love to exchange also with others with different perspectives.
And in my opinion, as far as I understand the field, I think it's one the only way that we can think about tackling this challenge of how to really avoid diversity biases in this kind of systems.
A lot of things I have seen in the chat and if you allow me, Sasha, I would also like to answer a bit that, is how can we actually also make people from communities who do not have access to digital word benefit from the artificial intelligence techniques.
Well, that's also a very interesting point.  I take that back to ‑‑ to the ‑‑ to the community I have the pleasure to be a head of.  One thing I want to mention in that field is that that challenge, we also have to maybe not make a guidance or say principle, but to have more investment to develop techniques to lower the barrier of energy needed to make these tools one.  Now, the amount of energy needed to do proper machine learning things to get proper results is really quite high and we have to find new ways to do that with low energy staff and, of course, that will ‑‑ well, it allows us to deploy these tools in more context, in more context where we are not as technical as agile as we can see in Europe.
I don't know if that is what you asked Sasha, but that's what I can say at this stage.
>> SASHA RUBEL: Thank you very much.  And thank you for placing the emphasis on the need for collaboration, both within the media sector but also beyond.  And for also raising something that is central to the work of UNESCO on the work of artificial intelligence which is the question on the amount of energy needed and the relationship between AI and the environment and we are exploring both in the framework of our recommendation, but also in the framework of foresight with regards to what the AI of tomorrow will look like and its impact on climate change.  And I'm very happy now to turn to Benjamin Prud'homme who is from the Quebec institute of artificial intelligence and is working with us specifically on foresight related to emerging issues in artificial intelligence.
Benjamin, in 2017, the government of Canada appointed CFAR to develop and lead the panelist Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy, worth $125 million, it is the world's first national AI strategy with an objective to translate AI research discoveries into applications for the public and private sectors leading to socioeconomic benefits.
The Quebec Institute for Artificial Intelligence, also known as MILA have supported UNESCO's work on AI, notably through the open dialogue on AI ethics to contribute to the UNESCO recommendation on the ethics of AI and in cooperation, of course with Algora Labs and the University of Montreal.  You are the world's largest academic research center in deep learning and MILA has ensured social influence and continued to stimulating a democratic dialogue not only on the importance of AI but the responsible development.
This is also hosted by MILA.  I would be curious to hear from your perspective, what is the role specifically of academia and research institutions in ensuring principles are also translated into practice and that capacities of all stakeholder groups are built so they are equipped intellectually to do so?
>> BENJAMIN PRUD'HOMME: Yes, thank you, Sasha.  It's a very large question with very limited time, and knowing academia is not always the best at being concise, I will nevertheless give it my best shot.  So the first thing that I would say ‑‑ first thank you for the introduction.
The first thing I would say is AI is very specific in the sense that industry is a big player, including in fundamental research.  And so I just want to narrow ‑‑ like, or mention that I will be focusing more on the university research center front of things and less so on the ‑‑ when the fundamental research to integrate with an industry.
So I think the role of acting is both essential yet limited.  It's essential because academia in all disciplines including in AI is always very important both at the inception stages, fundamental applied research but also as watchdog, as the research kind of, you know, goes further within the life cycle, and then we kind of come back and say, what have you been doing with what we have produced?
Also, AI is very young.  If you, you know, position it in comparison to many other disciplines and so a lot of it is still at the inception stages, sorry, and therefore, a lot of it is still within universities for research centers and so that increases how important it is for academia to be thinking about this.
It's also limited because academia, is one of the many stakeholders life cycle.  I want to pivot the question towards how can academia fill that role or that responsibility and I think there's many ways to do so.  I listed five but there's really ‑‑ I kind of wanted to put those on the table and have us discuss them.
The first thing is when you are doing fundamental research, you should ‑‑ whether it's research oriented towards, you know, climate change or very, very fundamental research on deep learning and so on, we should always be very aware of both epistemology and constantly ask myself why am I doing this research and how should I be doing it.  The second piece is you should make ‑‑ as a professor, you should make ethics as part of your AI teaching.  You have a wonderful opportunity to be speaking to everyone who is going to then be going to governments and to ‑‑ and to industry and you have the privilege of instilling in these people the notion that ethics is not separable from AI, and actually if you want to be doing good AI, even if it's fundamental research in A I., you need to be doing it ethically.
I think the third space is applied research, where we can actually be a keep player in developing practical tools.  And so you know, the recommendation that UNESCO is putting forward, talks about transparency, explainability, biases, but we're going to need tools to measure these, to audit these and we can also be key players in developing those.
The third ‑‑ of the fourth one, sorry is one that's very dear to me because of my human rights background, but you need to be embodying those principles in practice.  It impacts the knowledge you create.  And so you want diversity and inclusion to make sense.  You need to hire women, indigenous people, People of Color.  You want to do ‑‑ to help develop capacity, you need to partner up with emerging countries and universities.  You want literacy and you need to connect with civil society and citizens and we have had, you know, the chance to do it via the open dialogue with UNESCO, and thank you for the opportunity.
And the last one that is very dear to me we need to partially initially remove that from the shoulders of individual professors but to the institutional how can I as the director of MILA create an institutional culture that makes it very clear that ethics is front and center?  I can ‑‑ you know, I can put mandatory courses.  I can devote grants to that research.  I can choose professors and then promote professors who put that at the center of their work.  I can have ethical committees and so I know that my time is now done, I believe.  But basically these are practical ways in which we should be advancing ethics in AI institutions and I think that the key to that is always reminding ourselves that ethics is ‑‑ it's an essential part.  It's not ‑‑ it's not possible to disassociate but then we need to look at what we are, and not only what we are producing.  We need to be embodying those principles because that creates impactful knowledge.
I would really turn it back to you and thank you for your work both on the recommendation and for holding this panel.
>> SASHA RUBEL: Thank you very much, Benjamin.  I would like to thank you and all the panelists for responding despite the challenges to hard questions.  The questions are hard on purpose because I think that it's also a way to show how we are sitting in this uncomfortable and creative and iterative space and finding solutions together through this kind of dialogue.  So thank you for accepting those hard questions but also for being so concrete in your proposals.
I'm thrilled to have academia on this panel, also just so that we can have the word epistemology on this panel.  But also your emphasis on this need for ethics by design, and diversity and inclusion, which is really at the heart of you are work at UNESCO and one of the reasons why we appreciate our cooperation with MILA is how no involve more women, indigenous communities, minority and disabled groups, more in codeveloping the future of AI and institutionalizing this type of approach by ethics by design.  Thank you very much for your concrete proposals and your cooperation.
I would like to turn now to Jed Horner.  Jed, you are a part of standards Australia which is a member body of the ISO, and one the things that ISO is perpetually underlining is how AI presents new and unique challenges specifically to ethics.  No ethics systems that are leveraging AI can be implemented by many different users and different ways across various application verticals, from healthcare to mobility, with completely different requirements and sometimes, in fact, also with markets and regional differences as well.
To address this type of diversity, the ISO and the electrotechnical commission launched the will range of work items through their joint technical subcommittee, dedicated to AI, with 47 participating member countries including Australia, the Working Group on trustworthiness also worked to collect and identify the ethical and societal considerations related to AI, linking back to trust worthiness projects the ISO is working on.
You also developed a technical report, which highlights the specifics of ethics and societal concerns in relation to other more generic ongoing projects of trustworthiness, risk management and bias among other issues.
How, Jed, does this work provide guidance to other ISO and IEC technical committees developing standards for domain specific applications that use AI and in your opinion, what are the capacity gaps you have identified and what do you think could be done to address this? 
>> JED HORNER: Thanks so much.  Good evening to everyone else in my neck of the woods, to those Australians staying up for this panel.  I think a lot of you Europeans are probably waking up for it as well.  It's great to be with you all as well tonight.  You did mention the work of ISO SC42 and JC1, I would preface saying it has 47 participating member bodies including countries which is really fantastic to see.  So broad reaching in terms of the reach it has across countries and also corporations as well.  You mentioned Working Group three which as you alluded to Sasha and you nailed it, absolutely it's a committee.  It's work going on across AI what are the salient ethical rights concerns and human rights concerns and how did it map to the work that we are doing at the technical level, not just in the committee, but broadly across the ISO community.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-of23-eu-delegation-to-the-igf-the-youth-igf^^

>> YULIYA MORENETS: The majority of us have our mind on the COVID crisis.  What you think about youth and digital, quite often, you think about technical solutions, about innovation, but what we would like to achieve today, and to focus on is the role of young people, in youth, of the development of the policies, of standards, and of course, of legal aspects and the role of young people in cyber.  We have a role to play in digital cooperation but making the digital transformation of our societies faster and easier.  They have a role to play as elderly people, as executives, as, of course, women and men, and all people that compose our society.
But young ‑‑ we would like to have the direct dialogues who take the decisions for their countries, for their regions, for their companies and councils and young activists would try to make things useful ‑‑ useful things for data development of our countries and during this COVID crisis.
My name is Yuliya Morenets, and pleased and honored to be joined by our distinguished guests.  We have the minister, Dr. Sidi Ould Salem, who is the porte‑parole of the government of Mauritania.  Please be welcomed.  I will be switching now in French.  So to welcome those.  You have the translation in the chat room.  Mr. Minister, merci.
(Awaiting English translation).
We have with us as well ‑‑ I'm switching to English for ‑‑ and we have with us Bocar Ba who is with SAMENA Telecommunications Council.  It's the council it's the term says, of different telecom companies based in the Middle East, if I'm not mistaken, Bocar Ba.  So we will be discussing their role of the Telecom Sector, which is quite important in empowering young people for their ‑‑ in the innovation and also in ‑‑ in the activism to help during this crisis, COVID situation.  We do know that the ITU, the specialized ITU agency of the United Nations has as one of their strong strategic priorities the empowerment of young people.
So it will be interesting to discuss with the Bocar Ba in a while and thank you for joining us.
We have with us Casper Klynge, the vice president of Microsoft Corporation.  It's always nice to have Casper Klynge to with us.  Thank you so much, Casper Klynge, you are also the former diplomat and actually the former first ever diplomat and ambassador.
We have with us Professor Rolf Weber from Zurich University working on international law.  Thank you, professor, on joining us.  And we work on the artificial aspect of blockchain and one we say blockchain and artificial intelligence, we immediately think about young people and innovators.  So we'll be very ‑‑ we will have a lot to learn from you, as well on these aspects and thank you for joining us today.
We have with us the representatives of the youth IGFs and different youth committees present in our studios as well.
So I would like to welcome them, and also to remind that, please, you can put your questions and your comments in the chatroom.  We have also the livestream on the United Nations channel, YouTube channel.  So you can put your questions and comments there as well, as well as on our Facebook page of the global youth IGF.
So please be welcome.  Before we start this conversation between the executives and the young leaders, I would like to bring a very strong message, video message to you that was sent to us by the UN Undersecretary General Fabrizio Hochschild who is not here with us today physically because it's night time in New York, but I would like to propose you to follow me for this message and then we will be back for our discussion.
Let's go.
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Warm wishes to you from New York.  It's great to be able to contribute to this session.  You have so much more interesting things to say than I.  So I really will be very brief.  I thought the framing the subject was really quite curious.  I was told the subject is youth activism in the digital sector.  I thought that was a little ironic because, of course, the digital sector would simply not exist if there was no ‑‑ (No audio).
Under 30‑year‑olds had been kept hidden away in a dungeon.  I think if that had been the case, I don't think that we would have a digital sector today.  Youth activism, basically constitutes the vast part of our digital work.
But now, and this is my main point, I would argue that we have created or you have created this beautiful thing, but we have a challenge no longer technical but much more social and political in terms of maximizing its benefits and curtailing its malicious use and its unintended harms.
We have to work harder now to make sure that the great invention, your invention is inclusive, safe, and secure.
COVID has shown just how dependent we have grown on digital technologies.  By now most of us cannot work without them, can't socialize with them, and can't have pleasure without them and, of course being they have worked immensely in response from COVID, from tracking to sharing cures, et cetera.  But you have to acknowledge that those who are not connected have been left further behind, have been left more vulnerable.
And those who are connected have also grown more exposed to digital harms such as disinformation, data robbing, security breaches, et cetera.
So how we now steer this tool that grew largely through initiative, through entrepreneurship, with very little global steerage, how we steer it will determine what our digital legacy, whether it will just be a magnificent thing that benefits some or whether it reduces the bane of our age, growing exclusion and inequality and whether the majority will be left safer or more vulnerable.
So then I will put before you is the challenge for your generation and I really look forward to the initiative and the leadership and I have no doubt youth across the world will exercise in that, and I look very much forward to learning from you.
Thank you.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Please be welcome.  I think we had a slight technical element as can happen always.  It was my screen share as well.  So we do apologize for this and we will put the great message and powerful message of the Undersecretary General Fabrizio Hochschild on our Facebook page and the YouTube as well later on.  So to see it properly in a proper manner.
So I think it was a quite powerful message brought to you by the UN under Secretary General saying that, well, you know, it's not only technical.  Today we need to try to see how this benefits ‑‑ the benefits of technical innovation can get value.
And by saying, this I would like to return to the young activist and first turn to Alan from Kenya.  Are you with us?
>> Yes, I'm with you.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Do you have the camera?  I think you have a question.  So he will be happy to bring this to our panelists.
>> PARTICIPANT: I'm having a problem setting my video.  I don't know why.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Do you have a question to the panelists so they can start the real dialogue and the conversation?
>> PARTICIPANT: Yes.  Sure.  Can you hear me?
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Yes, we can even see you, which is quite great and please, you have the floor.
>> PARTICIPANT: Okay.  Thank you.  My question is:  We as the youth, we are the future generation, yeah?  And we have great minds of innovation.  So what is the government doing, respective governments doing to ensure that they support the youth enough, the innovation that they have with regards to the COVID‑19?
Thank you.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you, Eileen.  Thank you for asking your question.  And I ‑‑ I will maybe turn to minister Sidi Ould Salem.  I don't know if you got the translation in French.
(Awaiting English translation).
>> SIDI OULD SALEM: (Speaking French).
(Awaiting English translation).
>> YULIYA MORENETS: (Speaking French).
I think it was foreseen, sorry, for a slight trouble for people who don't speak actually French, it was said that the translation will be made by the UN translator, but as always we are in a technical environment.
So we just would like to summarize what Mr. Minister said, that actually, he has stated three main issues in African developing countries that we face when we speak about the technology and particularly during these difficult period of COVID.
But as well, he ensured that a lot of things are going in Mauritania, such as the national council for young people.  This is the question I would like to ask the minister, if in ‑‑ to ask the minister, what will be the role of young people in setting the policy and the functioning of this, the national digital council, as well as the incubators and I before I this question minister ‑‑ minister and I will translate what he says afterwards.
(Speaking French).
>> YULIYA MORENETS: (Speaking French).
And I'm sorry, I will switch in English.  There are two or three main things raised by the minister.  It's what is going on in Mauritania, they are providing the free open spaces with the WiFi connection, if I understood correctly that will be accessible to everyone, to everybody, and he's kind of saying that young people can be, you know ‑‑ can also take this and can be ‑‑ they can participate in the policy development by using this space as well.  We don't have Internet today, but also it can facilitate them to be connected.  So also to bring technical solutions as well.
And he also said something very interesting about the chain of values, the digital values, but also he pointed out a few elements about the importance of skills, and then it brings me actually to Casper Klynge, I know Microsoft Corporation, you took the problem seriously this year and you developed this program on digital skills.  But before we go on, this and we would love to know how does this work and how the young people can enter this program and how can they benefit.  Because what we are hearing from the minister.  Young people in developing countries, they do need this, but I believe in the developed world as well.
Before we turn to this, I would like to call Adya and we will try to answer it afterwards.
>> PARTICIPANT: Okay.  Good morning, distinguished panelists.  Thank you for the opportunity.  Greetings from Indonesia.  I'm humbled to raise a question to the panelists.  They have revealed the disparity among students across the globe.  Could the honorable panelists share some initiative to improve the situation that might inspire young people who are watching right now.  Thank you so much.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you, Adya, for your question.  I think this question goes quite well with what Mr. Sidi Ould Salem underlined about the importance of skills and digital skills that can bring opportunity and to the question I just raised to Casper Klynge, and learn more how people can enter into this program and be part.  Casper Klynge.
>> CASPER KLYNGE: Thank you for your kind word on the beginning supporting your work.  I think with you are the questioning as old as I am, it's a pleasure every time you have an opportunity to engage with the youth and younger people and to our friends who just asked the last question.  I just spent more than three years in Indonesia and Jakarta and it's great to reconnect with a country that I miss quite a lot, especially sitting in Europe now in the middle of winter where it's dark and cold outside.
I think both to the minister but also to your question and the question from the youth panel, we are in many ways in this unprecedented situation that everybody is talking about.  And the conclusion that I think that a lot of us have reached whether we work in civil society or minister in Africa or whether we work for a big technology company like Microsoft, we really need all hands on tech to get us through the global pandemic.
I would say that the global pandemic is the not the main focus area.  That's the transformation that we are seeing around the world which is driven by technology and digitalization.  What COVID‑19 has done, is, of course, accelerate a process that was already there.  And I think in some areas, we have benefited from the increased focus and the need for all of us to come online, because today's not just a nice thing to be.  It's a need for ‑‑ a necessity for all of us to uphold jobs to make sure that our economies will not sell for more than they already are.
And on this one, we really need to make sure that whether we work for government or private company, we need to add all the resources available to do our part to get us through this.
And as you highlighted, our small contribution to this is actually a big initiative that we launched a couple of months ago, a global skilling initiative where the aim is initiative to train more than 25 million people around the world, in ten different learning paths using LinkedIn, and GitHub and Microsoft Learn where we are trying to identify based on data the areas where we will see a gap between skills in demand and what competencies are currently available.
So this is free of charge.  You know, I will be very happy to share a link in the chat here where everybody regardless of where you are sitting in Jakarta, or whether you are sitting in, you know, Africa or South America, in Europe, you can get access to these learning paths, and for a very small contribution, actuals be able to get a certificate when you have completed these different learning opportunities.
And these are things and these are skills that we know also working from our ‑‑ for our customers and partners to come in demand.  So it's things like software developers and graphic designers and IT help desks.  So it might not be ‑‑ it might be quite obvious skill sets but we are seeing that the gap is really increasing between what we have and what will be in demand also again accelerated by COVID‑19.
It's to make it increasingly focused on cybersecurity which I know is a big topic for today's debate.
That is unfortunately the flip side of the coin as we digitalize our societies, we increase the vulnerabilities.  We have seen a number of attacks happening over the last couple of months.  We published in Microsoft several examples of the devastating impact of the cybersecurity attacks, and it doesn't really matter whether you are, you know, a minister in Mauritania, we are all subject to these attacks, and we have to upskill our abilities to mitigate the risks that we have seen from cybersecurity attacks.
That's one area where we work with you.  Can we have a feedback mechanism where we are listening to younger people.  What do you guys need?  Can you find ways of working together with you and providing these skilling opportunities so that we can help drive a more safe and secure society, that will uphold what is, I think, the fundamental need in the 21st century, that is the technologies is really driven by trust.  We have trust between people, between societies and the technologies that we are using.
So we are super delighted.  We trained ‑‑ we just looked at Europe, more than 2.2 million people as of today, but this is not the end of the process, we will continue to push ahead and please feel free to take a look on the opportunities.  We are quite proud of what we have been able to do so far.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you, Casper Klynge, it was very clear.  And the link that you just mentioned will be very helpful, I can imagine for everybody to have the link and to understand how the skills program that you mentioned, developed by the Microsoft Corporation together with LinkedIn actually allow the young people who are jobless or looking for the job or just would like to become the inventor and have the ideas to get new skills and get digital skills that the minister just mentioned.
(Speaking French).
So exactly this link will be very useful to understand how the young people can enter this program and how in a concrete terms they can benefit, but afterwards, you know, bring to the market new professions and new innovations and new technical solutions as well.
But you mentioned something and I can't imagine that you just mentioned cybersecurity and we can't imagine that in the new skills initiative, the cybersecurity skills are part of it, and then the new skills probably on cyber diplomacy and how we can raise the trust of the society in digital.
So thank you, obviously, for mentioning this and we'll work a lot on this cybersecurity skills as well.
So the link will be very well welcomed and we will put this in the comments of the YouTube channel and the Facebook.
I would just like to remind our audience that we are discussing the role of the young people and the youth activism in digital.  We had a multilingual, somehow it happened in French and English with me trying to translate, but I hope it also demonstrates that Internet is multilingual and we can all, you know, if we have the common values to share and the ‑‑ for example, the very ‑‑ we can all communicate.
I would like for you to put your comments and questions in the chatroom as well, and I would like to turn to Dawn from the Philippines.  And I think you have also a -- the floor is yours.  Please.
>> PARTICIPANT: Thank be you, Yuliya.  And thank you for this wonderful opportunity to join the amazing group of speakers for this event.
My question ‑‑ I think most of my questions are already answered.  So I think I will just focus on emphasizing the young people who are largely dependent on digital services.  So I would like to ask, how does the government see themselves and the private sectors across cybersecurity and online risks in the midst of the pandemic and also in the age of this information?  Thank you.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you, Dawn.  I don't know who would like to pick this question.  Bocar Ba, would you like to go with the question of Dawn but I also have a question for Bocar Ba from the SAMENA Telecommunications Council.  And I do know, for example, that on the part of the SAMENA council, they work a lot on education, for example, during the COVID.  So telecom companies can do a lot, for example, by giving the platform or allowing, you know, the SMS services, is what is so but I know the vice chair putting on his Twitter that is one of his powers is empowering youth.  Can you give us your perspective and bring in the answer to the Dawn question.
>> BOCAR BA: Thank you very much, Yuliya, and good afternoon to all of you.  First of all, I would like to thank you for giving me the pleasure to be with you today, and to have this conversation today.
I would like to emphasize that this is not ‑‑ this is a conversation that should have happened earlier and we cannot miss it.  Now, let me spend about two or three minutes and look at the global context and the ground realities in which we are today.  Especially from the perspective of the Arab region.  The south Asia and Middle East and north Africa.
Number one, youth population is driving demand for Internet application by fueling the mobile data consumption market.  That's number one.  See commerce and online games application have also grown significantly in the past years due to the popularity among the young population.
The youth is at the heart and is a key driver of a role of innovation with a focus on mobility, internationalization and competitiveness.
And believe it or not, in the region, almost 108 million young people in the Middle East alone, and this is the largest number of young population to transition to digital in the history.
Why am I showing that?  It shows the youth are a tremendous resource and even bigger opportunity and challenge.  Thus, we need to harness this resource for the Next Generation through capacity building and human capital development endeavor or human capital investment.
Now, what are we doing?  And I can speak on behalf of not only the telecom operators but also the private sector at large.  You mentioned at the beginning ITU, I am chairing the private sector of the ITU.  So what the industry is doing to support the youth, innovation to fight, for example, COVID or during the COVID time, and I would like to come up with some example.
The telecom and ICT ecosystem in the region is among the greatest catalyst of growth in many low‑and middle‑income countries.  They are not only part of the ecosystem as a consumer but also as contributors and innovators and the private sectors recognizes that very well.
That's why we see young people developing new technologies to help in the fight against COVID‑19 and this innovation can include, for example, low cost ventilators were developed by young people.  3D printing medical supplies.  Using in some country, shipping containers, or leveraging technologies to innovate, contact tracing as we have seen, for example, in South Korea.  Or remote learning and redistribution of goods to name a few of the examples.  Now coming to the question asked by our colleagues.  To bring this innovation to practical life, and to where they are needed most, a number of collaboratives have been undertaken by telecom operators by the sector, and their strategic partner and the young innovators.
And this collaboration within the industry, have created an enabling environment and this has mobilized youth‑led start‑ups to turn idea into actionable solutions.  I give you just two examples.  In the Arab region, programs such as Zain, which is a telecom operator based in Kuwait and many other countries.  Zain Innovate Center, ZINC, are unlocking opportunities in Kuwait, and entrepreneurial, the ultimate aim of ZINC is helping young innovators turn their idea into productive project that would be marketed locally being regionally and internationally.
The second example, and you have referred that Bahrain, and others they are supporting the Bahrain youth by promoting innovation creativity and the upskilling of future generation of technology expert.
So just to give you an idea what is going on, but, of course, the Undersecretary Fabrizio was talking about leaving to one behind and this is a global trend worldwide across the entire private sector and government.  We should not leave anyone behind.  That means youth.  That means disability.  That means vulnerable people.  We want them to be a part of the entire value chain and that is driven by innovation.
Innovation comes from the youth.  I hope that answers the question, Yuliya.
Thank you.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you.  Thank you, Bocar.  Thank you a lot for your answer.  And it's showing as well your answer is actually very detailed and showing us that a lot of things are going in the Middle East and the young people who would like to achieve something and would like to be useful in the societies, they can ‑‑ they have institutions, and now there's telecommunication council will probably take into account this youth perspective as well and your members are taking as well.  We will have the links the initiative that you mentioned for them, we will put afterwards in the ‑‑ in comments at the YouTube channel and the Facebook as well.
We also have ‑‑ because now we have the Middle East perspective, let's say, but we have the question in the chatroom about if the Microsoft Corporation projects on skills is a worldwide project or one region.  I think that's a question that Joao from Portugal is bringing to you.
Just very quickly if you could give us this answer.  Yeah, probably it's very interesting for them.
>> CASPER KLYNGE: Could you just repeat that?
>> YULIYA MORENETS: I was just saying that Bocar Ba brought us the perspective of the Middle East, from the telecom industry, but young people are asking, and Joao from Portugal request the problem of the Microsoft skills, is it worldwide or region focuses and do we have different projects.
>> CASPER KLYNGE: Thanks a lot for repeating the question.  This is a global initiative.  I hope I reached everybody to share the link where you can go in and see these different ten learning paths that are available and you can see the different skill sets that we're trying to support.
And a couple of points here.
We hope this will be a contribution to the more traditional educational services that will be, of course in this sphere of government and public sector around the world.
We think with the insights and the links with LinkedIn, and GitHub and Microsoft Learn, it's something that's worthwhile, since we are on the brink of a quadmatic transformation which goes to what Mr. Bocar and the minister mentioned earlier.  We are trying to avoid a digital divide.  I think we have a digital divide locally.  We have it even inside countries of Europe where those who have access to high‑speed broadband, primarily living in the more urban areas, that it’s easy for them to cope with the global pandemic like COVID‑19.  But even in the European countries, we have people that are without the same access, keeping their jobs and contributing to the economies, et cetera.
If we zoom out and look at this at a global level, it's so evident that it accelerates what we are looking at requires us to focus that everybody is on board on the bus.  It shouldn't matter where you live.  We have to ensure that the 3 billion people who don't have access to the Internet, they will get that access.  In the world of economy, had the digital economy, the areas that you are working in will require us to have access to the Internet and have basic and fundamental skills.  I think that's one of the big, big global challenges and I'm very happy we had Fabrizio speak to this in the beginning and I wanted to commend the work of Secretary General for Heil lighting that this is not only an issue for one part of the world, this is really something we into Ed to ‑‑ we need to make sure that we are bridging the gap on digital skills.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you.  Thank you, Casper Klynge.  The answer is yes, we intend to have this a global initiative and actually work on the digital divide with the initiative on digital skills.
These people left behind, you want the ‑‑ that he mentioned one of the biggest issues of our century, indeed and during the COVID crisis.
I would like to turn to Professor Rolf Weber.  Switzerland is in Europe.  We had a more or less European perspective.  But Switzerland is not part of the European Union.  We have a question from Monica before we go and turn to Professor Weber as well.  Monica.
>> PARTICIPANT: Thank you.  Hello, my name is Monica as you may know by now.  You have touched, like Casper and Bocar touched on this topic of programs but, however, my question is do you plan or down if any regional or international institutions would put forward the young NGOs proposing solutions to the COVID pandemic.  National, European, or United Nations or other investment fund that will be focused on proposals from youngster NGOs for digital solutions related to the caused poverty, unemployment or lower quality of medical services, plus concrete or specialized funding to youngster start‑ups for the digital services in the 2020 situation.
Thank you.  Thank you in advance.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you.  And we will bring this question first to Professor Rolf Weber as far as what is going on in Switzerland if we want to ‑‑ well, for the innovators, for the start‑uppers.  When we think about actually Switzerland and the digital, we obviously will think about cryptocurrency and about blockchain and the facilities.  It's what all young people have in mind, right?
You are the professor of law but also you are practicing at a well‑known law practitioner.  We want to know how it is in Switzerland for youth to have access to the funds to the start‑up what is going in Switzerland from this point of view.  And then we will go back to the other panelists.
>> ROLF WEBER: Thank you very much, Yuliya for this highly interesting panel invitation.  My position at the end is not so easy, because the legal perspective is usually not the most attractive in a dissertation.  Let me say up front before I turn to blockchain and artificial intelligence, what we see at the university level is a traumatic change in the education and I think it's a change in favor of the younger generation.  Instead of boring lectures in the classroom, we offer our insights now online, and facilitating access not only by Swiss students but foreign students.  And this whole change in the education has caused quite a lot of headache for the older generation.  The fact that it worked out quite nicely, I would say over the last six to eight months shows how important universities are considering the attendance of young people.
Now, I move to your principal question about legal environment as well as the ability of young people to start ‑‑ start‑ups in Switzerland, about a year ago, maybe slightly more, a member of the federal consulate of our government has publicly said Switzerland wants to become a blockchain nation.  And this is of course, a marketing argument, I have to admit, but I do think that this statement goes along with quite a lot of efforts in Switzerland to facilitate the creation of small start‑ups and successful implementation of new business models.  And this does have a certain tradition.  If you look back a couple of years ago, for example, bit coin has chosen to have its head domicile in Switzerland.
And shortly later, there's another currency, and if you look at the seven years ago, he what was really a young leader.  And these two practical examples show that Switzerland tries to be open for new ventures.
The regulatory environments and I won't go ‑‑ the regulatory environment in Switzerland is quite liberal.  It's quite flexible, because we have a new law that covers 20 or 25 legal provisions.  Most parts of the blockchain area, artificial intelligence is not yet regulated.  So we have a lot of room to maneuver to apply artificial intelligence big data analytics.
If I compare the new laws, the European Commission wants to regulate about ten times more provisions than Switzerland, this is also a good sign.  So overall, I do indeed think that the younger generation would see open arms in Switzerland to incorporate companies.
Obviously, as I said, I don't want to start now the marketing campaign for Switzerland.  Switzerland does have different other issues, such as the high living cost.  If a new start‑up is created, but we have a number of organizations supporting new enterprises in the context of COVID‑19 crisis, special funds from the government which otherwise is a little bit less open to blockchain and artificial intelligence and is taking more time to implement blockchain and artificial intelligence.
We have existing and starving startup and youth start‑up such funds do not have to be repaid at all, or only of six to eight years without obligation to pay interest so there's a couple of opportunities are existing in Switzerland.
We also have coming back to the question of Monica, NGOs which support initiatives of the young population and basically, since I don't have time to go more into the details, I would like to invite the younger generation to write many he directly an email if you have any specific question to the actual legal environment in Switzerland.  Thank you very much.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you, a lot, Professor Weber.  I think you brought two very interesting points and very detailed ones online education and as well on the situation in Switzerland.  We are four minutes left before the end.
So I see a very logical channel, actually, going from the online education and just mentioned by Professor Weber, that opened the door to the new skills that will offer the Microsoft Corporation project on digital skills and then we will have born the new projects and new innovations maybe.
We can turn to the Middle East, or the initiatives that Bocar Ba just mentioned to bring the value to the benefits and actually to raise the value of these innovations, as well as in Switzerland as mentioned by Professor Weber as well and then we go to the policy level mentioned by Prime Minister Sidi Ould Salem, with the incubators that are created.  And so this young participation of young people.
Of course, all is not rose and the voice of young people is maybe not at the level that the young people would like to have, but still there are things and also the most important is to have the access to this information that the executive leaders just brought to us.
Just to maybe add our conversation today, we have one question, and the floor will be opened for your comments but very short in one minute.  We have a question from Leonard Shultz from the youth community by asking and saying that the IGF itself is not the decision‑making space.  How do you take the discussions and the thoughts give and thrown out by the youth communities to the suggestions?
I do have already the answer.  The first answer to this question, with the example of youread.youth.EU.  The young people can advise and influence the policies and the strategies the.EU.  So things are happening, but I would like to turn to our distinguished speakers in they would like very shortly in one minute, please, say what ‑‑ how will they answer this question?
I don't know who would like to have the floor.  The floor is yours play.  Rolf Weber, but very short, please.
>> ROLF WEBER: You already mentioned EURid and I wanted to mention it depends on the older generation to really include the younger generation into the discussions.  About 12 years ago, I have cofounded the Swiss IGF and at that time, there were two or three representatives of older generation.  Now, the Swiss IGF is basically run by five, six, representatives of the younger generation.  So we have been very intentional in including the youth.  I was glad to hand over my task to the younger generation in the meantime.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you.  We know that you are very active and you stay very active in the Internet Governance sphere.  It's a call to young people to create and engage and be in the regional or the national levels and maybe to create or cocreate a national IGF or the youth IGF.  I don't know if Bocar Ba or Casper Klynge would like to add something, Bocar, please?
>> BOCAR BA: Yes, very quickly.  I would like to frame most of the question into a few answers.  From a private sector perspective, the way that we look at this digital space, we subdivide into the demand size and the supply side.  We are taking care of the supply side, which means building the infrastructure, laying down the fiber and putting 5G in place, integrating the IoT.  That's fine.
Now, we need to stimulate the demand.  The government is playing a role, which is putting together the right policies and regulation to incentivize and increase the demand.
Now, coming to investment and coming to innovation.  Innovation will be driving the future.  The money is available for funding those projects provided that it has sustainability.  Now, concerning the youth, they need so have an alignment as a stakeholder between what they want to do, the private sector and the government.  There are some institutions, IGF is one of them.  ITU also is integrating academia, SMEs, and innovators.  ITU can be a point of contact.  At the broadband for sustainability development, we are promoting a number of initiatives and we have spoken about digital skills and we are creating a Working Group.
There's a gap that has to be filled.  Those entities exist.  The funding is available, but they need much more guidance in which direction no move, and within the given I cannot elaborate but solutions exist.  It's a matter of alignment and organizing agenda together.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you, Bocar, and well, you know, if you want to have something done ‑‑ and have the influence and participating policy development, please stay engaged at the IGF, at the ITU and institutions is practically what I hear as well in a very short and summarized manner.  I don't know, Casper Klynge.
>> CASPER KLYNGE: I will be very brief.  I know we are running out of time here.  Listen when we look at how the world is going to evolve over the next five years we see that 149 million jobs will be established in digitalization.  Our view and also my personal view is we have to use data in merging demands, future demands with the supply side and that's part of the skilling initiative that we launched in Microsoft, making available if you go to the link that I shared, you can zoom in on individual countries and you can see different sectors what we expect based on our own data, it will be in demand over the next couple of years and how many people with those skill sets that will be available.  I think that's a modern way of doing it.
If you ask me what my wish list will be, I think it's basically three things.  We have to invest more in access, broadband access, making sure that everybody will be able to come online.  The second thing is what we discussed today making sure that we have the skill sets that are required of tomorrow, that's a dual responsibility in my view between the public sector and the private sector.  We are trying to do a small part on our side.
And then the last thing is when you look at all of those activities, we have to make sure unfortunately that we continue to focus on cybersecurity.  We know that the COVID‑19 has hit all of us very hard.  Unfortunately it has not hit state actors and non‑state actors who are using every single minute to attack our critical infrastructure, even the hospitals and the WTO ‑‑ sorry, the WHO, we have seen pretty vicious attacks over the last couple of years.  We have to make sure that we build up our resilience and, again, I think that's a situation that requires all hands on deck.
>> YULIYA MORENETS: Thank you, Casper.  So better ‑‑ you know, stronger upskilling programs and the promotion of these upskilling programs and I think it's very well summarized by James Paek, invest more in education especially in demand skills for the jobs that we don't even know, that they don't exist today but they will exist tomorrow.  I would like to turn to Mr. Minister, we have two minutes left.  And I would say as we started in French.
(speaking French).
We probably have technical issues we will end with this great summary by saying, yes, invest more in education, especially in ‑‑ in demand skills, and maybe this will allow us as well as by bringing the young people in the policy making and in the development of policies and the development of standards by promoting these cyber diplomacy among the young people.  We will try to reduce this gap between those left behind as said by the UN under secretary and all of those very well connected.
I would like to thank our distinguished gets for being present today and being present.  And we apologize for technical issues.  Yes, we are learning and hoping to become professional studio.  We are not there yet, but thank you for being with us.  Thank you for our audience for great summaries in question and thank you for those who followed us online.
We will make sure to bring all of this information in the comments on YouTube channel as well as the Facebook.
(speaking French).
Thank you for being with us and bye‑bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-of24-online-safety-technology-towards-a-global-market^^

 
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: Hello, everyone, and welcome to the Online Safety Panel.  I'm your chair for this panel.  If I may, I'll spend a couple minutes describing why I'm here today and why I'm passionate about this subject.
I spent many years running the UK's government digital service, and acting as the head of profession of the 17,000 digital data and technology professionals we employ here in the UK Civil Service.  And I've recently taken a new role, and in that role, I meet on a quarterly basis with other European envoys and we talk about key areas of collaboration.  To give you a sense for that, those areas for collaboration are interruptible digital identity, an ethical framework for AI,  and a number of initiatives around better data sharing and protection of data.
We all worry and work on how to develop more digital capability within our own civil services and saving the best for last, we work on making the internet safer.  That's the context of me today.  You'll hear from our other panelists that we all make commitments to make this work forward.  My job is to make sure it's a top priority for the European digital envoys.
I'll give you a background on what we might want to talk about.  Most of you will know people are generally very positive about the internet.  80% say it's made our life better for us.  There is a dark side of the internet that we've all experienced, whether that's terrorism, cyberbullying, trolling or the impact on children.  Again, we are here to talk about that today. Oddly enough, technology can help within this space.  A good example from here in the UK is the home office has developed a machine learning algorithm that detects terrorist videos on the internet and takes them down.  A good example of helping to solve the problems we created.
Last two points, safety tech is very much on the rise, it's 35% year on year in the UK.  We now employ thousands of people here in the UK and contribute billions of pounds to the economy.  We are at least saying that safety tech is global.  Probably unusually so, within government it seems to be a second ambition and regulations across the world.  Actually, UK safety tech companies export 50% of their ‑‑ 50% of the time they do work.
And the three objectives for this session today are, one, we want to share the work that we've done to define a measured safety tech sector in the UK and abroad.  Two, we want to explore the extent to which the challenges and opportunities in the UK reflect those across the world.  And, finally, the third objective, discuss how we might take this forward internationally by collaborating together.
Our agenda is 25 minutes of panelists speaking.  That will be followed by a Q&A for about another 30 minutes.  And we'd ask people to put the Q&A questions into the Q&A questions on Zoom.  That makes perfect sense.  And then, finally, we'll have a wrap up session, and we'll get each of the panelists to give us their personal commitments and their thoughts on how we turn discussion into action going forward. With that all said, it's a pleasure for me to introduce our first speaker, I introduce professor Mary Aiken, and she'll be talking to us about online safety.  Mary?
>> MARY AIKEN: Thank you, Kevin.  Today we're going to talk about safety tech.  We're all familiar with health tech and Fintech and now we have safety tech.  We know the digital advances drive our economies; we know they'll enrich our societies.  But to harness the internet's advantages, we also must confront the online threats and harms that can propagate.
We need to ensure the safety and security of those online.  We need to factor in those who are vulnerable in order to maintain thriving democracy in society where freedom of expression is protected.  So online safety technologies or safety tech is defined as any organization involved in developing technology or solutions to facilitate safer online experiences and to protect users from harmful content, contact, or conduct.
The online safety tech sector consists of companies whose products or services on online platforms deliver safer outcomes for users.  For example, through moderation or filtering.  So you may ask well, what's the difference between cyber safety and cybersecurity.  Fundamentally, cybersecurity focuses on protecting your information, your data.  And cyber safety or safety tech focuses on protecting people.  The point is your data is never going to suffer from low self‑esteem.  Your data is never going to feel the need for revenge.
This is about factoring the human into the cybersecurity and cyber safety equation.  We know that it is critical that our networks and systems are robust, resilient and secure.  However, it is equally important that people are psychologically robust, resilient, secure, and safe in cyber contexts.  At no time is this more important than now in the middle of the global pandemic. So cybersecurity focuses on protecting data and information from cyber attacks.  Safety tech focuses on protecting people from these psychological factors online.  Everything from abuse to online harassment.
In 2015 we conducted a review of online safety technologies.  And the good news is that we found a thriving safety tech sector, which complements the existing cybersecurity industry and is valued in the UK at more than $500 million and is growing year on year.  Funding is currently being researched to investigate the U.S. and the rest of the world in terms of their online safety technologies and our results will be published later this year.
The good news is so far there's evidence of an emerging and thriving sector in the U.S.  To wrap up, online safety is a multifaceted problem with no single solution.  It's a global issue with many countries concerned about its potential for harmful impact on security health and importantly on social cohesion.  Tech solutions are also global in nature.  We want to work together to create a safer and more secure cyberspace for all.
Safety tech, importantly, supports five U.N. sustainable goals: Good health and wellbeing, decent work and economic growth, industry innovation and infrastructure, responsible consumption of production, and peace, justice and strong institutions.  Safety tech can deliver an internet for human resilient and for solidarity.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: Thank you, Mary, now we'll hear from our second speaker. I'd like to introduce you to Professor Simon Saunders, the director for emerging and online technology at the UK regulator Ofcom.  Over to you, Simon.
>> SIMON SAUNDERS: Thanks, very much indeed, Kevin.  Hello, everybody.  As Kevin says, I look after emerging and online technology at Ofcom.  If you don't know, Ofcom is the UK's independent regulator of the communications sectors in the UK.  As it says up there somewhere, we're making communications work for everyone.  Which probably means if there's any problems with this online platform, it may be our fault.  I hope you won't hold it against us.
More seriously, the role we have at Ofcom and my team is to keep colleagues, really, informed of technology developments across all of our sectors.  Traditionally that's meant the broadcasts and the postal sectors.  In the context of today's discussion Ofcom has an increasing role in keeping users of internet platforms safe online, while ensuring that those services can continue to improve in the usefulness that Kevin indicated at the beginning that everybody sees from that.
That role comes from really recently acquired duties, which has appointed us as the regulator of video sharing platforms that are based in the UK, but also from the fact that government has announced that it's minded to appoint Ofcom as the regulator for online harms for all of the relevant services consumed by people in the UK.  So we're figuring out what that means for us in terms of the relevant technologies and what we need to know and to enable regarding those technologies.
In that context, safety technology, safety tech, is especially relevant.  So we need to understand how platforms will accept and moderate and distribute content, and to identify how they identify which content has a significant risk of being harmful to users and how they will deal with that content when it is identified that way through one means or another.  So technologies in terms of automated content classification and matching to known harmful content and how that is distributed and standardized and kept appropriate and current is critical to us.
Similarly, you know, there's an opportunity for systems that enable appropriate content to only reach the appropriate users.  So that includes things like age verification and assurance systems, includes parental controls.  And potentially wider issues of our digital identity and how we express our wishes, desires, and openness to view various sorts of content. I mean, in hopefully only extreme cases it's relevant for us to understand how those platforms distributing content of various forms interact with the internet structure and the content that hasn't been responsibly handled by platforms can be addressed any harms that may arise from that.
Understanding that tech and how it may evolve in the future is important for us.  For example, in setting an expectation on platforms of how they're going to exercise a duty of care to keep their users safe.  We'll need to find, as the regulator, therefore, ways to measure that effectiveness and to give the platforms a clear and informed guide to what level of performance is appropriate at a given time.  That's going to be a tricky thing to do given the wide range of platforms, the wide range of content and the wide range of user expectations there.
As well as the actual kind of capabilities of the technology, however, it's also important for us to understand how easy it is for the platforms to access and implement those technologies.  So it's no good for us to know that there's some especially capability platform that has some amazingly effective content classification technique if that technique isn't available to any other platforms.  Or if the implementation and the running of that technique would require some resources which it's not reasonable to expect, particularly of smaller platforms. As well as understanding the technical capabilities, it's great for us to see the emerges of a market of independent safety technology providers.  And equally of platforms that have prepared to make available their technologies to other platforms to help to raise the potential of the industry as a whole.  So a kind of safety tech as a service potential that it would be great to see emerging over time.
But, you know, safety tech as a whole is a very new category with one of the first regulators in the world, certainly, to be creating a specific regime around regulating the online safety of platforms.  So we may not be, as a regulator, just to watch how this evolves and interpret it, we need to play our part better.  We're still considering what that actually means.  It could involve actions like regulatory sandboxes to try things out, setting research challenges, engaging and even building trials and test beds and proof of concept projects to really get under the skin of this technology.  We'll probably need to find ways of identifying metrics of success and how to benchmark systems against those metrics.  We may need to play a role in making available sample data sets so the platforms can improve over time and perhaps define APIs for consistent interoperability of those different systems.
A whole host of activity said, which is not necessarily typical for a regulator to engage in, but we think might be necessary in this world.  Otherwise we need to give some thought to technical standards and, you know, there's a balance to be struck there in terms of using technical standards to provide clarity and a wide market for the providers of safety tech while ensuring that there's wide applicability of the best of breed approaches and the setting of standards doesn't in some way stifle the pace of innovation to the benefit of users in that.
Last but not least, what we really need is an international dialogue on these issues.  There's a healthfully thriving sector in the UK, which it's helpful for us to have locally.  Overall, we want the best outcomes for users wherever they technology comes from.  So this dialogue and what we might do as a follow up to it is really a great opportunity to get the ball rolling for ongoing international discussions.  I really look forward to those.  Thank you, Kevin.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: Thank you, Simon.  I see we've had the first question in the Q&A.  It's a gentle reminder to start filling out the Q&A, otherwise I'll end up asking all the questions.  Before we do that, I'd like to introduce our three final panelists, ask them to introduce themselves and speak in this order.  Ian Stevenson, chair of UK online safety and tech industry.  Next, Roni Gur, vice president of marketing for L1ght.
>> IAN STEVENSON: I'll share of the online safety tech industry association, which I help to form after my own company started moving into the online safety world.  And I felt there was a gap to bring the online safety industry together.  Not just to talk amongst themselves, but also to communicate with policy makers, customers, and to contribute the public debate.
Where I guess we really want to offer a voice of hope, because too often I think the conversation is about online safety are characterized by those who want change, those who want the world to be better, and those who are telling us why it's too difficult or too expensive to actually achieve that.  And I think that technology can bridge that gap.  Members of the safety tech association and other companies, some of whom are here today who already produce products and technologies that can solve individual parts of the problem in really compelling ways and help move things forward.
One of my observations coming into this sector is that everybody in this industry is motivated by creating safer experiences online by keeping people safe, by creating psychological safety.  All businesses are driven by safety as well as by perfect.  I think online safety is developing really rapidly, and often business, especially small companies, startups, spin outs are sources of innovation that can drive that sort of growth.
For innovation to be effective and well‑directed we need to be part of a much wider community that determines what we as a society globally want technology to do, both what we as a society want to do and what regulators are going to ask it to do and legislation is going to force to happen.  So we need to work together to set standards, develop metrics for success, and create environments for training and testing technologies with real world data.  I'm sort of delighted that in terms of a number of my points, Simon Saunders from Ofcom has stolen a march on me which shows an alignment we're developing in the UK.
I think it's important as well as a community we're collaborating with those who safeguard other rights.  So, you know, whilst I think freedom of speech and privacy are often used as excuses for inaction, there are genuine conflicts between online safety, freedom of speech and privacy and we need to have that as a debate.  Businesses and investors can only invest in creating solutions when it's clear there's a market for them.
Clarity on what regulators will be looking for, and support from governments and users of safety tech will all be vital to getting the investment into the sector that we need for it to grow.  And policy and regulation needs to be innovation friendly.  I'm going to repeat some of what Simon said again here.  It can be accomplished in part by focusing on the outcomes of the application of safety tech, rather than what the technology is.  Because that leaves scope for new inventions to be created.  By recognizing that what a regulator should be asking platforms to do today may well be very different from what it should be asking platforms to do in two years' time because the world will move on.  New technology will become available.
So we see this as a very dynamic world where regulators set today baseline and stretch goal with an expectation that next year the stretch goals will have become the new stretch goals for what people should be achieving.  That also means balancing APIs against the need to enable and support innovation.
We exist to facilitate conversation and collaboration.  We focused starting activities in the UK simply because you have to start somewhere.  But this industry is international by its very nature.  We want to be part of the global conversation in the community and I think events like today are a fantastic opportunity to get these conversations and collaborations started.  I forget who I'm handing over to.
>> RONI GUR: I think I'll grab it.  You won't need to hand it over.  Hi, everyone, my name is Roni Gur, I'm a VP for L1ght.  Our AI technology is able to detect and eradicate online toxicity such as hate speech, bullying, shaming, child sexual abuse and materials.  We're U.S. based with a center in Tel Aviv.  I'm happy to be part of this panel.  I'd like to reflect on a few challenges and opportunities.  I think that there's similarity between all of the panelists and kind of the voice that's being heard, and I'll get to that in a second.
Let's be very honest.  The safety tech industry is very, very young.  And big tech has progressed very rapidly leaving us maybe just a little bit behind.  This is no surprise I think as social networks and big tech gives narratives like move fast and break things.  And if that's the case, our motto as a safety tech industry needs to acknowledge the rapid effects of online harms.  We also need to adopt some kind of motto.  If I were to suggest one, I think you've heard it from other panelists here as well, we have to do better.  We can only do that together.  And that sounds very, very cheesy, and I'd like to try to explain why I think it's also very true. Safety tech is new, it's young, it's up against vast amounts of online danger.  But we also need to acknowledge that government and private sectors can definitely work hand in hand and complement each other.  What governments can or can't do private industry can or can't do and vice versa.  And I think that together we can get creative about how this ecosystem should grow and what governments can do to make it grow.
So I thought about three main points to this.  One is understand the ecosystem.  You heard this before with other panelists.  The safety tech ecosystem has various players, right?  It has users, adults, children, me, you, anyone who is online.  It has regulators.  It has safety tech providers like myself and others on this panel.  And have the platforms themselves, where content is being shared and people are getting abused.
And I think it's interesting that in a panel that's discussing online harms, there are people from academia and policy and safety tech providers, but not from the platforms.  And I also think it's very important to make sure that while they're part of the conversation, it's also important to differ between them.  When we say platforms, we tend to think about Facebook and Twitter and maybe even point fingers.  What I suggest to do is make sure that we understand that there are bigger platforms, but there's also smaller medium platforms.  They both host online harms, they both want to eradicate it and they both need a cost efficient way to do it.  If you are a smaller platform and you need a cost-efficient plug into a safety tech provider, you need to be aware of it and you need it to be helpful for you.  And if you are the bigger platforms like Facebook or Twitter, you can develop whatever you want.  But then only you have it or only you have access to it and usually platforms are just very much overwhelmed by what they find, meaning they don't really want to find it or deal with it because it's not their core product.
So I encourage governments to understand the need to move together by mapping safety tech ecosystem, getting familiar with technologies that are out there aimed for creating safer online experiences.  And understanding that there are different players with different needs.  I also encourage two other points.  The first one is incentivize.  Excuse the very American phrase,  throw some money at it.  Safety tech needs to be incentivized.  Whether it's funding academic research, subsidizing safety tech development, government or industry grants, sandboxes, anything you can make it worthwhile to be in the industry that is up against major forces that create online harms.
Which leads me to my last point, it can't be so easy to create online harms, but so difficult to eradicate them.  And I'll explain.  Regulation is really important.  We all know this.  But we all know that it also takes a long time.  So I suggest to certify, if not legalize.  For example, you know, codes of conduct or permits for certain types of work.  We've been in business for two and a half years.  We've raised $50 million.  We have partners who are law enforcement agencies and still we have trouble with certain content that can't be uploaded to certain servers, Amazon, Google, things like that.  It would just make it very difficult to develop.  And there's still the fact that child sexual abuse of materials is hard to tackle and eradicate because of its natures and because of various rules in various countries. So I think if regulation takes a long time, and we need to start walking that path, we also need a short and medium term goals like certifying.  To conclude, there's a lot to do like certifying, and I'll hand it over.
>> DEEPAK TEWARI: I run a company called Private.ly in Switzerland.  We aim to keep kids safe online, giving them the means to be able to be protected and to be part of their own safety through AI that works on their own phones or within the apps.
The angle I'm going to take in this conversation is more around about what has been my experience ‑‑ our experience from an internationalization point of view.  We started off, even though we were a Swiss company ‑‑ the UK was the first market where we got attention and traction because naturally ‑‑ there has been a conversation in that market, which we missed everywhere else.  I'm testimony that it came from the UK and we've been able to then ‑‑ having developed our first customer et cetera, in the UK, been able to show what the technology is capable of to other people in the rest of the world and have been able to develop from there.
For us, the UK, especially in the context of this conversation, the sort of top leadership and if we're able to share what different safety tech companies have been able to do, where regulation is headed.  Regulation is another big part.  Talking to regulators in Italy or Switzerland or other places.  I think there's a very big difference in perception of what constitutes online harm.  Where does the liability lie?  Is it with the telecom operator?  Is it with the platform operator?  It is very different if you ask different people.
So there is no clarity.  So the best way in which ‑‑ so if you're developing, for example, a consumer product, parents would think either the platform is taking care of it somehow ‑‑ it's Facebook, Instagram's problem.  So there is a little bit of ‑‑ so very clearly the growth of this sector, we need to understand that there have to be ‑‑ there has to be established duty of care, including the telecom provider, for example.  What is their responsibility in the online harms discussion?  Not only for young people, but also for older people.
The other thing is ‑‑ one perspective, the name of the company is called Private.ly.  Something very peculiar or typical about us is that we've focused on trying to bridge this gap between privacy and safety where people might say the platform provides solutions, but we cannot guarantee your privacy.  There is a diversion between privacy and safety.  Because to provide safety measures, you might need to violate someone's privacy.  And that's the goal.  I'm here to tell the panel and people who are hearing, we've spent the last few years developing tech that sits on the phone, it be super private, we're not the only ones.
What regulators and others must know is that the ‑‑ the ability to identify harms.  That can be done pretty privately without violating anyone's privacy.  So if someone ‑‑ if the platforms are saying this is not possible or it's something because it's not core to their business case.  They do not want it to come in the way of user experience.
Where we go from now is very important because we ‑‑ what we've discussed in this panel, for innovation you have to look at smaller tech.  These are the people ‑‑ the safety tech companies, their core bread and butter businesses is building these technologies.  How do we bridge the gap between what we're producing and make sure this is being implemented, taken on, promoted into bigger platforms.  Either ‑‑ or at least ‑‑ I mean, at least what becomes available and known to everyone is that the following tech exists. For example, the ability to identify kids within a game in real time exists.  Is it implemented?  No.  Where is the gap?  It's somewhere in the business model.  It's somewhere in the regulation.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: The perfect segue to get into the questions.
>> DEEPAK TEWARI: Thank you.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: We've got three questions, but I thought I'd start with one of my own, if I may.  Hopefully, the panelists can all see the questions, can you?  Give you a chance to swap up.  There's one specifically in there for you, Simon.
If I may, I'd start to ask Roni and Deepak.  What are the challenges we have identified in the UK reflect those of other countries?  I know you both touched on that, but I guess could you expand on that just a little?
>> RONI GUR: Sure.  All right.  Thank you, Deepak.  I think it's really interesting to look at the UK as, you know, kind of like the prototype that really emerged in safety tech.  I think it has to do with two major opportunities that the UK saw and really grasped.  The first one ‑‑ sorry to be a lawyer ‑‑ is regulation.  And the online harms white paper made so much segue ‑‑ made so much room and space for dialogue around online safety that even if this regulation has not passed yet, it still created a bed for, you know, these ecosystems to thrive.
I think we're also seeing buds in Australia, and I think it's a really good place to start and see where the opportunity kind of lies.  I think that created the space of the mapping of the ecosystem or the networking because a lot like Deepak says, a lot of it has to do with the fact that sometimes the regulator doesn't know what technology can be used and therefore does not enforce it on whoever that needs to be enforced.  Or does not incentivize it to be used.
And I think the UK kind of lit the match regarding the regulation and the mapping.  And I think while it made a lot of headway, maybe still a little bit to be done around both the incentivizing or data access but definitely has a lot to ‑‑ is definitely down the road and the ‑‑ very inspiring for the international communities to take a look, learn, and achieve those as well.
>> DEEPAK TEWARI: Did you want to say something?
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: I was trying to introduce you. 
>> MARY AIKEN: I wanted to make the point around online harm.  I work worldwide, and the UK is absolutely leading the world in the terms of conceptualizing online harm as a spectrum.  A spectrum of harm.  Everything is connected.  We can't continue to look at problems in silos.  Cyberbullying over here, harassment over here, mis and disinformation over here.  Everything is connected.
When we join that up and start conceptualizing online harm as a spectrum, then we can start conceptualizing frameworks in terms of how we're going to tackle it.  The brilliant news is in the U.S. a bill ‑‑ we talk about online harms in the UK.  But in the U.S., a bill has just been proposed in May which is called the online harms bill.  So I am just delighted to see this and I want to see more countries jumping in.  Maybe that's something as a group we can work towards and creating this premise of online harm worldwide with a view to addressing it.
>> DEEPAK TEWARI: Just to add to that, Mary, there's this ‑‑ the role in leadership, in regulation as well.  I think that part is missing.  The whole notion of duty of care and where the liability lies in the wild west so to say, that ‑‑ the first attempt has been made in the regulation which came out of the UK.  I'm seeing in countries I'm working at now, there's talk about that.  There is some lead to be made or some progress to be made there.  Otherwise, it's difficult to point who should be responsible for ensuring that that online harm ‑‑ it's not just a CSR item, so to say. Unfortunately, it ends up being a CSR item, which it should not be.
>> MARY AIKEN: We have to think about the Global South, we have to think about developing in markets and we have to think about how we transpose learnings from different countries and different sectors to these developing markets.  That's our collective responsibility.  That's our duty of care.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: Very good.  There are a number of questions in the Q&A.  I wonder to give us a bit of a breather, Simon, there's one specifically in there for you.  I don't know whether you had a chance to read it.  Would you mind recapping the question and provide an answer.
>> SIMON SAUNDERS: With pleasure.  The question actually covered two probably related but distinct points.  Given the very wide multiplicity of social media and gaming platforms, the large amount of traffic and the range of devices, it's very ‑‑ the question says it's almost impossible to have a consistent and protective regime for all.  It's definitely challenging.  I think I'd refer back to what Mary was saying about the way you think about what online harms might embody, you know, rather than looking for something that's very tailored to every individual platform and every individual type of content and defining in microscopic terms what harmful or, indeed, what good looks like.
I think a more sort of principled based approach to the kinds of harms that we're seeking to mitigate and sort of arrange of how egregious those harms might be from sort of unquestionably harmful and often illegal content through to harms that, you know, are socially concerning and adapting according to that.  So I think more principles based and outcomes based approach helps with that.  It doesn't make it easy, but it helps.
The second part of the question was saying that safety tech providers, you know, are keen to explore protections via proof of concepts with internet service providers who act as the funnel for these things and what appetite is there is for those ISPs to work with safety tech providers.
The premise I'm not so sure about, clearly ISPs have an important role in delivering content and being a point of sort of mitigation ‑‑ probably in the more extreme cases where as I mentioned in my introduction where you find the platforms haven't exercised a duty of care appropriately.  But, you know, ideally, this protection would happen at source and the content wouldn't find itself on an ISP network.
In terms of their appetites to work with safety tech providers, I'm sure Ian and other members would argue they are already providing their technology said to ISPs, and indeed to the platforms themselves.  It tends to be behind the scenes for understandable reasons.  But certainly, you know, making sure there's a good understanding of the technologies that are available and the opportunities for ISPs and others to make good use of that is, I think, part of the good work that's been going on in the UK in forming a safety tech industry association and even highlighting the existence of safety tech as a sector in the first place really helps to draw attention to what's possible there.
>> RONI GUR: Can I add something to what Simon just said?  I think that the appetite of ISPs, internet service providers, has become bigger for various reasons.  It could be profit.  An abused user doesn't return to a platform.  Could be something more cynical like they don't want PR scandals or whatever it is.  And to be honest, the biggest change that we've seen ‑‑ we work a lot with web hosting providers, right?  They really don't want at the core to be hosting child sexual abuse materials.  It's not good for them, not for their brand, not for their board, not for anyone.
I think once they open up to technologies, that very simply can help them identify, notify the property authorities and how easy and seamless it is, they become more open to it.  And I think COVID, sadly, we saw an uptick in online harms, online abuse, child sexual abuse of materials being spread around.  I think that ISPs are beginning to understand that there are kind of like the gateway and they have the opportunity and the power to make sure that it doesn't spread more than it is. There definitely is a shift and I hope that it continues.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: I was going to invite you for the next question but you're welcome to go for this one.
>> IAN STEVENSON: The traffic that goes over ISPs is very often encrypted which limits their ability to play that role.  I agree with aggregators such as hosts, cloud platforms and CDNs as well have a role to play here.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: And then I see Deepak you responded to Neil in the Q&A, do you want to give us a brief recap of Neil's question and your answer, is that okay?
>> DEEPAK TEWARI: Definitely.  Neil was posing a question around the problems posed by the encryption technologies and as we know a lot of online harms, imaging based online harms are on the account of self‑generated industry stemming from bathrooms, so to say, that's the way he quoted it.  He said ‑‑ he was bringing the point with sort of encryption and that becoming the rule of law, that whole thing gets weakened.  What is the way around it?
I mentioned to him that there are technologies come -- including the ones we have developed and we, of course ‑‑ safety net, the company he represents has developed technologies like this.  Images coming out of the camera can immediately detect if there is nudity and it can interject or warn the child or do whatever with that information in real time.  Of course, that doesn't mitigate the entire problem.  This will only be mitigated when platforms are able to ‑‑ when I say platforms, I mean device manufacturers ‑‑ are willing to integrate this technology on the phone, on the camera itself. But till such time, yes, there will be a gap in the market, definitely.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: Very good.  The final question was from Andrew.  I might ask you to have a crack at this, Ian, you've had less airtime than some of the others.  What do panel members think is the best way to ensure we have a joint of international approach to online safety tech that delivers for users?
>> IAN STEVENSON: I think it's really important that the progress is being made is debated internationally.  I agree with Mary, the UK has done fundamental work in understanding and defining harms, the spectrum of online harms, the different types of online harms.  If we could gain international agreement behind that or international input to creating an even better version of that, that would be a really strong starting point for making the conversation about online safety global.  It's really hard to talk about online safety until you have agreement as to what the harms you're trying to mitigate against are.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: Perfect, thank you.  We're running a little bit ahead of time.  If there are no final questions, now is your chance.  I think what I might do is take a little bit longer and ask the panelists to talk about their personal commitment to this subject going forward. I guess as importantly, how we turn this conversation into actions that helps us achieve all the goals we talked through in the panel session today.  Who would like to go first?  Sorry, I'm just assuming someone would ‑‑
>> IAN STEVENSON: Look, through the online safety tech industry association, we are committed to being a part of this conversation.  And I'd encourage everyone, whether you're in the UK or not and whether you're in the public or private sector to look us up to engage with us, to look at some of the events we're looking to participate in those.
You know, our commitment is to try and make industry collectively a constructive partner in these conversations globally so that hopefully if we were to reconvene at a meeting like this in five years' time we would be looking back and talking about successful deployments of practical innovative technology to address some of the key harms.  I'm sure we'll still be talking about the missing pieces of the jigsaw puzzle as well.  That's the point I'd like to get us to and we really want to be a part of that conversation and we're open to engaging with anyone and everybody who wants to join it.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: Mary, would you mind?
>> MARY AIKEN: I think for me as a cyber psychologist, you know, we've been sleepwalking our way into an age of technology.  We adopt each technology as lemmings following off a cliff.  For me, it will be progress when we can mitigate its harmful effects.  I think Ian's point is a really good point to look towards creating an international standard for online harm.  We're doing some work at the moment in terms of creating ‑‑ with Ofcom, with Simon's group ‑‑ in terms of looking at taxonomies of harm, and we're also considering how ‑‑ those taxonomies are considered in a developmental context.
We're all familiar with the stages of development, six months an infant should set up, at five they should be capable of whatever operations.  But there are no stages of cyber cognizant developments.  What age do you give a child a smartphone?  How do kids get the best out of technology? So I think that area in a global context is incredibly important.  The internet was founded on the construct that all users are equal.  This is not the case.  Not all users are equal.  Some are more vulnerable than others and children are particularly vulnerable.  I'm committed to creating a more secure cyberspace.
We've touched on the point, in a civil cyber society we should have three aims.  One is an aim of privacy.  The other is an aim of the vitality of the tech industry.  And the third aim is one for collective safety and security.  And the point is about balance.  None of these aims should have primacy over the other and that's the road map.  That's the way we'll achieve best practice going forward.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: Deepak?
>> DEEPAK TEWARI: I'm approaching this exactly from an engineer and technologist point of view.  Whatever we are developing, we want to be able to measure the impact.  The tech that we're developing today, we can tell you that about 60,000 kids are using it and it has a certain measure of reduction of online harms.
So all the efforts that we are doing now, my goal would be to see how it is creating an impact, is it able to reduce online harms as we know it?  Are we able to identify situations, mitigate them, make kids more resilient?  And technology for technology sake is not great.  When it results in measurable impact ‑‑ so my personal commitment would be that everything that we are doing, we would come back and be able to demonstrate the impact each of these technologies has on the well‑being on kids. By definition that would mean you would be able to replicate that impact elsewhere so it becomes a case in point.
>> RONI GUR: I would love to piggyback off that and share that every board of directors meeting that we hold starts with our number one goal in the company, which is how many lives did we save.  Then we can talk about profit and customers and all of the rest of the things.
I think that's unique for a private company.  I think we want to create an open together community, even if, you know, there are private ‑‑ even if it's in the private sector.  We want to collaborate in that way.  And I think kind of our commitment to this thing is we will show up, we will open our books, and we will commit to working together and putting we can, which is mainly technological but could be, you know, resources or ideas. Because, again, we have to do it together.  I think when one thrives, everyone will.  So that's our commitment.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: Thank you, Roni. Simon, if you may?
>> SIMON SAUNDERS: It's always tough when everyone else has spoke.  I'm happy to take my turn on that one.
Listen, in terms of commitment, the key thing I can offer at this point is dialogue.  We're hungry to hear more from the providers of this technology.  The technology you're working on, Deepak, I'd love to see those examples, and Roni, of where you've made a difference to people's lives.  Tell us about how we can think about how you do measure those outcomes and what is an appropriate way of measuring and your views on, you know, what the state of the art looks like today and what could change over time, and indeed, what we could do to shift that gradient upwards in terms of where the bar could reasonably be.  That dialogue is important to us.
It's important to us that that dialogue is truly international.  The platforms, the sources of content that we're dealing with are international and I'm quite certain the innovators for that technology are all around the world as well.  So we'll continue to engage very deeply with our home‑grown providers facilitated with Ian and our colleagues in the government, we'd like to hear from the rest of the world as well and I commit to listening to those as well.
>> KEVIN CUNNINGTON: I saw we got a couple late breaking questions.  If I may, just defer and ask the moderators to find you an answer to those based on the panelists' views.  If I may sum up, we set out to meet three points.  We wanted to understand whether there was agreement that these are global issues.  I think that came up perfectly clearly.  These are global issues.  And that we need international collaboration to make ourselves most effective in dealing with them.  Very productive workshop.  Only remains for me to thank the panel and also relay their genuine sense of commitment.  You can see from each of them how committed they are to making this a better place.  Thank them for their attendance today and thank you for attending.
>> MARY AIKEN: Kevin, can we take it we have a mandate to go forth and to do good?
>> RONI GUR: I'm on Mary's team. 
>> DEEPAK TEWARI: Thank you all, bye bye.
>> RONI GUR: Thank you so much.
>> MARY AIKEN: Thanks to the participants and our attendees for listening in, thank you. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-of25-freedom-online-coalition-open-forum^^

 
>> MODERATOR: We have a couple minutes to go technically, and officially our panel kicks off in five minutes.  We'll give it another couple of minutes then we'll kick off. 
>> TECH SUPPORT: Good afternoon, good morning, good evening.  I'm providing the tech support.  This meeting is being recorded and is hosted under the IGF code of conduct and the U.N. rules and regulations.  If anyone needs to speak, a person will have to unmute him or herself.  But if the person is having any issues the person can indicate that in the chat and I'll gladly do that.  That is all for now.  Please enjoy your session. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Raymond.  I hope everyone is clear on the rules.  We're now ready to go and start our panel.  I'd like to welcome all participants to this open forum session of the IGF of the Freedom Online Coalition.  We have an hour for our discussion, and my name is Lea Kaspar, and I'm moderating this conversation. 
 [ Inaudible ]
Again, this time in a virtual format, so I hope we'll be able to ‑‑ some of the directivity the IGF known for us.  I'd like to encourage our participants to share questions with us.  There's a Q&A function that you should be ‑‑ you should have available.  You can use the ‑‑ that function to post your questions or you can use the function in the chat for general comments.  I'll be monitoring both and see if I could ‑‑ I'll try to integrate to the extent possible into our discussion.
So with that, let's get to the core of what we're meant to be here today.  For those of you who are uninitiated and unfamiliar with the Freedom Online Coalition, just a couple of words on what the FOC is.  The Freedom Online Coalition is an intergovernmental coalition of 32 members at the moment established 2011 at the inaugural conference at the Hague.  It's committed to advancing internet freedom, including free expression, free association and assembly and the right to privacy worldwide. Now, one of the key priorities of the FOC is to shape global norms in the way that supports its mission through joint action.  One of these actions is drafting and developing joint statements and then leveraging the language of these statements in key diplomatic forums as well as laterally among members and the broader community.
In the past the FOC has issued statements on a number of relevant topics for the work of the coalition, including network disruptions, internet censorship, digital inclusion and the protection of human rights online in the context of cybersecurity.  The most recent statement that was released by FOC was about COVID which was released in June.  The commission called for measures to addressed to be compliant with international human rights law.
One of the topics the commission highlighted was the topic of disinformation where it's highlighted its conversation with the spread of disinformation online and the activity it seeks to leverage the COVID‑19 pandemic with maligned intent.  I think we're going to use that as a starting point for this discussion.  What we've decided to talk about specifically is the way in which the coalition is working to address and tackle the issue of disinformation and misinformation.  There are other things the coalition is working on, but for the time that we have allocated today, we're going to focus on this particular topic.
What we ‑‑ what I'd like to do first is go to my panelists for a set of opening remarks and reflections on why the FOC has decided to deal with these ‑‑ with this topic and why it sees this as a timely conversation to be had in the context of the coalition, and specifically why the coalition has decided to actually develop a joint statement on the topic of disinformation.
Now, I have with me three panelists, I have two government speakers and a representative from the corporate sector Rauno Merisaari, we have Campbell Davis, the head of digital policy from the cyberpolicy department at the foreign Commonwealth and development office in the UK.  And Akua Gyekye, regional lead for strategic response.  Sorry, I did my best with the pronunciation there.  I hope I did not go too far off.
With that I'd like to turn to our government speakers first.  The reason for that is as these two governments are members of the coalition who have decided to take the lead in developing the statement to disinformation, and I'd like to kind of get their impressions and sense of why they've decided to do that and why they think this is an important topic to discuss in the context of the coalition.
Rauno, would you like to go first?  I want to come to you first as the incoming chair of the coalition for next year.  What was behind your government's decision to lead the process of developing this statement?  Rauno, the floor is yours. 
>> RAUNO MERISAARI: Thank you, Lea, I hope you can hear me.  Yeah.  So when we conduct with our ‑‑ so we discussed really the need for this statement.  As we know, as Lea said, the Freedom Online Coalition's aim is to promote human rights online.  Well, disinformation itself, it's not a human rights violation, nor a crime.  It shouldn't be a crime because that ‑‑ the criminalization of disinformation would lead to silencing of critical voices and restrict the diversity of information, et cetera.
Disinformation, however, undermines and prevents enjoyment of many human rights, trusting democratic institutions.  And that is why the Freedom Online Coalition ‑‑ not only economic, but also in whole society, the right to seek information access to information is essential for development, prevent corruption, et cetera. Also we know that the factual information and right to information is also essential to protect public health and save lives as we have seen on the current COVID‑19 pandemic.  Lea said already, it's a productive statement about this issue.
And my government, we are worried about the discrimination and stigmas.  Disinformation can be used as a tool to incite hatred and violence.  Often the most vulnerable groups and persons are targets of this kind of net aggression.  So I think these are some reasons to start ‑‑ something from the British point of view.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thanks, Rauno.  Campbell, Rauno already mentioned the link between disinformation and misinformation campaigns as they relate to democracy, as they relate to public health and safety and potential implications for marginalized groups and how that might be another aspect ‑‑ why this ‑‑ why this issue is so important for the coalition to tackle. What was your ‑‑ what was the thinking behind your involvement on this topic?
>> CAMPBELL DAVIS: First of all, thank you for organizing this and allowing us to participate.  Rauno, thank you very much for those comments as well.
I think I'm enjoying a lot of the IGF sessions.  You see time and again disinformation features across the range of the work, which speaks to what important and salient topic it is.  Of course, it's not a new phenomenon.  Malicious rumors have always traveled faster than the truth.  However, now the change in media environment means that disinformation can now spread faster than ever and to more people than ever.  And the rise of disinformation and the multiple threats means that we collectively must respond to that. Of course, the COVID‑19 pandemic and the resulting increase in online activity, it just highlights that challenge even more clearly over the course of this year.  Of course, the election that is still ongoing in the United States in recent days is only the most recent disinformation that's been a topic of concern.
So the UK government is committed to ensuring that the people have access to accurate information.  And ultimately the public are equipped to make their own discussions with confidence in that information.  And so for us in the UK domestically we're developing a comprehensive policy response to tackle misinformation, working closely with civil society, academia, technology platforms and others.  We've developed a check list for members of the public to use to increase audience resiliency, educating and empowering people who see and potentially share information.
And we're working with strategic communication experts as well.  We're able to respond through communication campaigns where necessary.  And as I said, crucially, of course, engaging with technology platforms regularly, working closely with them to help identify and take action to remove incorrect, dangerous misleading information, which reaches the terms and conditions.  And to help us also understand that the spread of disinformation and misinformation on platforms and help steps they themselves are taking to address disinformation and misinformation. I think it's clear that more work is needed on the scale and the scope and the impact of online manipulation, including disinformation.  So the UK government is taking a wide ranging program research to explore those issues and engaging widely with academia and the civil society who have a huge area of expertise in that space.
Obviously a huge part of this response clearly isn't domestic, it's international.  And it involves working with many stakeholders to provide a better understanding of how the techniques are used as part of disinformation campaigns operate.  And best practice for how we respond and fundamentally disinformation is clearly a multinational and a multistate issue.  As such, an important one for the efficacy to address. That brings us really to the core of this work that we're doing together with Finland and the work we've been doing together on the statement.  Because the threat to the enjoyment of human rights is growing in reach and sophistication when we look at misinformation.  It affects all societies globally and it affects our democratic values.  It can affect public health as we've seen clearly throughout there COVID‑19 pandemic.
Importantly, disinformation has a potential to impact a range of human rights on freedom of opinion, expression, the right to take part in the conduct of public affairs, elections, protections against discrimination, the rights to health, right to education.  And crucially, while we domestically and working with international partners take action to address misinformation online, we'll ensure that freedom of expression and human rights online are protected.  Particularly freedom of expression.  The media are essential qualities for any functioning democracy.  People must be allowed to discuss and debate issues freely, and as such the UK is dedicated to protecting freedom of expression in alignment with our democratic values.
To sort of wrap up there, the threat of disinformation clearly requires a multinational and multistakeholder response.  It's not only about what governments should and should not do.  So the coalition is an important forum that brings together all of these different voices, government, industry, civil society, academia, et cetera, and brings a wealth of expertise from which my government and others and everybody collectively benefits. So that I think is a principle rationale for why we're doing this work and indeed for today's session here now for which, again, I thank you for organizing.  So I shall leave it there.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Campbell.  You mentioned a couple of things I'd like to come back to later in this discussion, including some of the measures that your government is taking in tackling this issue.  I think it will be interesting to dig a little bit deeper, specifically you mentioned digital literacy and how important that is and I think that's certainly part of the tool box of measures we need to keep in mind and implement.
Before we come back to measures and solutions, I still want to unpack a little bit about why we're even discussing this and why this is a timely topic. Akua, you are working with Facebook.  And for people's awareness, Facebook is a member of the FOC advisory network, which is a multistakeholder ‑‑ stakeholders who are nongovernmental who are engaging in the work with the coalition.  Facebook has been involved in the network.  I'd like to hear your views on why you think this is an important topic generally and also for the FOC to be involved in from your perspective.  Go ahead.
>> AKUA GYEKYE: Thank you so much.  I'm grateful for the opportunity to be part of this panel and give you a little bit of a context as to how Facebook is thinking about this very important topic. I think to put it a bit more into perspective we nowadays have over 3.1 billion people connect on Facebook on a monthly basis around the world.  My particular area of expertise covers Subsaharan Africa, as I lead our election integrity work covering Subsaharan Africa.  There we have over 176 million people who connect to their family and friends and communities on a regular basis.
I think the company recognizes as one of their values to ensure that people are safe when they connect online.  As much as the company also believes that free expression is fundamental to the company, we also have to recognize there are limitations to free speech and making sure that people can engage in a safe manner is really important.
I think part of that conversation, of course, is about how do we combat misinformation and false news so it can affect things like important elections or other conversations, so we're doing quite a bit.  I think it's important to keep in mind there's no silver bullet when it comes to combating misinformation.  There's quite a lot that the company has done, continues to do.  Not by itself, but really in collaboration with other partners.  So I'm grateful to hear, also, from our government partners about the approaches.  Because I think the beauty of such collaboration in panels is always to look for opportunities for how we can further collaborate and make sure that issues can be addressed and really get to people.
When it comes to misinformation more specifically, we have a policy that focuses on reduce, inform, as well as remove content.  When you think about the first part, which is removing content, it really is content that violates what we deem to be our community standards.  It's important to note that it's not the wild, wild west when it comes to Facebook.  We do have policies, we set community standards that say what's allowed and what's not allowed on Facebook, and it's the sort of values that are global.  They're not stagnant.  They continue to be updated.  And they really focus on authenticity, safety, privacy and dignity.
As you can tell, guided by international human rights and really relevant for this topic.  But when it comes to misinformation, we recognize that even though they don't violate our community standards per se, they undermine the healthy conversations that we want people to have.  We want people to see accurate information.  Fact checkers are organizations that day in and day out do that type of work.  They look for content online, they do the research and figure out is something true, partly true, or is it false. In partnership with them, they inform then Facebook, what content online should be deemed false, and then we do our part and label such content as false.  We have over 70 partners around the world in Subsaharan Africa.  We cover over 18 countries, and it's an ongoing program and we always look for more partners.
I've been excited.  I've been with Facebook for five years.  I've been excited to see that network grow, both in terms of countries but also local languages.  Sometimes you have to realize that, you know, false news might spread in English or French.  I'm from Ghana, so the more we can sort of expand the coverage there, I think we're working towards the right direction.  And what we've seen is that once we got these ‑‑ that information from the third party fact checkers, we place warning labels on content to let people know, hey, this has been fact checked by a third party fact checker.  You might not want to share this with your family and friends.
The good thing is that research has shown that the majority of people who see such warning labels then don't engage with the content and most importantly also don't contribute to sharing it.  Because nobody wants to be the source of false news, right?  And I think that's sort of a big part.
At the same time to the point that was raised earlier, digital literacy is an important component.  We do a lot of outreach on radio stations, oftentimes in native languages to make people aware and sort of think about, hey, let me think about what kind of content is it.  How is it making me feel?  What's the source?  If I feel strongly, should I really be sharing it with my family and friends?  Has it been forwarded by many people?  What's the original source? So getting people more in the habit of asking these questions, doing additional research, and being clear about content they read online or anywhere else, really, I think is another important aspect of sort of tackling misinformation.
Lastly, I would say from my perspective, which is at the moment we're quite busy, even though the U.S. has an election, Ghana, my own country is looking at an election.  We had elections in the Seychelles as well.  The sort of topic of misinformation is important to think about the election.  Based on feedback and conversations like we're having today, we updated our policy a while back to say that misinformation that has false voter information would be completely removed.  If somebody says the election is taking place on a Tuesday, even though it's taking place on a Wednesday, we remove content proactively.  Not waiting for people to report it to us because we deem that to violate our voter suppression policies.
We also look at misinformation has a high chance of leading to offline harm.  There are tensions in the country and excitement is there, emotions run quite high, which is not a unique issue to Subsaharan Africa.  We see this is an issue around the world.  We have teams internally, as well as external partners who make an assessment from a human rights perspective and otherwise to see if this information can lead to imminent harm to people.  We want to remove it from our platform.  We don't want to contribute to any kind of tensions or people getting hurt.  There I think safety will always trump freedom of expression.
I hope that gives you a bit of a context of how the company thinks about misinformation.  Why it's an important topic that we are involved in.  But also that we are relying on partnerships and making sure that we both educate people on how to better spot it, but also do our part to make sure that people don't continue to see and engage with the content.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for that and for sharing kind of some of the measures that the companies are putting in place in this case, Facebook in particular.  There are others, obviously, there's a lot happening as well on Twitter.  Much more proactive in recent weeks.  We've seen ‑‑ I think everyone will agree we ever definitely seen a step change when it comes to proactive measures that companies, platforms are taking compared to a couple of years ago when this topic became kind of more prominent on the agenda.
I'd like to come back to that and the role of platforms more generally.  But I now kind of want ‑‑ I think listening to you, what I am thinking is there's a lot of agreement.  You know, there's a lot of good stuff happening.  Platforms are taking measures, governments are taking measures to tackle this.  We all agree this is an issue.  It would all ‑‑ you know, someone who is not familiar with maybe the debate would think, like, well, we all agree on everything.  What's really the problem?
And for those who are unaware, the coalition is in the process of developing a statement on this topic.  This has been going on for nearly a year.  So we've been in the process of developing language on this issue for over a year.  I'd like to check in on why ‑‑ what makes this topic really so challenging to find agreement on?  What is the crux of the issue at hand?  Is it just that it's ‑‑ you know, is it the scale?  It's not a new topic.  We've had disinformation campaigns around for a very long time. So I just want to get a sense, maybe first Campbell if you don't mind, I'd like to come to you for your reflections on why ‑‑ what are some of the difficulties in developing the statement on the FOC side and why is this topic so challenging?
>> CAMPBELL DAVIS: Thanks, Lea, it's a good question.  You referenced the statement that we've been working on for some time.  And dare I say, oftentimes government can take its time to produce things like this.  Specifically, when you look at the topic like disinformation, in part simply due to its relative novelty and the fact it's increased in scale so much in a relatively short space of time.  It is naturally difficult for consensus to be reached quickly, not only between different governments, stakeholders, even within organizations, government, stakeholders as to what exactly is the right approach and how to factor in all those various considerations that one needs to make.  It's complicating, it's evolving and challenging and reaching consensus can take some time.
If we look within my own organization from the UK government, well then, as I said earlier, we're developing a comprehensive response to this.  That involves bringing together parts of government, which work with cybersecurity and digital policy, online harms, media literacy, et cetera, et cetera.  There's a huge range of actors involved all with slightly different sets of interests and priorities. And so naturally, it takes time to work that out, even on a sort of single organizational level.  Of course, scaling that up to one that is multinational and multistakeholder involved further layer and level of challenge.
I feel there's quite a lot of challenge simply from the novelty, the scale and the range of factors that are included.  And as I say, I speak obviously from a government perspective, but, of course, as I said this is not just about governments.  I think we, taking the lead on this together, are keen that this does involve a very wide range of stakeholders.  Ultimately, not only is that key to determining the right approaches and the right ways to take this forward, it is key in delivering the outcomes that I think collectively we all want to see.  This is not something that simply any single government or any groups of governments can deliver entirely on their own.  It requires cooperation, collaboration amongst a huge range of stakeholders and our colleagues are amongst those leading the technology platforms.
So that, I think, helps to explain perhaps why it's not been a very rapid process, although I think it would be fair to say a lot of progress has been made on the statement.  Ultimately, you know, if we think about the statement and when we do eventually reach our consensus and we're able to put the statement together, I think what we're probably hoping to do through this is to begin to build global norms and consensus around these challenges and around the ways we begin to think about and take it forward. I think that in itself is going to be an important part in helping to structure this debate and begin to draw people together in ways that will be usual and fruitful in terms of responding to the challenge which again, we all recognize is there.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Rauno or Akua would you like to come in on that?  Please go ahead.  I see Rauno, you're trying to intervene maybe, go ahead.
>> RAUNO MERISAARI: Thank you, Lea.  Yeah, just adding something to what Campbell said, I fully agree with what you said.  This really has been a wonderful year with this issue.  I've learned a lot.  I'm afraid that I'm everyday learning something new because this ‑‑ kind of moving target that ‑‑ so maybe it's one reason for this process has taken so long time.
I believe we have no fundamental ‑‑ the different approach is that this is ‑‑ so everybody understand that the spreading of disinformation does harm, and we know that we should combat disinformation.  As Campbell said, this is not any new issue.  For instance, in my country, we have some ‑‑ we witnessed the geopolitical situation.  We have witnessed the Russian propaganda and ‑‑ at least for more than 100 years.
What is somewhat new is that we are now understanding how much this phenomenon affects the enjoyment of human rights.  Not only how much it can harm reputation, not only that this could be and is ‑‑ a security issue, but how much it also affects for instance the right to health.  I'm not sure if this is the first intergovernmental trying to shape a kind of normative tool for this issue.
Then there are certain specific questions that are quite complicated.  For instance, metadata or algorithms, how much we can regulate the use of algorithms and how transparent the issue shall be, et cetera, so there are many questions.  Having said that, I'm fully confident we are all able to make this statement.  I'm qualified and it will be adopted by the member states.  Thank you, Lea.
>> MODERATOR: Thanks, Rauno.  Now I think it sounds like one of the things that is new and what makes this complicated is ‑‑ there are a couple things I heard there.  One of them is the role of the platforms, Akua.  That's not something that we've had in the past that presents part of the ‑‑ I think the challenge of dealing with this.  I kind of want to get your sense ‑‑ like, why this is a challenge and what's new about this.
As you've noted as well and we touched on before, the proactive measures that the platforms are now taking has been broadly welcomed by the community at large in terms of tackling this issue.  However, there are concerns that you hear around, you know, the mandate that the platforms have to do this and to police free speech.  That's certainly one question.  The other question that is raised is even if we agree that platforms do have a role in doing that, what about transparency, accountability and how do we ensure that those measures are implemented in a way that is in line with those principles and more generally with human rights law and standards.
I kind of want to get your sense ‑‑ sorry to put you on the spot, but I think it's good to have you here so we get that feedback and we have that conversation.  Do you think the role that the platforms are doing in this more proactive role that this is appropriate and what should ‑‑ what are ‑‑ would be some of your recommendations of what should be done better?
>> AKUA GYEKYE: I'm grateful for the questions.  A few things come to mind.  I heard someone ask me before why is it so easy for Facebook to remove COVID related misinformation as opposed to other fake news.  We have a source of authority dictating us.  What is in bounds and what is not in bounds when it comes to misinformation about COVID.  Right?  We get guidance from the WHO.
The same is not really true for political speech, so I think that's why we're calling for regulation to set these clear rules to the road.  So private companies don't have to make the call.  But I do think that having been with this company for five years, we're not a company that will sit on our hands and wait for things to happen.  I think in the meantime the company does have a responsibility and takes it seriously.  To the third-party fact checking program, we're sharing the responsibility.  We shouldn't be the arbiter of truth, but we work with organizations that are independent, they've been certified by the international fact checking network.  It's non‑biased.  It has relevant accreditation to do this type of research and to be able to look into which things are fake and which things are not.
I think one has to be really specific.  If you see an image that's used out of context because it was used in another country before, I think that's very easy for independent third-party fact checkers to review.  If it requires a bit more research, they might have to have more time to look into the story, do the fact checking before they can come back and let us know that a story is false, partly false ‑‑ sometimes we use humor and satire.  These are all things that make it a bit more complicated and I think there is no one easy fix.
In regards to the issue about transparency, I couldn't agree more.  One of the focus areas that we are also focusing on to tackle misinformation is taking down fake accounts.  Fake accounts we've noticed is one area where it's a lot of the source of mischief as I like to say, especially also in the context of misinformation. We're very public about the number of accounts we take down, both proactively based on our AI technology, but also relatively based on reports people tell us about.  There is no secret, it's the opposite.  There's transparency in regards to what we do.
Same is true for removing networks of bad actors.  Right?  Who is behind the misinformation?  Do we have a network of coordinated inauthentic behavior as we call it which is not allowed on Facebook.  Once our research teams ‑‑ we have threat intelligent, info ops and quite a few others that work with governments, security agencies, other tech companies to look for these inauthentic actors.  Once the network is identified, we post every single time on our newsroom site and there you find information about who is the network, what kind of content did they post, which countries were targeted in their attempt to undermine maybe healthy political debate.
So we are very transparent and I actually would recommend everyone to check out, you know, has my country been affected, what kind of content maybe has Facebook removed.  How did they fan out and take down related groups of pages or profiles.  I couldn't agree with you mere.  We definitely have a responsibility to let people know how we're approaching this.  We do so on an ongoing basis. Specifically for Africa, just last week we did a newsroom post, it's in my name, about how we go about supporting elections in Subsaharan Africa.  Tackling misinformation is a huge aspect of that.  We share information about who these third-party fact checkers are so that's no secret either as well as the body that certifies them.
The issues you raise are all very valid but I wanted to provide comfort that these are all things we're thinking about on a regular basis and that we're actually looking towards more guidance as to what else we should be doing in this space.  In the meantime, we're not sitting still.  We're doing as much as we can.  We invest a lot in terms of people.  Compared to when I started, we now have tripled our employees who focus on safety and security.  We have 35,000 people who do this day in and day out.  Out of those, 15,000 people are content reviewers.  They look at the type of information that is shared online in different languages 24/7 around the clock. So is that an easy fix?  We sort of say we're done now?  Of course not.  I think it shows how serious this company is taking the commitment to address false news.
>> MODERATOR: There are a couple of things I'd like to draw on there.  Thank you for sharing those views.  I see a couple of questions in the Q&A and one of them actually is asking about what the role of ‑‑ how this issue is being tackled across the world.
I think often when we look at this issue, because the platforms are based in the U.S. that there's a question of like, what are the ‑‑ what is the appropriate role and how this issue is being tackled in different regions.  So I'd like to come back to that question, but first I want to pick up on something you said about calling for government regulation.  I want to come to our government speakers here.
Just to reflect on something that hasn't been mentioned yet, that is okay, great, we're calling for more to be done for platforms, we're developing regulation across the world, countries are doing this.  What we've been seeing and one of the risks that has occurred and is very real for a number of ‑‑ in a number of countries is that in cases ‑‑ in more like I would say ‑‑ less democratically bent countries, we've seen efforts by governments to develop ‑‑ to use this information and use it as a justification to deal with political opponents.  To, you know, clamp down on free speech, independent journalists, et cetera.
I mean, all is well and good in asking for governments to put in place more regulatory and legal measures.  What if those measures end up undermining our rights?  I just want to see if Rauno or Campbell you have reflections on that.  How do we ensure ‑‑ when is the line to ensure that if we do put rules and regulations in place, how do we make sure they're rights respecting?
>> RAUNO MERISAARI: Yeah, thank you, Lea.  What we can do at the international level is we're trying to find some common ground.  Our approach is in some way based on the international human rights law.  We know that also this issue ‑‑ so, I mean, spreading information, they can be also ‑‑ on the basis of the existing international law and there are certain principles.  Things must be lawful.  There must be some kind of professionality if you're removing some information, et cetera.
But you're right.  Then there are differences in national levels.  Our tradition protects very strongly freedom of speech.  We have quite a few cases by the courts where for instance, some websites have been closed by the court decision.  Some neo Nazi websites, et cetera, et cetera.  We're following what happens in Europe because we know that in Europe, we have a kind of normative process, this issue.  But then we believe also that there must be ‑‑ this must happen so that the industry is really committed to do something.  Maybe that's ‑‑I'll stop here.
>> MODERATOR: I don't know, Campbell, if you wanted to comment on this.
>> CAMPBELL DAVIS: I absolutely agree with Rauno there.  I think this sort of fundamental starting point is that human rights online are the same as human rights offline and really, we shouldn't be drawing a distinction.  We should be working in the same way and upholding the same righting and freedoms.  After all, they are universal.  Online, offline, it shouldn't make a difference.
As Rauno says, in our work with our international partners, bilateral, unilaterally, we're clear about the importance, that work that's undertaken to counter disinformation is proportionate and doesn't have ‑‑ doesn't affect freedoms, human rights, freedom of expression, et cetera, and that the actions are taken are disproportionate.  I think you're right.  We do see some actors, perhaps using this as an excuse or cover to do that.  So we need to be clear in our own actions and in our conversations and in the work that we do, for example, looking at shaping norms and looking at shaping the kind of statements and dialogue that we have between countries and with our multistakeholder partners that this is a fundamental aspect of this and it shouldn't be used in that way as a cover for attempts to reduce freedoms.
>> MODERATOR: So what I'm hearing is a combination of things.  One is building international consensus around the topic, working with partners around the world but also setting good examples of how you do it nationally.  I think that that is something that a lot of countries ‑‑ what is happening, we see a lot of copycats.  So like once if Europe leads and starts implementing a regulatory approach, all of a sudden you have a disinformation law, fake news law in that country or this country.
Akua, before I come to you, I want to acknowledge a couple of questions.  I want to encourage people to post their questions into Q&A.  I have a couple that are actually addressed directly to I think to you, Akua, that are related to the role of the platforms.  We've already tackled a question from Leslie around what is Facebook doing when it comes to sharing transparency to more individuals but making the process accessible in more languages.
That relates not necessarily to directly to a question that Madeleine was posing, but something more differentiated regional approach to tackling disinformation.  I want to maybe ‑‑ maybe this is unfair, but I kind of want ‑‑ I want to merge those questions and to discuss a little bit about how we deal with this topic around the world and some of the challenges of, you know, of dealing with this in different ‑‑ across different jurisdictions.  I'd like to get your sense on that.
>> AKUA GYEKYE: Thank you for the question.  I can speak to our approach in Subsaharan Africa simply because that's my area of expertise and that's a whole continent.  I think it also tackles the broader point in that our approach to attacking misinformation is a global one.  There again, the partnership with our third-party fact checkers is critical.  We have them around the globe, right?  They're not just situated in the U.S. 
I think your point holds true and that's why I think Facebook is not the right entity to see what is true and what is false online.  You need local context, understanding, something that is a joke in one country might be highly sensitive in another country.  In order for you to figure out what is true or false, you need to have an understanding of the local context.  And there the independent third-party fact checkers sit in those countries.  They speak those languages.  They cover ‑‑ they have networks with journalists and other academia and others from those countries or regions and organizations such as Africa Check, AFP, Friends 24 and a few more we're partnering with.  That's what they do day in and day out.  They think about who do we hire, who has expertise in the context of this country and how can we make sure we upgrade the teams with more people who have expertise on the local context.
So I think the point in the question is very well taken.  And that's exactly the sort of push I've worked on internally and other teams as well.  And I've seen the progress we've made in regards to starting out with a handful of countries, now we cover ‑‑ I said 18 before, it's actually over 20 countries in Subsaharan Africa and multiple languages as well.  You can be rest assured that the more we can do that type of work and find local partners we can actually work with, I think the more we can make sure that it works on a global scale.
I think the one constraint that we face is that we want these third-party fact checkers to be is certified by the international network I mentioned and that process takes a little bit of time.  It's a good process and rigorous process because you want to make sure the entity is trusts, non‑biased it adheres to code of conduct practices.  But our call to organizations to do that work is to start with that process.  Get certified by this network so we can partner with you and use you going forward in partnership to help us spot false news, let people know about it, and then also ‑‑ that's another great job these organizations do ‑‑ share related articles so people have more content about the news.  They can look more into what ‑‑ why somebody rated it as false.  And further educate themselves. So it's kind of a call to action almost, that if you're in this space, definitely look into this network and how your organization can become certified.
>> MODERATOR: Thanks for elaborating and taking that question on.  I have a couple other questions in the chat that I want to bring to the attention of the speakers.  One, she's asking can panelists explain in more detail what is in their opinion the right division of labor between governments and the private sector when it comes to addressing disinformation. This is kind of the ‑‑ goes to the question around roles and responsibilities of ‑‑ that we've kind of already touched upon.  But if anyone would like to think about that and comment, please do.
The other question I see ‑‑ it's an interesting one which is ‑‑ picks up on the question of proportionality.  We were discussing the ‑‑ where you draw the line and both Rauno and Campbell you mentioned proportionality as an important principle when it comes to assessing the limitations on some of our rights and specifically in Article 19 as ‑‑ which outlines the limitations on freedom of speech.
Certainly, this is not an absolute right and there are limitations being posed.  The way we check for this is we'll look at ‑‑ we have ‑‑ the three-part test and proportionality is one of the questions that we ask.  Are the measures in response to a problem we're trying to address proportionate to the potential harm that they could cause?
So I kind of want to get ‑‑ the question, maybe ‑‑ just to read it out to make sure everyone has it in front of them.  Are the provisions of proportionality ‑‑ that's one question and that's maybe a question to Facebook.  Like, do you ‑‑ is there any notes or elaboration on when content is taken down.  What's being considered.  And is it formalized in any way?
And then a comment on whether proportionality is being used in a matter that causes an undue limitation of rights.  I think the question is probably broader.  I'd be interested to hear, you know, how in the UK or Finland you've been dealing with this topic and anything to share and then we'll come back to Facebook to see if you have any reflections.  Taking into consideration the other question as well that we've had.  I don't know, Rauno or Campbell, if you want to come in.
>> RAUNO MERISAARI: I guess I start.  The responsibilities of governments and the private sector.  Of course, the governments they are state parties of the international governance, so we have judicial obligations. The case law is so far that's not so rich, would we say.  We have a case about the Russian sputnik radio station and how this information was used to violate one person's rights in Germany.  Finally, the restrictions will be some way tested in course and in legal terms.  We hope ‑‑ voluntary ways to use this proportionality.  That's the legal ‑‑ it's quite hard.
>> MODERATOR: Is there anything else you want to add?  Looking at the clock, we have six minutes to go.  I'll do another round just for closing.  But just on this topic, I just want to check whether you have quick thoughts on that before I go to Akua and then we go a round of wrap up.
>> CAMPBELL DAVIS: I'll be brief.  I thought what Rauno's explanation there the situation in Finland was interesting.  Absolutely right, the principle here should be of cooperation and collaboration, not only between governments and civil society, the right rules and responsibilities for this.
I think the immediate exact of the COVID‑19 pandemic is a good one.  You know, they make it a little more easy to work out what the rights and responsibilities are.  I think it's a useful blueprint.  Not only for thinking through those responsibilities but thinking through the ‑‑ and I think that has helped to set up a lot of very useful channels for communication that we can then hopefully elaborate more broadly into areas.  Akua mentioned the importance of governments setting regulation.  I won't go into this in depth, but last year the UK government published a white paper on our approach to online harms and we hope that in due course that will allow the UK to have a framework, which is putting us hopefully at the front of what governments around the world are doing to tackle a range of online harms.
One of the issues that's covered in that is misinformation which in due course there will be further work coming out.  That thinking is in the UK and internally with the work we do with platforms.  We have quite elaborated sort of processes and protocols that set out what, for us.  How we work together with platforms.  There has been a good dialogue with platforms on that again, specifically on COVID‑19 work right from the beginning of that.  Most recently yesterday our secretaries of state for digital culture media and sport and health and social care had a round table with the major platforms, the latest stage in that work.  It is a very ‑‑ again a very useful blueprint.  This has been where we have been working with the platforms to think of the best ways we help to shape those such they are delivering what we want to see here and what input is needed from government on that. Then that is a continuing process.  As I say, that specific example is a very good blueprint and a helpful way for us to begin to take this work forward.
>> MODERATOR: Thanks, Campbell.  I think, Akua, I'm going to come to you.  I think we don't have a lot of time left so this ‑‑ if you don't mind, also making this kind of your final comment and apologies for everyone if your question has not been addressed.  Thanks to everyone who posted questions in the chat.
I guess, the one remaining question I have is what should the FOC do next?  We're here in an FOC open forum.  What do you think the FOC should do?  I will come to Rauno for your thoughts as the incoming share on that.  But I kind of want to give you a chance to address a couple of points that have been raised in the discussion so far, and then I'm going to come to Rauno for closing.
>> AKUA GYEKYE: Thank you for that.  One thing one has to take into account is that the commitment of Facebook to free expression is paramount.  At the same time, it's really important that we keep people safe online.  There's an ultimate tension there and the company won't always get it right.  That being said, we are guided by a set of principles.  There are community standards, as I mentioned earlier.  I really would sort of ask people to have a look to better understand how do we think about what is allowed and what is not allowed.
How do we respond to information or content that is posted that violates these community standards?  We have reports on how much content we take down in regards to some of that content as well.  There's transparency in regards to that.  But I also think it's not a perfect system.  So I think based on that feedback, there have been multiple initiatives to help people appeal decisions.
If it's in regards to false news, as a publisher you have the right to approach that fact checker and ask for an appeal.  To make sure that they maybe have access to information they didn't have when they made that rating.  The company Facebook, we recently launched our independent oversight board.  Again, they're supposed to be thinking about the really tough questions of proportionality of content decisions that were made that might be difficult, especially to come up to that healthy balance between safety and free expression on a global scale.
And I think that's something, also, that has to be kept in account.  In regards to last words, I just want to say thank you for the opportunity to participate.  And my ask is always one of collaboration.  Right.  We can't do any of this work on our own.  We're always excited about additional partnerships, be that government, CSOs, NGOs, media.  So if there is more interest in what we're doing or how we can collaborate I'd be happy to follow up via the organizers to make sure people have access to that information.
>> MODERATOR: Thanks so much.  I know we're at the top of the hour.  Rauno, a quick round of what your plan is for the FOC and I'm going to kind of close the session after that.  Rauno?
>> RAUNO MERISAARI: Thanks.  The next step is to finish the statement.  We haven't made any decisions how to deliver it or use it.  Normally we have ‑‑ we use the language of the statements in international forums.  And we hope to do this as well.  I hope that we are able also to continue this kind of open forums sessions with all of you.  And then at the end of next year, Finland is going to host the next FOC conference.  Hopefully can see many of you in person when you can.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thanks, Rauno.  Campbell, apologies, I think that was the closing remarks I think on behalf of the FOC, from Rauno there.  I would like to thank everyone, all my speakers for their frank and kind of open remarks and joining us in this discussion and to all the attendees for their questions and comments.  Apologies to everyone whose questions perhaps weren't answered but we hope this is just the beginning of this conversation.  We'll look forward to continuing the dialogue and thank you very much, the host, the IGF for having us here. So with that, thank you, everyone, and have a lovely rest of the day.   
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-of30-human-rights-and-the-use-of-ai-in-the-field-of-health^^

 
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Okay.  Good evening, or at least evening where I am here in Vienna, and welcome to the session on Human Rights and Use of Artificial Intelligence in the Field of Health.  We at the Human Rights Agency, are really delighted to be hosting this session which we have organized together with the Council of Europe.
For those of you who aren't aware, the Fundamental Rights Agency is an EU agency which provides data and expertise to the EU institutions and the EU Member States on fundamental rights matters, this includes through social and legal research on various topics related to fundamental rights, and we also carryout large‑scale surveys on a number of different topics.
The agency started working on Big Data and artificial intelligence in 2017 reflecting their increased attention to this topic amongst policymakers as well as the many fundamental rights issues that are engaged by the use of artificial intelligence.
Since then, we've published a number of papers which deal with related issues, including one on the potential of discrimination when using algorithms, data quality in artificial intelligence, and facial recognition technology and fundamental rights.
In the course of last year, 2019, we started working on a research project that looks at the fundamental rights implications of using AI, and that's based on interviews with representatives of the public administration and businesses in five selected EU Member States asking them about their experience of the use of AI and related technologies.  We'll be publishing the results of that project on the 14th of December this year, so you've got a little over a month to wait.
One of the areas that we cover in this research is the use of AI in the field of health, and here we've collected evidence about use cases of AI in the EU, including, for example, image‑based diagnostic tools as well as tools that monitor health indicators remotely.  And the intention is that we can use this evidence to support the ongoing policy‑making processes that are already underway.
And, of course, we've seen this topic of AI and health is becoming ever more relevant at the moment in the context of the pandemic where we see that technologies are really emerging as a very important tool in helping to control the spread of the virus, so we think that the discussions on this topic are particularly timely.
I'm not going to give away the results of our research quite yet.  For that you have to wait until the 14th of December, but I can highlight a few of the owe occurring issues that we see coming out from a fundamental rights perspective.
So, for example, we see issues about a lack of clarity, about the definition of artificial intelligence.  We see from our research that often this term means different things to different people and that that can pose a particular challenge in the context of any regulation in respect of the principles of legal clarity and foreseeability that will be really important for any regulation that is forthcoming.
We also see some confusion over the application of existing law.  For example, standards on data protection and discrimination and how that applies to the use of artificial intelligence.  Partly tied to that are also questions of whether we should take a horizontal or sectoral approach to thinking about regulation and that's also often tied to questions of risk, and that may in fact mean that there are different considerations depending on the particular use within one sector.
Another topic that often comes up concerns data quality, so in terms of what data is being used to train AI systems, where does it come from, how representative of a particular population is that data, how is it being input into the tool.  And, again, these are issues that we can particularly see emerging in the health area.
And, lastly, we also see questions around the effectiveness of tools to mitigate fundamental rights violations and enforce existing rules, and there we see that there is a big issue around the awareness of fundamental rights issues amongst the full range of interested parties whether that be developers, users, or others.
Now, these are issues that policymakers are also very much grappling with as they're exploring possibilities for regulation of AI, and in that context we're really delighted to have excellent speakers to discuss with us this evening about how AI can best be used in the area of health and also how governments can and should respond to some of the fundamental rights challenges that may be associated with the use of AI.
Each of those speakers will give a brief opening intervention, after which there will be time for discussion with the participants.  So please feel free to type your questions into the chat during the session.  It would be great if you could briefly introduce yourself, and perhaps you could also indicate if your question is for a particular speaker or whether it's for the panel as a whole.
We have an online moderator who will be closely following the questions in the chat, so your input won't be missed.
So, I'd like to start by giving the floor to Ritva Hailila, Senior Medical Officer in Finland, as well as being a Member of the Council of Europe Committee on Bioethics.  And prior to that, she was the General Secretary at National Advisory Board on Health Ethics and Research Associate and Head of Department at the University of Helsinki.  Ritva, the floor is yours.
   >> RITVA HALILA:  Thank you very much.  Do you hear me?  All right.  Okay.  Thank you, so just to be sure that my voice is heard.
I'm much more familiar with ethics than human rights, but anyway so there are some differences between ethics and human rights.  So human rights are or have been written in international conventions and ethics is always like balancing between good and bad and benefits and harms, and there are a lot of things just like AI that has benefits and also has risks, and I would like to open this topic a little bit.
So AI can be used and has been used in medical fields quite a lot, so it has been used in medical imaging, support of professionals, especially medical doctors when they are making diagnosis and planning care with patients, especially with new medicines and side effects so that there might be like warnings that this medicine is not suitable to use with another one.
So it helps in everyday work, but there are also these things that you have to be careful when using with AI, which is that health data is always very sensitive data and especially in our country, in just a few weeks’ time so we have experienced that what happens when a lot of data is going outside or practically they have been stolen from health care units and there has been a hacker, but hundreds of thousands of people have become very anxious and very, very worried about their future because some data has disappeared.
So, if medical sensitive personal data is used in a way that can be identified elsewhere by outsiders, so then it is a kind of thing that you have to be sure to ‑‑ to not have that kind of accidents because once they are lost so you can't do anything for that.
And then another thing that we've been worried about, especially in the Bioethics Committee is ‑‑ is that if a lot of data is used together, especially genomic data, so how people can keep their privacy and not to be identified from the amount of data that is used there.
One question that has been raised very often is that once you get the information from Big Data, for example, when you have got the information, how can you be not to know something?  Because especially, genomic information contains a lot of things that you can ‑‑ you can get to know already 30 years or 50 years before you'll get some troubles with your health, and it would not be very beneficial and not very nice to know something that is ahead in your life and you know it but you cannot do anything about it.
So, benefits and risks and balancing between them is a very important ethical question or ethical issue that is important every time when we are talking about artificial intelligence.
Also, justice between individuals is also important.
I think there are a lot of things that are discussed in this panel afterwards and so I could come to that, but anyway.  All the things that are done also in this AI field have to follow the ethical principles that have been laid down in the convention that is a product and so that is a kind of tool that with which we operate every day.  Thank you very much.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thank you very much, Ritva, for highlighting the really important issues this in terms of some of the existing rules and regulations that apply in this area but also in some of the particular risks in terms of the security or sensitive data, and also about the sort of challenges that can arise when you have an amount of data which can say a lot about an individual and their potentially their future health prospects.
So now I would turn to Andreas.  Andreas Reis is the Co‑Lead of the Health Governance Unit in the Research for Health Department of the Division of the Chief Scientist of the World Health Organization in Geneva.  His main area of work is public health ethics which aspects of infectious diseases and outbreaks of emerging pathogens, and he also works on the ethics of public health surveillance, health research, and big data and artificial intelligence.  A lot of very, very relevant things for our discussion.  Please, Andreas.
   >> ANDREAS REIS:  First, let me thank you, Martha and your colleagues and Council of Europe for inviting me and WHO to this important panel.  I'm really happy that I can be with you tonight.  And I want to make a few points before we get to the discussion.  And being at WHO in Geneva, I would really like to focus on the issues of this session with regard to the use of AI for health in lower and middle‑income countries.
So as I think we all agree and Ritva has said, AI holds a great promise for transforming health care and public health, and this includes the rich countries but also the LMICs, but particularly in LMICs, the challenges for adopting AI to generate benefits are quite considerable, and they raise concerns that actually precious resources could be diverted from proven but underfunded interventions that would reduce mobility and mortality.
In addition, as we all know, there is already an existing digital divide, which is the unequal access to direct communications or Internet services, computing equipment, and so forth, and there is a concern that it might actually be widened rather than reduced by AI applications.
Another concern, which I think is at the heart of the session is data and data security.  This, of course, concerns all countries, but I would argue that it's even more challenging for lower and middle‑income countries.  So, this is an absence of data, poor data quality that could actually distort an algorithm's performance or poor datasets that require significant investments to even make them usable.
So, compiling this data to make them usable could prove difficult and time consuming, and in addition, the human resources are quite scarce in many countries so it could be, again, a difficult tradeoff to put even more work on their shoulders which might sort of detract from the time to care for patients directly.
And in particular, data from the most vulnerable or marginalized populations, including those where actually there is no health care services, is not likely to exist or could be inaccurate.
Another point is that there has been a concern raised about data colonialism where data from LMICs could actually be used for commercial purposes without due regard for ethical principles and human rights norms, such as consent or privacy and autonomy.  Such a collection of data without informing individuals of intended uses, which could be for public health purposes, but also for commercial purposes, can potentially undermine the human rights agency, the dignity of these individuals.  And this is in particular a concern because of the possibility that companies from, you know, countries with very strict and developed regulatory frameworks and data protection laws could actually expand data collection to LMICs without in the end providing products and services back to these underserved communities in countries.
The third concern is that AI technologies may be introduced to LMICs without adequate impact assessment in terms of human rights prior to the deployment, and that technologies that are not adapted to the existing context, such as diverse languages and scripts within the countries, can mean that certain applications may not operate correctly or at all.
And this is a wider problem which is that many AI technologies may be designed by companies in high‑income countries and for high‑income populations, and they don't necessarily apply directly to the needs in LMICs.
Final point I want to make is that AI is proving to be quite a challenge for regulatory agencies, even in rich countries, but there is a concern that regulatory agencies in lower and middle‑income countries may not have the capacity or expert these to assess novel AI technologies adequately and to ensure that potential systematic errors do not affect the diagnosis, surveillance, and treatment, and in particular if the introduction of technologies is piloted in an LMIC before maybe going to the market in more regulated environments.
So, such technologies could be introduced into countries without up to date data protection and confidentiality laws especially for health data.  And without data protection or authorities that can protect data of individuals and privacy of individuals and communities.
All of these ethical issues that are raised by the potential use of AI for health have led to WHO's project to develop guidance on the ethical and governance aspects of AI for Health.  We have been working on these guidelines for about a year now.  We have an expert group of about 20 people working on these issues and we're hoping to issue the WHO Guidance on the issues I mentioned and many more in the first quarter of next year.
With this, I will close my remarks.  Thank you for your attention.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thank you very much, Andreas, for highlighting the work of the WHO, and I think for bringing a really important global perspective to the discussion and highlighting some of the particular challenges that face the Low- and Middle-Income Countries.  Having said that, I think a number of the issues reflect countries everywhere, irrespective of whether they are wealthier countries or not in terms of questions around data security, questions around the capacities of regulatory agencies, including data protection authorities, but also questions around discrimination, and I think you talked quite a lot about discrimination in the context of the data per se, but of course, there is also significant questions around discrimination in access to, to different tools and the benefits that artificial intelligence may be able to bring.  Thank you very much for that.
So, I will turn now to Oli.  Olivier Smith is responsible for overall strategy and head of ethics at Kao Health where he also establishes and maintains partnerships and deals with business model development.  Prior to joining Kao, he was a Director of Strategy and Innovation at a charity in the UK where he was responsible for investments in innovations across the acute, primary, and integrated care, and biomedical research and digital health.  And he's also been a Senior Civil Servant at the UK Department of Health.  Oli, the floor is yours.
   >> OLIVER SMITH:  Thank you, Martha.  Good evening, everyone.  It's great to be here with you all virtually from here in Barcelona.  I'm sorry that we couldn't all be together.  There is a huge amount to talk about here.  I can already tell from the two previous speakers that we're going to have a really rich discussion.  What I want to do is to give the perspective of taking principles of ethics and human rights and putting them into practice.
Now, I will start with a bit about Kao Health just to give you that context.  So, we create meta health services, meta health digital services that support greater access and enhance well‑being.  And we have a portfolio that ranges from prevention and well‑being through to treatment and also prediction of worsening health as well.
Actually, today's quite a big day for us because today we actually launched Kao Health.  Before that the last four years, we've been part of Telefonica in part of the Innovation Alpha, and today we graduated so it's a big day for us.
Over those four years, ethics was part of our thinking from the very beginning, and we have it into our work.  The first is we have a set of principles as you imagine, and to an extent we drive that from human rights and having talk to Martha I know we can do more there, but we made some efforts there.  The second layer is we take the principles and put them into practice, so we look at our design, we look at our engineering and say okay, what does that really mean?  And then the third area is governance and having a strong governance system.
What I'm going to focus on now though is kind of what we learned really in terms of trying to take our principles and actually put them into practice into our portfolio.  Around there are really three big challenges that we faced, so one is tradeoffs; the second is proportionality; and then the last one is really context.  So starting with tradeoffs, to give you an example, we had a product cycle, one of our products, and a year ago we asked a company that is also based in Barcelona to review it, to do an audit, an ethical audit of this prototype, and one of the aspects of that was to look whether the algorithm, the recommendation engine at the heart of this product, this prototype, was actually biased.  And they very quickly came back to us and said, we can't do that.  Because you actually aren't measuring anything that would allow us to look at whether this is bias against one group or another.  And it was one of those real moments where we're like oh, that's really obvious, yes.  What we've done is we've really privileged privacy as a principle and we sort of ignored or forgotten about, or not really thought through bias as a principle.  So, it's a tradeoff that can hit you if you haven't really thought about it.
But when you have thought about tradeoffs, you then have a question of proportionality or how do you balance between them, and one of the classic errors for us, and I think for other organizations as well that creates health applications is, is onboarding and consent.  And that's a moment where the desire to have impact and having an effective and engaging service quite often drives organizations to say, well let's get people through onboarding really quickly, let's avoid friction as a design team would say.
And then, of course, we have this counter desire to actually be true to our values, be true to our ethic strategies, and we want people to understand because that's really important, and you can sort of get through in a GDPR way and have minimum, but we actually really like people to understand and comprehend what it is that is going on here, and the way we do that in our stretch product called Foundations is we use layering, so for instance at the moment of foundations, it's very much well‑being and it doesn't really collect ‑‑ it doesn't collect health data, but we're intending to introduce the features that would actually require some biometric data.
So rather than bury that consent in the very beginning of the application, we thought well actually it's much better to just not ask for that consent until the moment when the person using it clicks on that feature and says I would like to do this.  Then it will come up, then we can explain it, and it's just much more of the moment and salient to that user.
So that proportionality is really important.  But then how do you know it's the right ‑‑ how do you know you actually got the right balance?  My team gets really frustrated with me sometimes because they say, Oli, Oli, we see this, is that in line with our ethics strategy?  And I get frustrated because I say, it really depends.  It depends exactly what you're trying to do and what's the context.  So, to be a little more concrete about this, then we go back to the example I mentioned before about the prototype and bias, and so fortunately, what we're able to do is look at some of the indirect data, although we weren’t actually measuring directly anything about people's gender or anything like that.  We were able to look at some of the data that we were collecting through coins and app stores and they did a thorough review of the content, and they said if we look at indirect data, we don't think it's bias.  And we think that in this context, using indirect data is okay because this product is about well‑being.  If it was bias the impact to those groups wouldn't have been that big in terms of the impact in their lives.  However, we were very conscious that had that been the case with one of our products that's about treatment, say in a product that's looking at treating depression, actually then if we were having a product that was bias, well that would be a problem because the detrimental impact would be much greater, so in that circumstance, we would probably think but it wouldn't be good enough to ‑‑ we wouldn't think it would be good enough to use indirect data and we would actually have to use direct data, and what we might want to do then is actually go out and survey the users and the proportional way to actually understand some of the data about them.  We wouldn't necessarily still try to grab data from everyone because we still have privacy as one of our principles.
So, proportionality and context, we struggle with, and we don't have all the answers to this, but some of the little nuggets that I just wanted to mention and maybe spark your thinking as we move into the discussion in a few moments.
So, one aspect that's really, really important is for you to think of this upfront, and you do actually need to take some time at the beginning to work out, well, how does that ethical strategy or ethical framework apply to what we're doing.  I know that sounds obvious, but actually building that into the process can become quite challenging because the team at Kao Health is very much used to an agile approach, and if I said okay, you've got to sit down for a week and really think through the ethics before you can do anything, they just won't buy that.  So, we have to take a more approach where we go step by step.
But one aspect that I found really helpful is to take some of the language of agile development and redo I employ.  So, engineers in agile development talk about tech debt, yeah, we can build that for you really quickly but it won't be production ready.  It will have lots of bugs, so we will need to go and fix those later on.  So, I now talk about ethics debt, and I say, yes, we could do that without necessarily thinking or taking a week to think about it.  We can think about a bit about it, but there is a risk that we miss something and then we would need to go back later on and pay back that ethics debt because we will have spotted something that we haven't originally seen.
So, try to fit into the process is really important.  There are not loads of tools around that help you with this, and emerging all the time but not a lot out there, so I encourage people really to try to use what there is out there and also to publish what's out there.  We published our audit, we try to publish as much of what we do, and then just try to build this ground swell of forward movement really because there are lots of benefits to artificial intelligence and health, but there are risks and we need to manage those and then together we can take advantage of those benefits while managing and mitigating the risks.  That's enough of my introduction.  I'm really looking forward to the discussion later on.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thank you very much, Oli.  I think you raised some really important issues that can inform the discussion.  I mean, I was really struck by the question of an ethics debt and that also sort of ties in to some of the discussions that we have had in the data protection context but can also be sort of relevant or broader in terms of the idea of fundamental rights by design as it was, you know, really trying to build in those ideas from the outset and making sure you don't then get stuck later on trying to retrofit your fundamental rights obligations on to something that's already underway, where it's likely to be much more difficult.
And also, the point that you made at the end about transparency, and that there is still a lack of concrete evidence data and experience that is publicly available, and obviously the more of that that there can be and the more sharing that there can be, then that's going to be very useful for informing discussions and also trying to avoid making the same mistakes twice.  Yeah, where possible.  So, thank you very much, Oli.
And lastly, I will turn to Katarzyna.  And, Katarzyna is an expert in human rights and technology and she's a lawyer and activist.  She is co‑founder and President of the Panoptykon Foundation which is a Polish NGO defending rights.  From 2012 to 2019 she was Vice President of European Digital Rights, and in the past prior to that, she was an associate at the International Law Firm Clifford Chance and as well as a member of the Civic Advisory Board for Minister of Digital Affairs in Poland.  Katarzyna, over to you.
   >> KATARZYNA SZYMIELEWICZ:  Thank you so much.  As a lawyer we've experienced in the EU lobbying, and our focus on what can be regulated or how we should approach this challenge of ‑‑ the challenge that comes with the fact that we clearly want to have more AI applications to solve serious societal problems like now to fight the pandemic, but on the other hand, we are still not ready as a society to respond to risks that will come with these applications.  So one of the responses, I'm stressing one of them, and definitely not the only one, can be legislation.  And in this regard, it is our position that not only Panoptykon Foundation but the whole movement I represent here firmly says that it cannot be just ethical framework and we will need or we do need right now a clear legal framework that can only be introduced at the EU level.  So, this is not so much a task for specific governments to handle, but for the whole supernational structure or global treaty at some point to make it effective.
Obviously, we do have safeguards and standards coming with data protection law, the GDPR, and these should not be disregarded, and so in practice we could try to rely on Article 22 of the GDPR that gives individuals the right to have automated decisions that affect them in a significant way explained, and give them also the right to human intervention in the context of AI.  So for example, if there is an AI application in the field of health that results with individual decisions, we can certainly use GDPR as a source of safeguards for these individuals effected, and in practice our interpretation of existing safeguards precludes the use of black box systems, so we need to be able to explain why a specific AI System produced a specific individual decision, and I think this is what is beyond debate.  This is what we already have in the European Law, but by no means does this standard solve other problems that will come with the use of AI in high‑risk sectors, and these other problems are related to the fact that not always we will have individual decisions, but always we will have personal data involved in producing certain outcomes, and not always the outcomes will have individual significant impact.  They might have far bigger impacted on the society as a whole.
If we think about errors, if we think about simply waste of public money or getting predictions wrong or getting public policy wrong, these types of results are extremely problematic even though they might not affect a specific individual or entail the use of personal data.  This is why we represent this position that the EU needs to create a new legal framework for AI that goes beyond the use of personal data and goes beyond individual protection.  Fortunately, it's not just saying this, but it is definitely one of the priorities of the current European Commission and we are quite satisfied with the principles that were already formulated by various bodies, Council of Europe, definitely, but also the high‑level working group set up by the European Commission and the only caveat here is that ethics is not enough.  We need to at some point arrive at strictly more rules.  What exactly can be done?  I agree with the idea already represented on the panel that we had need to introduce obligatory human rights assessments for such systems, both public and private, but definitely the higher standard should be apply to public applications and there should be no way for thorough, detailed, public evidence‑based human rights impact assessment to make before an AI system is deployed, but that in itself increases transparency, increases exploitability, prevents certain risks like the use of non‑adequate data for training, but even the best human rights impact assessments will not ‑‑ will not minimize the risk of simply applying AI to the context where risks are too high or where AI cannot solve the problems we're facing.
And I think for that we will need to arrive at some redlines also represented in the law, and the type of redlines that we suggest for the debate, it is early stage of the debate, so these are still suggestions, so the following concepts of, for example, AI should not be allowed at all, AI systems should not be allowed if risks cannot be mitigated, so if the results of the human rights impact assessments are not satisfactory, but it should also not be allowed if we cannot explain the functioning of the system to the level that allows for independent auditing, especially in high‑risk areas.  So that's something to say about transparency.
Finally, one of the red lines that we put up for the discussion is that goals of the AI system cannot violate the essence of fundamental rights and they cannot violate human dignity, which is not exactly the same thing as human rights, and I can imagine systems that do not present human rights‑related risks but still they cannot be reconciled with the cost of human dignity.
So these are the examples of rules that we would like to see represented in the binding legislation, but that framework is only the starting point, and then the whole next level is how to implement it, and I'm not sure whether we can discuss it today, but a lot can be said about enforcement, about the need for independent authorities, independent governments with adequate budget, skills, and stuff inside.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thank you very much, Katarzyna, and I think that's a really good place to start the discussion in some of the terms of highlighting some of the processes that are underway at the European level for looking at prospective regulation, and some of the issues that are very much part of the discussion there in terms of the role of the GDPR, the need to legal framework, in terms of the role of fundamental rights impact assessments, for example.
So, there is one question already in the chat that's directed to Ritva, and so I would perhaps address that to her first.  And then I will encourage you also to let us know if you have any other questions for the panelists in the meantime.
Ritva, I'm not sure if you can see it in the Q&A Section, but I can read out the question anyway also for the benefit of other participants.  It's referring to the point that you were making about data security and asking at what conclusions and reform steps have been envisioned after the data hack in Finland?  What is considered?  Hardening technical security, considering alternative architectures, different storage practices, and what are Finland's recommendations to others after that experience?  You need to unmute your microphone, Ritva.
   >> RITVA HALILA:  Yeah.  Now.  This is a long question and probably a long answer.  Shortly, this is just a recent occasion and people got to know it just about two weeks ago, two or three weeks ago, and so we don't have answers yet.  But there are a lot of issues probably in data security issues also, so that the hackers could get into the data, into the personal data and could transfer them outside the health care unit, so that actually, I think this is a criminal case.
But I think that could be used as an example, also, about the ‑‑ about how important it is to make barriers to outsiders, and not to use personal data because that caused really a huge emotional reaction from like a lot of citizens, including our President and politicians, Prime Minister, so that reacted on that.  And so that you could imagine how sensitive, how this whole case became under ‑‑ under our skin.  So, it was very personal, and so I think that could be a good example on how to protect the personal data and something that is ‑‑ something that belongs to us all, and how the privacy of persons is so important to be protected.
I cannot say what we should think about it, so in a couple of months, so I think I more might make sure to say something about that but it just shows the importance of this whole area.  Thanks.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thank you very much, Ritva, and I think also, it's a useful point to remember that some of these issues are likely to come into the political arena very quickly, and then of course, it becomes a different level of discussion that's not so much between sort of experts working in the area, but it's very much led by politicians and also in reaction to the experiences of the general public.
So, thank you.  Andreas, I would have a question to address to you.  Thinking about to what extent do you see a problem with discrimination in the use of AI in particular areas in the health area?  So, for example, if you're using data from one area of the world in another area of the word, what potential issues around discrimination could be there, and what is the potential for the use of AI in that way to be exacerbating existing social exclusion?
   >> ANDREAS REIS:  Yeah.  Thank you very much for this question, Martha.  That is, indeed, quite a big concern, and I think there is one example that I want to give, which is a tool that was developed for diagnosing skin cancer and melanoma and when it was developed, basically, the data that was used to feed into the algorithms was exclusively from white persons, and I believe hundreds of thousands or millions of pictures of melanoma were basically used to train the algorithm to recognize any suspicious skin lesion.  And the result of this was that the tool was not able to detect melanoma from black people.  And this is, you know, basically, restricting access very seriously, for example, for the African Region.
So, this is an example where I think it's very important to also use data from other regions, and I would suspect it's very similar for people in Asia that data from all of these different ethnicities need to be used to train algorithms in order to ensure that also non‑white people can benefit from these interventions.  Over.
   >> OLIVER SMITH:  I just want to add to that, Martha because it's not just that approach of taking a data set from one group of individuals and applying the algorithm that comes out to another group of individuals.  That's not only unethical but bad data science as well.  Data science, don't worry, it's definitely going to work.  Have you really thought about why and what the differences might be, are they salient?  It's also just bad data science to do that as well as all the ethical challenges that Andreas has quite rightly highlighted.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thanks very much for that, Oli, and actually I think the question that I would address to you is actually sort of very much built on that, and you were ‑‑ you were mentioning in your intervention about sort of indirect indicators, indirect data which I guess can also be sort of in proxy data in some respects, but are there sort of examples of potential proxy data that could be linked to discrimination that is actually okay to use as an indirect indicator, so for example, risky driver behavior or gender, let's say. 
   >> OLIVER SMITH:  Again, my answer it seems is it depends because, (Laughing), because ‑‑ the ethicist answer.  Yeah, I'm afraid I'm not really an ethicist.  So, one example that we come across, for instance, is gender and whether we should measure gender or not, and some examples of what we were doing, and so in general we don't because we just don't think there is a meaningful difference in some of the work or most of the work that we're looking at.  So, when we were thinking about well‑being and stress, we just didn't see enough evidence in the literature to say that actually knowing gender is a salient fact that will allow us to give someone an intervention, an activity that will actually help mean that we get equal results, whether you're a man or a woman.  But when we're looking at sleep, it turned out actually there was evidence that suggested that it was important to understand the gender, and so that's what I mean about the context coming out.  One of the challenges with proxies is that even if you don't measure it, you can learn it and then the system could learn it, and question found this with voice as well.  We've done some work looking at voice to analyze mood and stress, and it was really obvious that the system actually learned that oh, these people ‑‑ they didn't name them as women, but you could tell through the research that that's a group of women and that's a group of men, and that sort of is okay but then if actually that dataset is then being applied to something else, you they'd to be aware of whether it's then going to say, well actually we're here going to recommend an activity to keep you healthy, and because this group we sort of learned you're women, we think you should do something that's more associated with women than something more associated with men.  You might say actually that the men can go and do, I don't know, football and the women can go and do something else, just pick some awfully sexist examples, but that's the kind of thing that the system might learn if it was drawing on its data from ‑‑ if it was drawing data from this, for instance.
So, I think this for me speaks to, gosh, there are so many points.  One is explainability becomes really important because you need to be able to look into what's going on.  The other part of this is then the auditing so that you can then actually understand and periodically look at what's going on as well, and those two need to work together, and then finally the transparency point becomes important because then someone else needs to mark your homework at the same time, so that's a really long answer to my, it‑depends question, Martha.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Not at all, thank you.  Katarzyna, I think you wanted to comment here as well.
   >> KATARZYNA SZYMIELEWICZ:  Yes, indeed.  The proxy data is a very complex political problem, a legal problem that we need to find a solution to and it's not an easy one.  If we want to protect the use of proxy data, prevent or simply make sure that people are not discriminated based on proxy data, we probably need to force system designers to reveal correlations that are not always tracked by the system itself, so in order to interrogate which factors had impact on individual decision in question and to what extent the data are sensitive, we probably need to collect even more data and we need to force the AI system in question to identify correlations that otherwise wouldn't even be identified.  That leads to more data processing, that leads to more exposure, but if we want to be sure that high‑risk applications of AI like in the places of health are not discriminatory, probably there is no other way to do it.
On the other hand, in the private sector where the stakes are not that high and where we are even more worried with data minimization principle and we're even more worried that platforms like Facebook will collect more data than they need, and more intelligent approach might be to simply prohibit ‑‑ prohibited certain data analytics leading to the use of proxy data to detect certain correlations.  So rather than saying to a company like Facebook, please reveal which correlations you used to target people with health‑related advertising, we should rather say, do not use your relevance metrics for health‑related advertising because it's extremely difficult to prevent the use of sensitive data, understanding that in our data‑driven reality, almost everything can be a proxy for health these days.  
So, yeah, and interesting as well to protect individual society in private sector might be budding certain practices, I'm afraid, in the public sector applications, we need to be ready to dig deeper into how AI systems detect correlations which leads to my earlier point on explainability, interpretability that for at least public sector applications, we will need to work very hard on ensuring interpretability which includes understanding of which correlations were in play, even for machine learning systems, I'm afraid we will need to require that.
   >> OLIVER SMITH:  Could I, is that all right?
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Please, go ahead.
   >> OLIVER SMITH:  I'm not sure about the difference between the public sector and private sector.  I know what you mean, but I ‑‑ the proxy, I take that quite often as a proxy that the public sector is working on issues and has tools that are more impactful on people's lives, which is often very true because, of course, you think about health and education and all of those areas.  But it's not always true, and if I think about pharmaceuticals, for instance, as a sort of parallel industry where pharmaceuticals are overwhelmingly created by the private sector, but it's a very well regulated and manage the sector, so I would explain ability think less in terms of public sector versus private sector versus what is the potential harm that could arise from this, and then I would regulate both in the same way.
   >> KATARZYNA SZYMIELEWICZ:  Sure, I agree.  I just use a shortcut to not go into details because I understand that today we are focusing on high‑risk sector in particular health, and by saying that certain things should be precluded in the sensitive but less important in terms of societal benefits and harms, cases, I just use a shorthand of private sector for this less important but not necessarily less harmful, and I fully agree that what Facebook does with advertising and targeting can be equally as harmful or wrongly implemented AI system dealing with health, and just states are different, and so my argument here is rather that I'm prepared to do much more work also on the legal front with the public sector recommendations because we all understand that they are important, and we need to do that work.  Where the less important but equally harmful private seconder, I'm just more inclined to discuss outright of the most risky practices, but full agreement that it shouldn't be private versus public divide but rather high versus low risk or high versus lower impact.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thank you very much.  Now, I'm very conscious that we have very little time left, unfortunately, which is really a shame because there is a lot of very interesting issues that are coming up.
I wanted to finish with a very quick round to ask the panelists what your sort of number one burning recommendation to policymakers in this area would be, and perhaps I can just combine that with two really interesting questions that have come up in the chat, and one is about the potential discriminatory use of COVID‑free status, and which is obviously a very topical question.  And secondly, which I think we touched on a bit in the last discussion, about the responsibility between and inside organizations concerning potential misconduct and particularly in the context of public/private partnerships.
So, if you have a recommendation that also brings in those topics, that would be even better, so an easy task to close with.  And, Ritva, perhaps I'll start with you.
   >> RITVA HALILA:  Thank you.  This has been very interesting discussion.  I think this public/private combination and differences between private and public, I think that is very interesting because in our country, for example, there is a lot of private activities also within public sector, and public sector is buying like services from private companies and that might cause sometimes troubles also with data protection issues, but ‑‑ but in these situations, I think that this is also very good to remind yourself why data protection is so important, and especially public sector is quite heavily also they have quite a lot of rules of how to manage and protect privacy, and for example, in our country, people are sometimes very annoyed that things are going so slowly and legislation is going to slowly and services that are given to public, they are so ‑‑ it takes so much time to get this better, and there you have to remember that we are protecting something that is very, very, very individual and very sensitive as something that belongs to a person itself.
And in private sector, they have different things that makes them running and that's why they sometimes forget these issues.  Also, in that case, what I told you.  So, I think ‑‑ I like also governance of data and legislation, international legislation that Katarzyna also emphasized.  So, going forward, good luck to everybody in your work.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thank you very much.  Andreas, burning recommendation from your side?
   >> ANDREAS REIS:  Yeah, maybe just very quickly.  So, from my perspective, globally speaking, you can have a lot of criticism about GDPR.  But, actually, European countries are quite fortunate to have this quite high standard, and from my perspective, I think many other countries need to step up their data protection and confidentiality laws and modernize them and also need to invest more in regulatory capacity for this quickly evolving field.  Over.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thank you very much.  I think that builds on what Ritva was saying.  Two impulses, there is the need for speed but also the need to make sure that we get it right as well when we move forward with regulation.  Oli, over to you?
   >> OLIVER SMITH:  Yes.  Absolutely thinking about those two impulses as well.  So I have two recommendations to try to balance those because we're working in health, so I think we want a pretty high level of standards and trust building, so I think we can learn from perhaps the accountancy and having ethical audits and that being something that is obligatory, I think would help provide the standard layer that everyone has to just demonstrate about the principles and looked it up and can think about the details.  But I think learning from perhaps the pharmaceutical regulatory world where there is an understanding of the more serious the harm the greater the amount that you need to demonstrate to the heart of that process is.  And I think the two of those coming together adjusted properly to be sophisticated on artificial intelligence, I think it would be really powerful.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thank you very much.  Katarzyna?
   >> KATARZYNA SZYMIELEWICZ:  I can only reinforce the need to look at the purpose of the systems and always start with interrogating why we want to implement something and what will be the societal and individual impact, so never assume as the government that AI is your silver bullet to solve a complex problem unless you can prove it, and never assume that discrimination can be solved by tweaking data or, you know, adding a fairness metric or something inside of the system unless we can really prove it that is a thing really relevant in the context of Monica's question about the use of cove‑free stages in the public policy and the use of data on people related to their health to let them in or regulate people's movement or whatever we can imagine here, I would say that that's exactly one of the examples of maybe not AI, but data applications that will be extremely risky are bound to be discriminatory and ineffective in managing this crisis, so if we need examples of where not to go, this is for me one of them.
   >> MARTHA STICKINGS:  Thank you very much, and I think hearing from Oli and Katarzyna, we hear really important things about questions of tools to ensure compliance and at different stages of the process, and also in terms of thinking about potential harm and making sure that particularly in those cases where there is risk of harm, then sufficient protections are in place.
And so I want to wrap up the discussion now by sending a huge thank you to all of our speakers for contributing to a really interesting discussion.  Thank you, really, for your time.  Thank you also to our co‑organizers at the Council of Europe, it's been really good to work with you again on organizing a session at the IGF.  And we've seen it and I think just how much there is to talk about in this area, and so if you'd like to talk about it some more, I would invite you all to attend our online launch event for our AI Report which will take place on the 14th of December and it will be an online event that we're co‑organizing with the German Government in their role as the Presidency of the Council of the EU at the moment.  You'll be able to find more information on that event on our website, which is all on our social media channels and perhaps we can put the link in the chat to that now.
So, thank you very much and we'll be touching on the issue of health again there, but also other sectors which have been mentioned in passing today, social benefits, targeted advertising, law enforcement, so we'll have plenty to talk about.
Thank you very much, everyone.  Have a good evening or lunchtime or morning wherever you happen to be.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-of34-global-forum-on-cyber-expertise-gfce^^

 
>> ELLIOT MAYHEW: Hello.  Welcome to the session.  We didn't get much of a practice run.  So I guess we can just kick it off if you guys are comfortable with that, Joanna and Chris.
>> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER: Yep.
>> ELLIOT MAYHEW: How are you feeling?  Excellent.  I have slides to share, but I think with everyone's camera on, I think it's nicer like this.  Carolin, I know you wanted to share some slides I believe.  At that point, I can just start sharing if that works.  I guess with, that I will hand it over to Joanna.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Without further ado, I will start us off.  Hello, everyone.  Welcome to this open forum session on the Global Forum On Cyber Expertise, the Global Forum On Cyber Expertise, the GFCE provides a dedicated and informal platform for policymakers, practitioners and experts to facilitate the sharing of knowledge and expertise best practices on cyber issues.
The importance of capacity building from the Internet Governance community perspective, was recognized at an early stage.
The Tunis agenda set out the mandate for the IGF and capacity building for Internet Governance in developing countries, drawing fully on local sources of knowledge and expertise especially in uncertain times capacity is a prerequisite for effective engagement and for cooperation.  Without even the ability to engage or the requisite knowledge and skills, stakeholders cannot be expected to advance implementation in commonly agreed standards or rules of the road.
Many stakeholders have insufficient understanding of complexity issue to develop and implement policies, engage with companies that are developing technologies and effectively explain these issues to the general public.
Providing equitable access to information and knowledge for all is therefore essential in had recognition of the role of ICTs for economic growth and development. 
So to introduce the GFCE in more detail, I would like to hand the floor to Mr. Christopher Painter who is the president of the GFCE Foundation Board.  Chris needs no introduction, but to meet the formalities, let me very briefly say that Chris is a globally recognized leader on cyber policy, cyber diplomacy and cybersecurity and combatting cybercrime, he has been at the vanguard of cyber issues for over 27 years and was the world's first cyber diplomat at the US department of State.  He's also the commissioner for the commissioner for cyberspace.
Chris, the floor is yours.
>> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER: Thanks very much, and it's a great pleasure to be with you all today.  I guess good morning, good afternoon, and good evening depending on where you are.  For me in Washington, D.C., it's early afternoon.  So it's a pleasure not to be doing a seminar at 4:00 in the morning.  It's really good to be with you.
It's a pleasure to be here at IGF again.  I have been to, I think, eight IGFs.  The first virtual one for me and I suspect for a lot of you.  My name is Chris Painter.  I'm the president of the GFCE Foundation Board although it's been around for five years, it's just transitions to an independent foundation this year.
In is a special year for the GFCE as it marks the fifth anniversary.  During this forum, we would like to highlight some of the achievements over the past five years and also really importantly talk about current activities and looking into the future.  As Joanna mentioned the GFCE is a global multi‑stakeholder platform for the global cyber capacity building.  It provides a dedicated and informal platform for policymakers, practitioners and experts to facilitate the sharing of knowledge, expertise and best practices on key thematic cyber issues.
Since it was established in 2015, the GFCE has grown into a network of 120 members and partners that includes countries, governmental entities, international organizations, industry, NGOs, academia, technical groups and civil society stakeholders.  I know of no other forum that brings together such a wide swath of multi‑stakeholders including governments and governmental organizations together in this important ‑‑ on this important issue.
Issues of capacity building have always been important, as Joanna said going back to the history of Tunis agenda and the IGF and certainly every IGF I participated in, capacity building was an issue.  And it's been gaining more with prominence with many groups.  Global multilateral, multi‑stakeholder alike, attempting to define solutions.
Capacity building around implementation of agreed norms of responsible state and non‑state behavior, for example, has been at the very top of the agenda of both the UN group of governmental experts, the new ones going on this year, and the new open‑ended Working Group and, indeed, I have attended many of the sessions of the open‑ended Working Group and I would say capacity building is a central theme raised by many, many countries and other stakeholders.  A foundational theme, I would say.  And we're very happy that many of those countries and the stakeholders mentions the GOC as well.
The UN Secretary General's high level panel on digital cooperation report also calls the recommendation for the establishment of digital help desk.  I think that's one suggestion that highlights the importance of capacity building to understand digital issues and steer cooperation related to social and economic impacts of digital technologies.  I would also remark that given the current COVID crisis and the dependence on digital technologies and the unfortunate attacks we see on those technologies from a wide range ever threat actors, that again highlights the importance for every country who may not have put capacity building or cybersecurity at the top of their list before that this is really an important issue.
The GFCE is not a platform, I should note for developing new norms.  That's the job of the UN, and some of the regional organizations that have been focusing on this.  But rather it's a practical action‑oriented and bottom‑up organization for the realization of the implementation of those initiatives including the norms and issues and raising awareness and getting more support for those initiatives.  It tries to play a complimentary role to share experience and knowledge with each other and with the wider community.
A core part of our efforts of the GFCE's efforts and functions is to act as a clearinghouse.  They need help and those entities whether they be countries or other entities who can help both fund and implement that help.
We're organized around five GFCE Working Groups.  Working Group A is on policy and strategy, and that includes both national strategies where a lot of work has been done, but also policy issues including, issues around diplomacies, norms, competency building and Working Group B, on infrastructure protection and Working Group C is on cybercrime or combatting cybercrime.  And Working Group D is cybersecurity and skills and Working Group E is cybersecurity standards.
In the early years, which wasn't that long ago, the GFCE focused on building a network of folks who can talk about these issues.  At the same time, members and partners collaborated with each other to establish cyber capacity building initiatives under the GFCE umbrella.  The GFCE had provided the foundation for the establishment of about 20 such initiatives so far, including on topics such as one, increasing resilience of Internet infrastructure, through promoting the adoption and the implementation of open standards, increasingly justified ‑‑ increase in justified trust in the operation and the use of the Internet.  Two, helping to improve the health of the global cyber ecosystem by providing reliable metrics, measurements and mitigation best practices to cybersecurity instant response teams or CSIRTs and providing a platform for memberships to share experiences, and lessons learned in cybersecurity mechanisms for responsible and coordinated vulnerability disclosure policies.
A fourth I would add is working to get ‑‑ to help countries around the world, particularly in the developing world have national strategies for cybersecurity which is an overarching foundational element.  All of these initiatives can be found on the GFCE website and although my talking points don't have the website written, it's www.theGFCE.org.  We have lots of material there.  Really if you are not familiar with, I really recommend you check it out.
The GFCE has been encompassing ‑‑ it has overall encompassing strategic objectives for the near future.  One the things we want to do is look ahead.  Over the coming year, this is ‑‑ I think inflection point is used too often.  But this is an inflection point for us and the global community.  One is to increase the visibility of the GFCE, promoting knowledge and expertise of GFCE members and partners and highlighting the impact of those projects and initiatives.  This is critically important.
I think all of us who play in this area, we think it's very important, and it is, but often we don't get the recognition among senior policymakers and senior government officials who don't play in cyber every day.  We have to raise this as a priority for all of them.  Two, are we looking to connect with other fora and cyberspace communities looking at what is being done by the GFCE with other important global and multilateral initiatives.
As I said in the outset of my remarks, many of those global initiatives, including some UN ones like the ITU and the UNODC also work with the GFCE itself but we are trying to connect to other initiatives especially new ones.  And then additionally we are trying to create regional and national focus and an impact of cyber capacity building activities working with regional partners and national governments to offer targeted consultations and projects around cybersecurity capacity building.  This includes regional organizations like OES, ASEAN and others, but it goes beyond that and where we have a number of exciting things we are looking to create the regional focus as well.
On the practical aspects, I will hand over to other speakers and they can go into more detail.  It's important to know that the GOC has been steadily building on its strengths.  In the last five years, this has been a continue building process.  It's trying to be more flexible, creating synergies between the GFCE and connecting other organizations and being more responsive to the community.  This is very much a community‑driven organization, where there's a lot of consultation and work with the community.
The synergies between the IGF and the GFCE are very clear.  They play an important role as a one‑stop shop for people to increase their knowledge and understanding on thematic issues of Internet Governance and cybersecurity respectively.  I would say the Internet Governance Forum as we all know has spent well beyond issues of internet governance to deal with issues such as cybersecurity, cybercrime and capacity building and that's very important.
In fact, the IGF goes further than simply acknowledging the role on cyber ‑‑ on capacity building around Internet governance but recognizes that people and institutions, including governments, from developing countries have particular need for such capacity building and capacity development.
The IGF has many strengths.  The IGF has a bright future, except in stakeholder communities and gender balance in IGF bodies and activities and a broad network of 114 and regional and youth IGFs.  I just participated last week in a talk for the youth IGF and the youth IGF is really important as well.  We are trying to make sure that we partner with that.
It's been addressing some of the issues with limited participation of certain stakeholder groups gaining traction from government and business representatives again especially from small and developing countries.  And I would say this is a challenge for all of us that too often you get people involved in one subject area and you need to have a range of folks, even in governments, the ministerial level, it's not just ICT ministers.  It's folks who do ‑‑ from interior ministries and foreign ministries.  We need to broaden that scope and the stakeholders as well.
So both of our organizations, IGF and GFCE can play and are playing an important role in their respective fields and there's, I think, a good synergistic overlap in those fields and more can be done to link these initiatives in ways to broaden the opportunities for the respective communities some of which are overlapping but some of which can, I think, we can use to recruit even new members.
And broaden, and to learn from others and develop the skills needed for the governance that is required to create inclusive and positive outcomes for all of us.
So I very much look forward to this session as I look forward to the rest of the IGF and I look forward to seeing people in person next year.  With that, let me turn it back over to Joanna.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Thank you very much, Chris.  Our next question is Ms. Carolin Weisser Harris who is leader international operations at the Global Cybersecurity Capacity Center.  She's working on the Afghanistan Working Group A on cybersecurity policy and strategy.  One of the tools that the GFCE has been supporting and developing for cyber capacity building is the Cybil knowledge portal and that will be the gist of Carolin's presentation.
>> CAROLIN WEISSER HARRIS: Thank you very much.  Good evening.  I want to say that there's a bonfire night in UK right now, and it just started.  So if you hear shooting in the background or if I'm suddenly jump, there's some background noise.
Yeah, thank you very much, Joanna for the introduction.  I will immediately go into the presentation.  Elliot, I don't know if you can share the screen or I can share the screen.  You can share the screen.
Yes.  So I would like to present Cybil.  Cybil is the knowledge portal of the global forum cyber expertise community.  As Chris already outlined the GFCE is really this to provide support and provide a platform to coordinate, to bring ‑‑ to bring people together and support the capacity building activities.  And one way to enable this is to also, of course, have the access to the knowledge and the access to lessons learned to practical tools to analysis to experience on how do to effective and efficient cyber capacity project.  And for that reason, Cybil was developed by a group of stakeholders, GFCE partners, the GFCE that you see on the bottom of this slide.  The Australia strategic, and Diplo, and NIIP, the Norwegian institute for international affairs.
So the ‑‑ as you see, that was very much outlined by Chris is that it's really important to share information with stakeholders in a very timely and efficient manner.  That's Cybil has the Delhi Communique and tries to hit the targets of the Delhi communique, which you can see, one goes through the details, but you see like we really try to ‑‑ yeah, kind of put the agenda into action and providing this platform.  Next slide, please.
So this knowledge sharing platform, it's a publicly available website.  It provides easy access to knowledge with respect to best practices and cyber capacity building and I will show you what it looks like in the couple of next slides.  It's neutral and on its work.  Neutral and open means actors can provide input documents, tools, et cetera, and it goes through a process that by the GUC Working Groups but overall, everyone who is a member of the GFCE, but partner of GFCE, and non‑partner can submit to the portal.
The aim is to avoid duplication.  First, that it's not showing any information which has already been somewhere else and not duplicating any other kinds the platforms but at the same time, it's to help actors who plan and implement cyber capacity building activities that they can what is happening in the capacity building, what type of projects are happening around the world in a specific country, on a specific issue that they don't do the same or duplicate any kind of efforts.
And the platform is often curated by the global community.  There's not one actor who decides on content, but the global community curates the content on the Cybil portal.
It meets the needs the global community and we actively, proactively talk to the global community at different events and collect inputs, what they would like to have on the portal, what actual kind of content, and how is it prepared?  We have feedback loops at every step of development but also like in the ongoing management of it.
And hopefully that's the aim, to have more ‑‑ it fosters and ables a more effective use of resources among the GFCE community and fully beyond the GFCE community as the GFCE becomes more known and eventually we have the aim that there's a great harmonization between different actors.
Next slide, please.
Yes, so that's why Cybil.  You know, there are many portals out there and cybersecurity building is really long word.  And we had people who saw it differently and they looked at the wording and they saw cyber capacity building, if you look at some of the ‑‑ you look at the words it's a bit of creativity for Cybil and the Cybil where the female prophets associated with wisdom.  We hope the Cybil platform fulfills this promise as well.  It's a nice catchy word and making it easy and we are talking about civilization within the community and also it's very good to make the brand much more known.
So everyone can go to the platform, it's www.Cybilportal.org and you can Google it.
And you see that there are four areas, and this is basically how the platform is structured.  We have a project repository, where projects are collected.  We have almost 700 to put on Cybil.  When you plan a project in a country, you can go there and look which other project, and which other actors has acted there.  And there's also the other area 99 tools.  These are tooled provided by the GFCE community that helps these activities.
This can be guidelines to develop cyber capacity awareness ‑‑ cybersecurity awareness campaign.  This can be assessment tools to assess national cybersecurity past and this can be other frameworks, handbooks, et cetera, that help you in the implementation.
And there's also publications so most GFCE member partners are academic institutions or think tanks but there are also other organizations who draft reports, do analysis and these kind of publications, including lessons learned, can published in that section.
And there's a big database of actors.  So actors include GFCE members which can be governments, implementers, funders, civil society organizations.  And so we have a broad range of organizations involved in cyber capacity building activities.
And then last but not least, this category doesn't have any ‑‑ it doesn't have its own tile, but there's an events calendar on Cybil.  And if everyone can submit his or her events, conferences, fora and it can be shared with the community.
So I will go into detail what you can find and also explain, like, what the benefit is.  Next slide, please.
For instance, this is the publication section.  You can see on the left‑hand side there's a menu where you can fill it according to the GFCE themes.  Chris mentioned this already.  The themes are also covered by the Working Groups.  And then you see the different tiles, which you can sort according to what was added last, or the number of results per page.  You can also have these tiles, as you see or you can have it in lines and what is really good, yes, you can filter according to actor, according to what kind of publication, but you can also download a spreadsheet.
So if you plan any kind of research or you do some kind of analysis, or you just want to have like a ‑‑ a ‑‑ have them all in one document, you can download a spreadsheet for research for analysis purposes.
Next slide, please.
Then Cybil can help you to coordinate.  And so this is a project database.  The GFCE Secretariat who is now managing Cybil after it was managed by Oxford for a year gathers the information from members and beyond and whoever is using and goes on this project category, can look for and filter according to the countries, the beneficiaries, the funders, the partners involved in a project, the region and topic.  So it really helps you to identify like who is doing what, where, when and you can also get more information about the project.
So if you want ‑‑ if you would scroll down.  This will be a ‑‑ you will see the same tiles and then you can click on a specific project and the project can also include certain ‑‑ the ‑‑ a description of the project, including certain documents.  And we have detailed information about a project.  And it's also possible again on the publication category, you can download a spreadsheet and then filter and use it for your project planning or whatever you want to do, if you do analysis or research, you can easily download it and have access sheet.
And with the aim like ‑‑ for also like identify areas for coordination whether you really know who is doing who, what and where and someone is doing something similar in the country.
Next slide, please.
That's the next category.  That's the tools.  Again, attention to filter according to the themes of who developed it and what is the topic and then you can also ‑‑ yeah, you can ‑‑ you can see it as a tile.  Again, you can download the files, if you want to have it in one document and use it offline.  So that should help you to improve your activities and help better understand and make ‑‑ and what is best practice and how to ‑‑ how to implement and draft the project.  Next slide, please.
Yes, so that's ‑‑ in the case that ‑‑ that's something which is for those who also are new to the community.  One of the observations was that in organizations, but also new people join the GFCE community or the cybersecurity capacity building and they are not sure where to find the right information.  There's a nice little small, get to know Cybil with a little smart user guide and where you can find it on Cybil and how it can help you.
Yes, how to get involved and how to engage with Cybil.  Of course, use it.  Provide your input, share your events.  Give feedback, it's a very good resource and it's something that really helps to promote ‑‑ promote what you are doing, and promote what is happening out there.  And also the link to actors, link to other players in the area and, yeah, really meet the objectives of the Cybil portal and achieve the agenda of the cyber capacity building.
Next slide.  Oh, this is already to the end.  So one last ‑‑ one last slide where we have.  I see I put it also in the chat. 
So if you want to ‑‑ if you are interested to get involved and to submit something, you can always connect ‑‑ you can reach out to the GFCE.  There's a contact form on Cybil on the top right and you can reach out.
You can also follow the GFCE on Twitter and look on the GFCE website, if you want to learn more about what the GFCE is doing.
But, we, of course, spread the word about Cybil.  Let us know if you have any project going on.  We would like to help to communicate your achievements over Cybil.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Thank you very much.  I might be biased, but I find the cyber capacity building that the GFCE is providing, together with its partners most informative and very useful, as you emphasized.  There are different tools but there, but this one is very comprehensive.  I think it skillfully links the practical side of cybersecurity capacity building with the research side and this smoothly brings us to our next speaker who is Mr. Enrico Calandro, who is the codirector of C3 Southern Africa but equally important is also chairing the GFCE Research Committee.  A relatively new initiative within the GFCE that is focused on research, the type of research that will help us build cyber capacity in a more effective, and efficient way.
As Chris emphasized, the GFCE is unique.  It brings together the practitioners and the government and also the researchers and Enrico the floor is yours.  Please tell us more.
>> ERICO CALANDRO: Thank you very much, Joanna and I had, everyone.
Greetings from Cape Town.  That's where I am in the world.  I'm very happy to present these ‑‑ yeah, relatively new as Joanna said mechanism of the Global Forum On Cyber Expertise.
I'm saying relatively new, because it comes from some discussions that the GFCE and the community had during the annual general meeting in Singapore in 2018, when the GFCE community realized that the different Working Groups were actually identifying knowledge gaps in their activities on cyber capacity building.  So we came up with an idea to try to fill into these knowledge gaps.
And we recommended to recognize this new mechanism, called global cyber capacity building research agenda.  So why?  Why do we need such a new mechanism?  Because as I said the community and especially at the Working Groups level, identified that we need to do research and we need to fill the knowledge gaps in a way that then capacity building activities can really be informed and evidence based.
So the best way of doing that then was to identify these knowledge gaps in a bottom up approach.  So really, you know, letting them emerge from the activities of the Working Group and translate these research ideas emerging from the discussions and the activities across the different themes of the GFCE and policy questions in research questions.  Into research questions that can be really developed through research projects by searchers, by experts and by consultants.
So in July of this year, we launched a call for research committee members and we received a number of applications and we selected all of these colleagues that you can see in your screen.  They are experts from different fields.  So they are not only academic researchers but they are also representatives from government entities, and from think tanks and from civil society organizations and from the private sector.  So that really all the different kind of expertise and knowledge is represented in this research committee.  The research committee is also not the traditional kind of academic exercise when you have only qualified academic, but an excellent way of doing research is different from the traditional academic work.
The research of the GFCE is practical and applied research.  It really has to identify answers and solutions to the problems identified within the Working Groups and that's what we are trying now to develop.  So all Working Groups GFCE according to the different themes that Chris Painter have identified a number of knowledge gaps and research ideas and committee members.  And these research ideas have been translated into with research questions and it's more structured research project that can be implemented.
And now mid‑November, in a few ‑‑ in one week and a half time, these research questions will be prioritized by the GFCE community so that then the prioritized researched questions will become part of the global cyber capacity building research agenda, which will be presented in ‑‑ at the end of November during the Global Forum On Cyber Expertise.
In December, we will start with some piloting projects to test these two mechanisms and the GFCE will have four proposals that will be open to everybody.  So not only to the GFCE community but to anybody who has actually got the specific expertise that we are looking for.
The initial research projects will be implemented.  As I said with the aim, we are really providing practical and applied knowledge to the activities and the problems identified of the Working Group level.  I believe that's an interesting mechanism really to fill some of these knowledge gaps within the Working Groups all the activities of the Working Groups have so far been done on a voluntary basis.  That will still happen and continue.  But somehow there is a feeling of adding more qualified for their activities, and that's where we tried to fill in that kind of gap.  So I look forward really to working with this newly established mechanism with the GFCE community.  I'm very happy to present for the first time publicly this mechanism with the broader IGF community, where I grew up from.
Yes, I really look forward to engaging to build the knowledge that is needed for the cyber building capacity processes.  Thank you for your attention.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Thank you very much, Enrico.  That is an interesting endeavor and we're looking forward to the research call and the research that comes out that initiative.  As we said, what the GFCE does.  It brings together expertise and research and those in need of both of those elements trying to implement new policies legally or regionally and this brings us to the next speaker who is Ms. Racky Seye Samb, who is the head of the office of ministry of digital economy and telecommunications in Senegal.  Senegal is a governmental member of the GFCE and what they have been doing is exactly using the capacity that the capacity to build their cybersecurity strategy and hopefully Racky can share where Senegal came involved in the GFCE and who has been done so far on the Senegal national cybersecurity strategy.
I hope you can use your mic well, Racky.
>> RACKY SEYE SAMB: Yes, thank you, Joanna.  Hello.  So firstly, I would like to thank GFCE to invite are us to share our activities done since we are member of GFCE.
So can I share my screen? 
Okay.  So firstly, I would like to talk about the history.  So Senegal joined GFCE via our Ministry of Telecommunications and digital economy in 2015, during the international conference on cyberspace in the Hague.
So during this conference, Senegal, they created an initiative named an initiative between Senegal and the kingdom of the Netherlands.  So this is aimed to promote a safe and secure cyberspace, and also to establish in enabling environment for an open net, including digital trust for the population.
And finally, dialogue to share the best practices in awareness during the campaign on cybersecurity. 
So what we did first was to do an exercise in order to a reference situation on sign err security in Senegal.  So we did it with the help of Oxford University and based on the cybersecurity capacity maturity model for the university which includes five dimensions on policy and strategy, culture and society, education and training and skills, legal and regulatory framework, and standards and business models and technologies.
So we did ‑‑ we organized a work shop with all stakeholders at the national level in Senegal, in order to establish this situation on cybersecurity in Senegal.  And the main recommendation issued from this document is to establish a national cybersecurity strategy, which we included in this national cybersecurity strategy.
So after this.  I note that this document is online and you can download it, the capacity.
So after that, we establish our national cybersecurity strategy in 2017.  We had help with it was the same process.  We organized workshops.  All stakeholders at the national level and we without our national cybersecurity document.  It was validated by the government at the end of 2017.  So the vat is based on the vision in 2022 in Senegal, and this is a trusted, secure and resilient for cyber space for all.
So we want to promote cybersecurity culture in Senegal.  The first one is to strengthen the resources in cybersecurity in all sectors and the last one is ‑‑ to be involved in regional and national work on cybersecurity and to enhance our international cooperation in cybersecurity.  So what we have done since the validation of the cybersecurity strategy.  So we have a new law on Internet communications and we are updating our laws on ICT.  So we have things for personal data protection.
In the side of cybersecurity culture, so we ‑‑ we implement our National Action Plan on child online protection.  So we organize a training ‑‑ a lot of training and workshops on this topic, are in order to have more students and children and users on cybersecurity.
So there are also a lot of initiatives necessity national level that are done by stakeholders in order to aware users, Internet users.  Like ISOC and other stakeholders from civil society.
So also we created a national cybersecurity school in 2019.  So this school will ‑‑ this school will provide some ‑‑ it will provide some ‑‑ it will provide trainings on cybercrime.  Information security ‑‑ information security and cybersecurity governance.  So for all stakeholders at the national level and also at the national level.
So about critical CAIP.  We have also established competency security response team for the government network with ADI and also the national public key infrastructure is going to be finalized.
So at the national level, we are members of ECOWAS and we benefit from their support.  So to enhance or put in place our cybersecurity projects and we are also a member of GLACY plus, and we take back to a lot of trainings that are provided by GLACY plus for law enforcement.  And also we are UN‑GGE, and we also participate to UN‑GGE meetings in order to enhance our international cybersecurity domain.  And we participated in all activities in the GFCE, and encourage also as the countries, the African countries to be member of GFCE to share their experiences and get more from them in order to enhance our experiences on cybersecurity.
So challenges are ‑‑ are in general to continue the ‑‑ the setting up of our projects, our project officer of national cybersecurity strategy and also to create national responsive team and national structure on national security on national level and promote investment in cybersecurity.  Also, to implement an program for all groups of users and to enhance our international cooperation and international cooperation in ‑‑ by being by implicating ourself more in projects with the African Union and ECOWAS.  So my English is not very, very good.
So that is ‑‑ that's the end of my presentation.  So thanks again to GFCE to allow us to share these activities with you, and if there are questions or contributions or ‑‑ I'm available.  Thank you very much.  And sorry for my English.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Your English was perfect.  That was a very clear presentation.  On the one hand we can clearly see what are the challenges at hand and we can also see what ‑‑ the long way you guys have made sin the very beginning in building the national cybersecurity strategy and infrastructure.  The challenges you are facing seem common around the globe and it's interesting to see it represents specifically.  Thank you very much for this.
Before I give the floor to our next speaker, who I'm looking very much forward more regional perspective, as Chris emphasized Africa is the region where the GFCE has provided most extensively expertise thus far, but first, please allow me a brief housekeeping note.
We started ten minutes later and I would presume you might be willing to go ten minutes beyond the original time that was set up for us, that would be 20:30UTC for us to finish, 21:30UTC, giving us 15 more minutes.  I see we have two questions in the Q&A bod.  The time permitting, I will be happy to read those out and bring to our panelists to answer.
Please Moctar, take the time that was initially assigned to your intervention and allow me for a brief introduction, Mr. Moctar Yedaly is the head of Information Society division at the African Union commission and has already indicated we are very much looking toward to the insights between the African Union and the GFCE.
Mr. Yedaly, the floor is yours.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Thank you very much.  It is really hard to follow all of those good speakers.  But there is some part of Africa where we say last one is the most loved one.  It is bedtime here.  I'm very humbled to be here with you, so speak about first of all the capacity building and the cooperation between the African Union and the GFCE in terms of achieving the objectives set at ‑‑ during the political declaration of the GFCE 2015, and allowing us to become members of the GFCE.
As Chris mentioned at the beginning, the issue of cyber capacity building or cybersecurity is being talked about everywhere and in every corner and from different angles and specifically, the countries ‑‑ the development countries are actually really requesting and are in need of more capacity building to augment the threats in the cyberspace for them to use the ICTs to get into the 21st century and reshape the way they are developing themselves.  And most of them are in Africa.  So 55 countries ‑‑ 55 Member States.  African Union.  And 54 countries or actually all of them are in need of capacity building.
And most of them as you have seen with the example of Senegal are trying to adopt some digital transformation strategies to address the way they are actually conducting their development and their ‑‑ they are meeting their development goals.  The African Union being a member of the GFCE has really is that righted to do a lot of capacity building to achieve three main objectives.
One is having each member of the African Union having the national cyber strategy.  Second is to issue the regulations and within the framework of GFCE, we have started to do a lot of capacity billing and seminars and webinars here and there and most of those activities we have done through which we have actually trained more than 200 experts in Africa.  That's just a number.  We have haven't had the chance to evaluate the ill pact of that and how it has implemented us in the cyberspace.  So most ‑‑ one the biggest parts that we have worked with within the framework of this is the US State Department, through which we have trained people in different issues from the technical side, evidence.
One of the ‑‑ that really is coming, and I wanted to push that today, which is the project that we are now starting with the GFCE related to the capacity building with support of the GFCE Foundation.
They are aimed at building so better understand the cyber capacities and understanding cyber resilience.  This is a two‑year project that will be starting toon, hopefully next month and you see the GFCE with the Bill Gates foundation.  One is to grow a trusted community of cyber leaders and Senegal could be one of the countries that could be benefiting from that.
Identify relevant cyber capacity games at the national level and that is very important also not only to start ‑‑ if we had to go for monitoring evaluation from we are starting, and we will look at what is happening in Africa and what is the situation, and build what we call the so‑called online database on all projects and at the same time creating the online models and materials that will be building that knowledge for cybersecurity in Africa.
This is what I wanted to share with you quickly and I hope I haven't been too long because I don't want to stand between myself and the bed.
And then leave a few times for the Q&A.  Over to you.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Thank you very much, sir.  Thank you for staying up for us.  That was most informative and I think it gives a very good framing for the work that has been done thus far.  So we have looked at the theory and you and Ms. Seye Samb have showed us.  Thank you very much for taking the time.
We have a few more minutes I would like us to look into the Q&A pod, with the permission of our panelists, I will read out the questions for those of our participants who might not have access to the Q&A pod and I would like our panels to think about potential answers.
The first question:  This has been an increase in capacity building initiatives among different stakeholders.  The main question is:  Are they effective?
How does the GFCE measure its capacity building initiatives?  Is there any metrics and indicators that you can share with us?  That would be the first question.  I might have an assumption, but I will leave it open for a moment.
And then the second question is, is the GFCE knowledge portal and model for the GFCE as recommended by the UN high level panel on digital cooperation.  Is the scope and coverage of that different?  So we have two questions, questions one on metrics and one on the link between the IGF and the work that has been done by the GFCE within the Cybil portal.
I'm curious if we have any takers for nose questions.  Chris, I see your hand is up.
>> CHRISTOPHER PAINTER: Yes, let me start with the metrics issue.
I mean, I should say one of the reasons that the GFCE was founded is something that I found when I was in government, that we didn't have good metrics or good coordination.  I used to stroke we were training the same two people, whatever countries you name, and five countries were training them and there has no follow through.  There's different kinds of metrics.  There's questions how effective is the activity that you are doing and there's follow through so you don't just train someone and go away and never see them again.  And there's a number of aspects.  So what the GFCE does is it tries to make sure that there's follow through and coordination.
We are working on issues about metrics and some other folks might want to talk about some of those things and there are good metrics and issues out there.  To give an example of the strategy and the policy group with respect to national strategies.  One the country has a national strategy, it has to implement that strategy and sometimes it has to revise that strategy and the idea is to have the GFCE continue to plug in and make sure that the matchmaker function delivers what was asked for, and that the country is getting what it needs and then the country can take the next step.  So this is not just a one‑off process.  This is very much a journey that we are trying to take together with the countries that are asking and there's cyber green and other things that have metrics that are part of it, and I'm happy to defer to others.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: I'm curious if Carolin has something to add.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Can I say something about the issue of metrics.  This is something that we face in Africa.
Indeed, there's a lot of initiatives, a lot of capacity building.  We have seen most of the people but we don't know where they are and what is the impact, what they have done and have they achieved anything?  That's actually very important for us at this point in time to start thinking just ‑‑ question ‑‑ not just go ‑‑ we said we have 500, okay, fine.  Where are they?  What are the impacts?  Have they been really working the ‑‑ in the space?  This is something probably we need to think of how to really develop strategy good metrics in order to make sure that the impact has been really measured properly.
And beyond that, we will go after that to see how we are going to place all of those people we will be training.
Be it online or be it physically or be it those who are using our portal, be it all the GFCE portals.  We do have some digital platform we have developed in which we have what we call the digital clinic, with all the documentations and people are able to counsel, but, again, what is the impact?  That is something we need to ‑‑ because we have to adjust ourself.  The crimes are evolving ‑‑ evolving every single day.  They are being developed and we need to adapt every time.  It's not a one‑time training.  It's continuous enhancement of ourself in order to face the challenges we are having.
Over to you.  Thank you.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Thank you very much.  Carolin.
>> CAROLIN WEISSER HARRIS: Yes, I will take the question regarding the portal.  So I think ‑‑ I think what ‑‑ and as was actually the principles of Cybil, I think that's something which is actually really important for whatever type of platform that you build is that it is inclusive.  So it's really inclusive in a sense that it tries to be open and inclusive in terms of who can access the content, who can use the content, and who can provide content and make sure that it doesn't discriminate against any type of obstacles that the players have.
The other thing, it needs to be practical knowledge.  I think a platform only works when it's useful for the users.
It's not worse to step for something that is just there for the sake of having a platform and then it's not ‑‑ it doesn't fit what the users ‑‑ what the user needs.
I'm also saying, this I feel that Cybil, it's a learning process, and is it actually fulfilling its objectives but it's ongoing dialogue to make it very useful for those who just intend to be for.
And then the issue of openness, again, like accessible, open for ‑‑ and also yeah, accessible, open for different kind of stakeholders.  It also means that the content must be in different languages, for instance, which Cybil is not at the moment.  That's one the aims.
And I think the other thing is that issue of ownership.  I think when they provided the funding for this platform, it was developed by GFCE partners, but it was also very clear that it was driven by the community and was not something that came top down but it also came from the community.
In regard like what is really important, I think that's what other portals, platforms probably experienced.  There was ‑‑ there was a panel at the IGF in Mexico four years ago on different platforms and the big issue for all of them was they started and then after one or two years, the funding stopped.
So what is really important is that these platforms, they can be really good in the beginning.  They have brilliant content but then the funding runs out and then a lot of effort, resources and, like ‑‑ and they get lost.
So to do that, I say that's what is really important to really have a commitment by a funder who doesn't see like a short‑term project and must really invest in it and doesn't give up after a couple of years.  And I think that's where the GFCE has become very valuable because they have not funded Cybil and another portal transitions into Cybil and, of course, you need the commitment.
Data and commitment, the commitment by the community.  A lot of it is on Cybil and what Cybil is actually is, is also based on voluntary involvement by ‑‑ by GFCE partners but also the GFCE members who contribute the content.  They look at the content.  They say it's valuable ‑‑ like you should go on Cybil and we have the creation processes and, of course, you need resources.  You have need money to ‑‑ not only to build something like this, but to maintain it, and to improve it and to develop it.
So long story short, I think the first question should be what does a user want?  How does he want it?  What is the ‑‑ what is the USP of a platform, like how is it ‑‑ avoid duplication.  What do other platforms already provide?  What are the gaps and then really ensure to find ‑‑ make it such a compelling case that any organization can fund something like this makes a long year commitment and I think Cybil and I think the cyber capacity building community is very lucky to have some organization like the GFCE who has made this commitment to start this kind of platform.
And you hope that it's successful and it will be there for many, many years.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Thank you.  I fully shared that sentiment.  I have the odd job today of keeping time.  As much as I am a fan of Cybil as much as you are, I need to give us a framing.  Enrico, one minute for your feedback.
>> ERICO CALANDRO: Yes, very quickly on the question on metrics, so you can measure the effectiveness of cyber capacity initiatives in a number of ways but the GFCE currently in the task force on strategy and assessment is actually trying to understand what are the different it wills available to measure cyber capacity maturity and there are a number of tools with a number of indicators and metrics that try to measure the maturity of countries from an policy development, legislation, up to, I think, you know structures to fight cybercrimes like CSIRT.  And this is the cyber readiness index, the Oxford cyber maturity model for countries and the E‑governance academy national cybersecurity index.  So they have a number of really granular indicators that are collected at the national level, across a number of countries longitudinally, you can see how they change their poster in terms of cyber maturity.  And the GFCE is good at coordinating.  Having Cybil portal which is matching the cyber capacity initiatives, you can see whether they have been effective when you go and have a look at the indicators on the cyber maturity of different countries across the different themes and identify at that point specific points of cyber capacity where our country is particularly week and you can do it based on our research and what have you observed.  That was very insightful.
>> JOANNA KULESZA: Thank you for enumerating.  We have an interesting is, maybe Cybil can be part of an interconnected global network.  It avoids the risk of duplication.  I think that's a handy recommendation.  Thank you for sharing that.  Thank you for inquiring about the PowerPoints.  We will make sure that they get to you.  Please feel free to reach out to me or my cochair or the team at the GFCE with Elliot and particular situation.
I need to be wrapping up.  So thank you very much.  Thank you to our wonderful panelists.  I hope that this was a teaser of ow comprehensive and at the same time how open the GFCE is.  There is a lot to be said but we just have one hour.  We need to wrap it up.  Thank you for joining it.
On behalf of the advisory board and my cochair who joined us here today, thank you very much for participating.  We are open to questions.  You can reach out to me.  I'm just a very friendly individual and you can reach out to me on any issue.  Or if you need to reach out to the contact email of the GFCE, I'm certain you will have comprehensive and useful information.
Thank you, everyone.  I really need to wrap this up.  Thank you for joining us.  And thank you to the wonderful panelists and enjoy the IGF.  Until we meet again.  Thank you.  This session is adjourned.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-of44-technical-internet-governance^^

 
 
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Good day, everyone.  My name is Mandy Carver and I'm the Senior Vice‑President for IGO Engagement at ICANN.  Welcome to ICANN's Open Forum at the IGF.  This year's theme is on technical Internet governance and the importance of looking at new ways of understanding and working together to protect what we all know is an important resource in this digital age, the Internet.
This year's theme is to identify a distinction between technical Internet governance and Internet governance.  Internet governance has historically focused on questions of who has access to the Internet and what they do with that access.  Technical Internet governance focuses on how the Internet operates.  Our speakers today in order of appearance are Maarten Botterman, ICANN Chair of the Board.  Goran Marby, ICANN President and CEO.  Merike Kao the Liaison to the ICANN Board, and David Conrad, Senior Vice‑President and Chief Technology Officer at ICANN.
During the session, we will explore with our speakers what is meant by technical Internet governance, the distinction between technical Internet governance and Internet governance, and ICANN's position and role within technical Internet governance.  We will be taking your questions after the speakers are done.  Please make sure that when asking a question to use the Q&A Pod or raise your hand to be recognized by the host and unmuted.  With that, I would like to turn to our first speaker, Maarten Botterman, Chair of the ICANN Board.  Maarten?
   >> MAARTEN BOTTERMAN:  I really want to talk about the future of the Internet.  Before we commence, I would like to take a moment to share with you that an important contributor, not only to the IGF but also to the ICANN Multistakeholder Model, has passed away yesterday, Ms. Marilyn Cade, and we convey our deepest respect and gratitude for her tireless contributions, may she rest in peace.
So, today's Open Forum comes at an opportune time in the evolution of the Internet governance, the Internet is a pervasive complex network of networks, but ICANN along with other technical organizations play a fundamental role in maintaining a stability and security.  ICANN's mission is to preserve and announce operational stability, reliability, security, and global interoperability of the Domain Name System, the DNS.
ICANN coordinates part of the DNS which translates computer host names into IP addresses, the numbers, and so the Internet protocol addressing system used to route Internet traffic.  Some of you know that ICANN helps assign the IP addresses to our partners, the RARs, who then distributes them to Internet service providers.  The ICANN Community made up of members of the technical, business, government, and Civil Society communities, helps support the Domain Name System by defining and helping publicize the rules.  Without ICANN's management of the unifying system known as the Domain Name System or the DNS, we wouldn't have a global and accessible Internet where it's possible to find each other anywhere in the world and without risk of confusion.
For ICANN to be successful, it's necessary for us to understand and identify the major trends and forces that could have an impact on the appropriateness DNS from going forward and we have captured the understanding in our Strategic Plan for 2020 to 2025 both the challenges that arise from a security perspective, the DNS evolution perspective, as well as the global governance perspective.  This document will provide important guidance to our work for the years to come.  Now, you can find it on the ICANN website.  ICANN.org.
We very much recognize that all of these areas will evolve over time and we keep close track of developments that may require adapting our strategic plan going forward as things that you don't expect will come up every time, and at least to reflect on it on an annual basis, community, organization, and boards alike.
Internet governance refers to the shared principles, norms, rules, decision‑making procedures, policies, and standards that governance shaped the Internet on how it's used and for example exchanges at forums such as the one we're participating in now, the Internet Governance Forum have traditionally aimed to identify current challenges across a variety of Internet issues, and exploring potential solutions, taking broadly Internet governance can be viewed as explorations of mechanisms that define how the Internet is used.  When we focus on Internet governance, we see the following.  The global and cross‑border nature of the Internet challenges, the concept of sovereignty and governance by governments or groups of governments.  This is largely why Internet governance has evolved organically through international multistakeholder process.  This process is a way to tackle the challenges inherent in the network of networks that is developed by people for people, across borders, around the world.
ICANN is very much based on and committed to this multistakeholder model.  That is where we are today.  It's transparent, it's the transparency, the inclusion, participation to it, as well as the expertise in it are critical for governing discussions related to a critical element of the Internet.  We very much recognize that no stakeholder can run the Internet alone, and we reflect that recognition both within the ICANN ecosystem and with other stakeholders that go beyond ICANN's mission or besides the ICANN mission.
As the Internet continues to develop, the opportunities, challenges, and risks will continue to grow, and we need to address those together.  So with exponential change in the Internet transformation over the past few years, introduction of legislation like the GDPR, the data protection regulation, and technical developments like the Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, we must work together to ensure that the Internet continues to develop safely, securely, and in a stable manner so that it continues to be an Internet and we trust enough to use it.
When we look at the future of the Internet, the choice for us is not between globally and the respect of rule of law or national system.  It's both.  They can co‑exist.  To ensure they co‑exist we have to work hard and through innovative processes and approaches in order to reinterpret the fundamental values and norms for the reality of a transnational and connected Internet and help others to understand how the system works.  We can continue ‑‑ so we can continue working to serve the global community in the best possible ways.
Today, we not only need to ensure the Internet continues to grow safely and in a stable manner, we should also cherish it and ensure that it continues to bring the people in the world together.  ICANN is committed to fulfilling its responsibilities to that, and we'll step up when needed.  We're also willing to lend our knowledge and technical expertise where and when needed.  We're all working together to ensure the Internet serves the world to the best possible way.  ICANN is determined to continue to deliver on our mission, recognizing that this is a key part of how the global Internet functions.  With that, Mandy, back to you.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Thank you, Maarten.  Thank you for that important introduction on ICANN's role and framing of this discussion on governance.
Now I'd like to give the floor to Goran Marby, ICANN's CEO to discuss the concept of technical Internet governance and ICANN's role within it.  Goran?
   >> GORAN MARBY:  Thank you.  Thank you, Mandy, and thank you Maarten.  So, I hope that we will have some time for discussion as well after this, but I'm really sorry that I'm not meeting all of you in Poland, which I was looking forward to.
Anyway, I'm sure that you all agree that the Internet should be a resource available to everyone, and so we can all benefit from it and I hope that you will agree that this is becoming increasingly important that we all work together and build this unique ‑‑ in shaping and building and continuing to shape and build this unique resource.
Every stakeholder, every interested party, whether they come from government, Civil Society, business, academia, or any other group has a stake, has a responsibility, an obligation in the evolution.  This is the key to what I think and we think is important, the multistakeholder model of governance.
But we therefore need to find new ways of understanding and working together to protect what we all know to be this important resource in a digital age.  I mean, historically, technical experts have been trying ‑‑ let's be frank, trying to simplify explanations of how the Internet operates providing high‑level models that aim to help nontechnical individuals to understand the basics of Internet technologies.
However, what we've seen is that this sometimes overly simplistic models will be assumed by non‑technical legislatures and regulators to be how the Internet actually works.  Where it can result in misunderstandings and becomes embedded into laws, regulations, or standards.
The effort with what we call the technical Internet governance, are intended to improve the understanding of the technical underpinnings of the Internet among non‑technical stakeholders within governments, businesses, Civil Society, academia, or anyone else.  So, the intention is to avoid unintended consequences.
That is why we started to distinguish between technical Internet governance and Internet governance, and I know that some of you will not agree because of course it's going to simplify, but the Internet governance has historically focused on who has access to Internet and what they're going to do with it.  The technical Internet governance is how the Internet actually operates involving more than just the technical competence relevant to ICANN and the DNS ecosystem.
It's an effort but all of those that can affect and contribute to making the network more stable, secure, and resilient such that the Internet standards development, organization, network operators, hardware manufacturers, protocol designers, software engineers, and the list could go on.  That is our focus.  The juncture with this distinction is going to be more important than ever.  It's especially important now that many countries are developing new Internet regulations and legislations that aim to tackle the main Internet related issues we face, or as they define to face that cybersecurity, cyber warfare, espionage, protection of personal data, e‑commercial data, localities, et cetera, et cetera.  In the role of a technical Internet governance ICANN's role is to clarify positions itself as a technical nonprofit organization keen to keep legislators and regulators to understand and therefore to be mindful of the way the Internet functions.
Some of you may ask why.  The straightforward answer is to avoid the development of new legislations, regulations, and policy missteps that could negatively impact the technical function of the Internet.  Because these new regulations and/or legislations could have negative impact on the stable, interoperable Internet, one component of being the DNS.
What we're concerned with really are three types of dialogues, discussions taking place in IGO initiatives discussions and decisions in standardization bodies, and regulatory initiatives at the national, regional, or government level because the discussing are taking place are diverse.  ICANN's participation in this conversation has expanded and has to be expanded.  A part of why we're having the session is also to be transparent from ICANN of what we do and when we do it.
It is important to note that not all challenges to a stable, secure, resilient Internet are related to legislation.  Many of the threats from open Internet could come from standardization.  Case in point, 5G and the new IP, proposed standards that we carefully are monitoring and analyzing for potential impact on the ability for people to connect on which they define as the Internet.
To maintain an interconnected Internet, we must therefore talk about the technical implications of what exists, especially with a non‑technical stakeholders within government, business, Civil Society, et cetera.
The introduction of the general ‑‑ take GDPR for example, demonstrated the need to early engage with legislators and regulators to help them process the impact of their initiatives.  We will, of course, as a non‑political organization have an opinion about the legislation itself, the impact of the legislation, the purpose of the legislation.  What we want to do is that the legislatures should understand the consequences from a technical perspective of the legislations.
It is important for all of us to be aware of an evolving landscape of the challenges that may present in order to assess the appropriate approach.  New discussions that can affect ICANN and the Internet are occurring in new places that address new challenges in connecting people to the Internet.  This creates a potential for new threats to the function of the interoperable Internet, originating from places we haven't encountered before.
For ICANN that means that we need to broaden our engagement to interact with those that previously have not interacted with us.  This in turn helps decision‑makers of all levels avoid triggering unanticipated consequences.  Focusing on the concept of technical Internet governance, encourages us to look at the current state of affairs from a technical perspective of governing the Internet.  This perspective is called increased attention paid by governments to more aspects of the Internet due to the ever‑increasing importance of Internet, in society, economically, educationally, socially, and soon related.
For me ICANN exists for a very specific purpose.  We're here to provide a service to the world.  It's to continue to do so, we need to evolve our engagement and address the understanding of technical protocols that are a potential challenge to the security, stability, resilience of the Internet, definitely.
At the end of the today the common goal is to ensure that it's singular, unified, interoperable at the next billion Internet users come online, that's why we're here.  At the IGF, why we're actively engaged in stakeholders like you through the processes.  We need to preserve and support continued innovation of this fantastic thing we called the Internet, not the platforms, but the very core that supports the platform's existence.  To do this, we are committed to lending our knowledge and technical expertise to legislators where and when needed to ensure policy choices are made with the full understanding of the possible impact it might have on the Internet core infrastructure.  The positive thing is not ‑‑ ICANN is not aligned in this, but together with our partners in the number’s community with ISOC, with ITF and other ones, we are part of a very strong ecosystem.  With this, we also want to make ICANN's role a little bit clearer, but we will also help and work together with our partners.  We're in this together, all of us.  Thank you very much.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Thank you, Goran.  A very helpful overview of technical Internet governance.  I'd like now to go to Merike Kao who will update on the activity of the DNS Security Facilitation Initiative Technical Study Group part of ICANN's work in this area.  Merike, the floor is yours.
   >> MERIKE KAO:  Thank you very much, Mandy.  And good day, everyone.  Good morning, good evening wherever you may be around the globe and following this session.
Following on what has been said so far on our perspective of technical Internet governance and alignment with the five‑year ICANN strategic plan, I want to focus on the key initiative that was introduced earlier this year that supports ICANN's position.  This is the DNS Security Facilitation Initiative Technical Study Group.  This Technical Study Group is a CEO‑initiated process and it was introduced in May of this year.
It is charged with providing recommendations to the ICANN CEO on ways to establish and promote best practices, facilitate communications between ecosystem participants, and implement processes to help stakeholders and/or threats to the DNS.
These recommendations will involve discussion and consultation with relevant stakeholders, policy‑related issues are out of scope as this is purely a technical mandate.
This Technical Study Group is made up of a number of invited guests that have cross‑functional expertise.  The expertise is quite varied and it includes handling the emergency response coordination, DNS security and building out architecting and operating large‑scale DNS operations, generic architecture and design, and also, in-depth DNS protocol knowledge.
The group is being supported by members of the ICANN Organization.  This Technical Study Group will explore areas around what ICANN can and should be doing to increase the level of collaboration and engagement the DNS ecosystem stakeholders to improve the security profile of the DNS.  The group aims to have some kind of recommendations by May of 2021, so next year.
The Technical Study Group will structure development of its recommendations around five key questions, and these are as follows:  What are the mechanisms or functions that are currently available that address DNS security, so this relates to what are the best practices and technologies that exist today to help mitigate issues around DNS security issues; can we identify the most critical gaps in the current DNS security landscape?  Who is best suited to fill those gaps?  Then also another question is, what are the risks associated with any of these gaps that may not be well understood, and does the DNS have unique characteristics that attract security problems which other Internet services do not have?  The goal of this Study Group is to look at the cross‑functional aspects of the DNS and create the recommendations to the ICANN CEO to promote best practices, facilitate communication, and implement processes to help all stakeholders mitigate and/or responds to the threats of the DNS ecosystem.
I am happy to announce that the Technical Study Group has completed its first very important milestone with the completion of the Charter and the Project Plan.  And the completion of this work in a timely manner, especially during the challenges that we are facing for the lack of face‑to‑face meetings and the fact that workloads have increased for everybody, because this is a purely volunteer effort for all TSG Members, and it's really greatly appreciated.  I'm just incredibly grateful for the productive conversations we've had so far and promise for more to come.  That's a quick update on this Technical Study Group.  Thank you very much.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Thank you, Merike.  Now I would like to turn to David Conrad who will cover other aspects of the work that ICANN does in the realm of technical Internet governance and our efforts to foster a trusted, open, secure, single Internet.  David?
   >> DAVID CONRAD:  Yeah.  Thank you, Mandy.  As mentioned, I'm ICANN's Chief Technology Officer, so the technical part of technical Internet governance is obviously a particular interest of mine.  One area in which technical Internet governance comes into play is in new technologies, either real or proposed, and how those technologies may impact the Internet.  Examples would include 5G, New IP, Digital Object Architecture, Block Lists.  There are a number of technologies that are potentially impacting the Internet, but looking at those four specifically, with 5G, one of the areas that we look at is how network slicing can impact the way the Internet runs and how it's being used.  Network slicing can present different Internets depending on what you're paying for, and this can potentially result in ambiguity depending on which segment or which slice of the Internet you're actually looking at.
Does example.com mean the same thing as it would on another slice?
And in New IP, this is a technology being proposed by Walway and Affiliate Future, and proposes a underlying new infrastructure for the Internet which is defined in a top‑down way and this would necessarily create a new Internet, one based on new IP addresses as opposed to the existing IP addresses, despite the fact that you can use the existing IP addresses within New IP, it would still require some sort of translational gateway thereby creating essentially a new Internet.  How that Internet would interact with the existing Internet is an area of concern and interest.
With digital object architecture, also known as DOA, it creates a new naming universe as opposed to the new addressing universe you would see in New IP.  DOA would have a different administrative structure, requiring users to know which naming universe to select and how to select it.
Block Chains is an interesting technology.  It's been explored in many different areas, but its applications in the context of technical Internet governance remains a bit unclear, specifically what problem does Block Chain apply to and how does that technology actually solve that problem?
All of these technologies have pros and cons.  The technical implications of those technologies may not be fully understood by folks who are working on developing legislation or regulation.
Within ICANN, we're not unthinkingly wedded to any particular technology.  Rather, we believe that bottom‑up multistakeholder approach, fully informed by objective and unbiased, data‑driven analyses is more supportive of the innovation and acceptance that we've seen of the Internet over the last decades than top‑down driven mandates.
In terms of top‑down bias‑driven analyses, some examples that I can cite that we're undertaking within the organization, the ICANN organization, are projects such as the DNS Abuse Activity Reporting Project.  Tracks reports of domain names used in phishing and others, and provides that information to the community.  Our goal there has been to provide sort of a consistent reference, a consistent reference of data so that we can see how different policies will impact those four security threats that we see in the Internet.
We have another project called the Identifier Technologies Health Indicators, ITHI, and that is collecting data on metrics that can shed light on how the Internet ‑‑ how the identifier systems are evolving and whether that evolution is healthy or not, similar to DNS Abuse Activity Reporting or DAAR, ITHI goal is to provide longitudinal data so that we can compare over time how different policies are impacting the way the identifier systems are evolving.
A more recent project, the Domain Name Security Threat Identification Collection and Reporting Project was triggered by reports of a surge in COVID‑related domain names registered for malicious purposes.  The DNS sticker was aimed at collecting reports of those domain names specifically those used in phishing and malware distribution verifying as much as we could that the domains were malicious and when we determined that we were, based on a relatively high criteria, we notified the sponsoring registrars for those registrars to investigate and take appropriate actions.
And, finally, not really a project but an engagement approach that we've taken is that at every ICANN meeting, we have an emerging identifier technology session where we aim to bring in speakers that are expert in new technologies, regardless of what they might be, to present those technologies to the ICANN community and take questions during the ICANN meetings.
In that way, we hope to expose the community to these new technologies, and whether or not those technologies will take off is something that we within the org, within the organization aim to not necessarily have an opinion but to provide objective data for the community to include within their policy deliberations.
So, within the Internet governance world, ICANN is a technical organization, and our focus on technical governance aims to help ensure that the Internet is as secure, stable, and resilient as it can be.
Within the organization, we offer objective, unbiased data to help the community evolve the Internet system of identifiers and we look forward to continuing doing that in the future.  With that, I'll hand it back over to Mandy.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Thank you, David.  I'd now like to open the session up to the Question and Answer segment of our Open Forum and I ‑‑ we've got folks monitoring the Q&A Pod; and also, we've got some other questions that have come in.  While we're waiting for the queue to set up, can I just ask, Goran or Maarten, would you like to expand how ICANN will contribute its technical expertise to the global Internet policy development?  Is that only going to be within the context of technical Internet governance, or will it also be in other aspects of the Internet governance ecosystem?
   >> MAARTEN BOTTERMAN:  Well, basically, what's important for us to do our work is that our work is all understood, and there our mission is focused on the Domain Name System, on the unique identifier system.  Measures that are taken by others will make a difference in how we can do our work, and this is why this focus is so important.  But Goran can tell much better than I do what we can do about it.  Goran?
   >> GORAN MARBY:  One of the interesting aspects within ICANN and the whole ecosystem is that the world is evolving.  The COVID situation has put a special attention to the Internet as a functioning set of technologies that works together.  And in many of the conversations we have, outside of the ecosystem, we often tend to sort of stand away than to actually explain how it works, and this is the notion that I think that we need to ‑‑ we need to be better at from the whole ecosystem and not only ICANN to really speak to the people who are making the decisions in standardization foras, political foras, in the UN system or local government and really explain that, you know, we don't take a position about the policies itself, but we really want you to understand that if you make a policy like this, it might actually have an effect on our ability to connect to the Internet itself, and we've seen proposals like that.
I mean, we have directly engaged and we do that transparently and talk about it with our community about what we do, but we've seen proposals that can actually disconnect people from the Internet.  When we tell that to legislators, they say that's not our intention.  We understand that.  Many of the proposals that we see is about the ‑‑ or are done for good intention.
So, we don't think this is a hostile in a sense.  And then, of course, the Internet creates many new business models and has been disruptive to many business models, which often has been sort of to the benefit of the consumers.  And, of course, we see that attempts to change those business models to certain technologies.  I'm not talking about the platforms or what happens on top of the Internet.  I'm actually talking about the technology itself.
And David mentioned about network slicing and 5G, for instance, and which is one of those things that we follow carefully because it can actually change the underlying principle of how the Internet actually works but by sort of moving traffic into a mobile Cloud which is probably good for some things.  But on the other hand, it can take away the ability to people outside of the mobile Cloud to connect to people on a fixed network, even from a technical perspective.
So, there are different are ‑‑ there are different foras that we're now engaging in, and I think that it's important for our community and other communities that we're transparent with what we do and therefore we have this conversation.  I hope ‑‑ and another point is that as David again mentioned, I'm quoting by David today, we're also trying to more and more create tools and processes for things so we can be a bit more transparent and less ad hoc.
I mean, the tools the DAAR and sticker and health indicators are open and publicly available for everybody so they can actually have a look on what we do and how we do it and contribute to it.  Merike's, the TSG, the Technical Study Group that we're doing also shows the uniqueness of this ecosystem because we defined a problem that increased ‑‑ that increased threats to the DNS systems around the world from a technical perspective.  ICANN is not the controller of those DNS Systems.  We are peers.  We are working together with all the top‑level domain operators because when we delegate, it's top‑level domain operators that are responsible.  We're trying to form together with them as peers, as colleagues to have a better information system so if someone ‑‑ if in one system in one world gets attacked, we can use that knowledge to prevent other attacks, so it's really about building something that we're shaping things together and that's really the way we believe in the Internet.  It shouldn't be a centralized system, it shouldn't be something that someone takes control of, that's multistakeholder model.  Also, technology‑wise, making sure the ones independent which has worked so well, actually make sure that we can take on the knowledge that we have about threats to the DNS as well.  So, it's like a Swedish motor sport with a lot of different things.  The important thing is actually working together.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Thank you, Goran.  I see we have a number of questions now in the Q&A pod.  I'm going to turn to my colleague, Luna, to read them out and we'll get answers for you.
   >> LUNA MADI:  Thank you, Mandy.  The first question is from Mark.  As ICANN reaffirms the position as technical and data driven, will it close in on contracted parties known to be bad actors for many security‑related studies and hold them accountable for their actions?
   >> GORAN MARBY:  I can answer that.  One of the uniqueness’s of the system and one of the reasons that I believe in what I do is because that is a very good question, and I hope that you can engage in the ICANN Community to answer that question.
The form much how ICANN works, which is really, really important to me is that I don't set policies.  The ICANN Board doesn't set policies.  It's come from a multistakeholder model, which I actually say has been extremely effective in shaping the Internet users around the world for many years.  From the outside sometimes it looks devious and a lot of conversations, but it's really something, you know, it's really something that I think is working well.
So, the way we want to manage those things is really coming out of policies from the ‑‑ from central and multistakeholder model and that's where it should belong.  What we're talking about here is the ‑‑ and being transparent is the work that ICANN is doing when it comes to doing what we believe and when it comes to protecting the ability for people to connect to the Internet.  Thank you very much for a good question, and I recommend you to please participate in the ICANN Community and we can help you if you need to get contacts into there.
   >> LUNA MADI:  Thank you.  We have another question.  It is encouraging to see ICANN engaging more broadly in public policy discussions.  Comments in educating legislators as to the function of the DNS is critical to the development of sensible rules and regular laces.  Assuming that implementation of GDPR is positioned at number one, what do you envision is the second biggest challenge to ICANN from a legislative perspective?  Who would like to answer this?
   >> GORAN MARBY:  I guess it's me again.  So, I don't want to pose the privacy regulations around the world as a problem for ICANN because that would be, first of all, that would be wrong and the other thing is that, you know, ICANN shouldn't take a position if privacy legislation is right or wrong.  The reason I'm talking about GDPR is because it has an effect on our operations.  It has ‑‑ it's probably the first legislation that has a giant effect on the ICANN Community's ability to make policies, sort of puts it into the box.  We can only do certain policies because we have legislation.  We often talk about it as the European GDPR but there are different privacy regulations not only in Europe, but in California, and we have them in other places and we see more and more of them because there is a bigger interest in ‑‑ there is a bigger interest in privacy‑related matters on the Internet now than ever before, I think.
So just one of the strongest regimes in this is if we get to understand how that works, you know, we are ‑‑ we have country, domain all over the world and if we get that it's probably high probability we get it right in other places.
But the point is here that, so I just want to put that into so we don't make something a problem that we shouldn't make a problem.  Our problem with it is that it's a new law, there are a lot of uncertainties in the law, how to interpret the law, and I think the community has done a fantastic job, I think, when it comes to our policy work, it's actually quite amazing, and now to get the final answers about GDPR, it's in the hands of the legislature, the European Union, and especially the European Commission for take the next steps.  ICANN has reached the point of doing stuff.
So, what are the next big challenges?  We're engaged with our own community governance around the world to better understand the technical impact of the legislation, so we've seen ‑‑ we have interacted with some governments around the world about legislation which is transparent and also open, but I actually think that the other avenue now is in what I call standardization.  And some of the things that David talked about is actually doesn't come out of legislations, but it comes out of proposals for standardizations.
It might not come as a surprise to anyone that I believe it's really important that standardizations for Internet stays within the multistakeholder model, stays within the ecosystem, stays within the ITF.  We have seen attempts to move that out of this setting, move it into other venues, which I don't think is a good thing.  New IP and things of 5G are examples of that and I think that is one of the challenges for us and to make sure that we can, when people ‑‑ regardless of the infrastructure, mobile, WiFi, fixed, whatever you call it, they all go into one interoperable Internet and that's one of the reasons we have this setting today.
   >> LUNA MADI:  Thank you.  Anyone else from the panel would like to input?  No.
We have another question from Peter.  Is the influence of the gap on ICANN changing and if yes, how?
   >> MAARTEN BOTTERMAN:  Peter, thanks for the question.  For those less familiar with ICANN, it's the Government Advisory Committee and more than 170 governments around the world signed up to contribute to our processes advisory committee.  Its role has changed, it's not changing yet but it's for us a very important body and we take the advice very seriously, and it's very appreciated.  So, I do think that over time you see that the GAC has truly contributed to our understanding of what the government's interest is from a perspective and that's relevant for us, so we're extremely grateful, but, no, the rule isn't changing as it is.  I hope that helps.
   >> LUNA MADI:  These are the questions in the Q&A pod so far.  Mandy?
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Thank you, Luna.  I'd like to go back to our panelists at this point ‑‑
   >> GORAN MARBY:  Could you make because I forgot to mention one small thing.  One of the reasons we're also engaging with this is because it's easy to sometimes think that sometimes it looks good, I mean, it feels good but it actually could be not good.  One example is that we've seen a proposal over the last couple of months that the UN System should ‑‑ should ‑‑ should name the DNS as a critical infrastructure, which on the surface looks like what a great idea.  You know, but in all governments all around the world stand up and say the DNS is very important.  First of all, they've already done that because in the GAC, they all came together about the transition, so the governments around the world have actually already recognized the importance of the DNS but also recognized ICANN's role in that and the ICANN multistakeholder model in it.  So sometimes seem like good suggestions sometimes have drawbacks because we believe that the DNS belongs in the ecosystem where we belong.  We don't think that the UN ‑‑ and we have very good relationships with the UN and we have good relationships with the different parts of the UN System so it's not about the UN itself.  We just don't believe that it should be part of their official competence because it becomes of the part of the UN competence that could have other ramifications where they have Member States that may not be so positive of the multistakeholder model.  So just to give you the ‑‑ it's sometimes on the surface looks very interesting and good, but if you actually open the hood, you will see it's much more problematic.  I'm sorry.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Thank you, Goran.  I do have a question I'd like to put to Merike.  Can you tell us a little bit more about the domain security facilitation initiative?  Who are the members of the Technical Study Group and how is this going to feed into ICANN's role within technical Internet governance?
   >> MERIKE KAO:  Absolutely.  Thank you for the question, Mandy.  Yeah.  It has become very clear to ICANN, and I think a lot of other stakeholders that DNS stability and security involves a collaboration amongst a lot of different players.
So, for example, there might be routing hijacks instantiated because the net goal is to impact the DNS stability and trustworthiness, and so as this Technical Study Group was instantiated. It was very clear we needed a cross‑functional multi‑community participation, and therefore the participation absolutely needed to include members that have routing expertise, members that have had expertise for well over a decade in the handling of various types of network‑related incidents, be it routing related, DNS related, or anything else because usually there is a lot of interplay between all of these issues.
And so, the main task and focus is to take a look at what are the campaigns that have been instantiated in the last decade, how are they growing, what are the ‑‑ I call them root causes, but that's not really accurate because that just assigns blame to someone or some entity.  But really looking at what are the factors that contribute to having these attacks be successful, and then looking at what kind of collaboration can ICANN facilitate amongst various different entities that it is already collaborating with to really make sure that there is a much more coordinated way to tackle and make the DNS and the overall network infrastructure much more resilient globally.  So, I hope that answers the question.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Thank you, Merike.  Luna, I see we have some other questions.
   >> LUNA MADI:  Yes.  We have from Annriette, what role do you see for technical Internet governance in the UN SG digital cooperation roadmap, or to put it differently how active should technical governance processes and institutions in this new digital cooperation process?
   >> GORAN MARBY:  Who would you like to answer that one?
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Goran, would you like to take this on or Maarten, do you have comments?
   >> GORAN MARBY:  First of all, we welcome all the cooperation we have with the UN System.  And we will submit when there are proposals like the proposal right now that the UN System should have a competence about the DNS, we will tell what we think about that and explain that and reach out to different stakeholders and other ones in the world.
But it's important that we don't ‑‑ because sometimes it's a very good example of how this works is that we believe that some of those conversations will be ‑‑ it should belong to the multistakeholder model in the different part where we're from together with the ITF, together with ISOC, together with the IARs and other ones in this ecosystem and that's where if we believe that that conversation should be happening, and so we will always be there to defend that.  But we will not ‑‑ it's not like we always participate in the discussion because we often then give credibility to the discussion and ICANN was in the room; and therefore, we agree, and so we have a balance, and we actually do believe that we have to defend the multistakeholder model.  That's not something ‑‑ I mean most governments around the world believe in multistakeholder model as well.  So, we end up doing, yeah, please move the discussion to GAC or please move the discussion into ICANN and let us engage in it because even if it sounds good on the surface, giving governments general competence over this we don't believe that's beneficial for the Internet itself.  That's our belief.  So, we will engage in particular proposals that come up but not engaging in that cooperation as total because we think that that discussion belongs in a multistakeholder model, especially with you know, if it doesn't belong to ICANN, it should belong.
And the other one, like the country code operators who have their own policy‑making process, they are often involved in this because many of the proposals might affect them.  And there we're just there to help and support if they want.
   >> LUNA MADI:  Thank you, Goran.  We have another question.  If New IP in whatever form it takes is to involve a new addressing or naming system and/or hierarchy.  Do you think ICANN can be the system where it's created or should ICANN stick to the current responsibilities and ‑‑ I'm sorry, and its current responsibilities, should ICANN's mission evolve as the Internet evolves?
   >> DAVID CONRAD:  I'll take this one.  So, as I mentioned in my remarks, we're not unthinkingly wedded to any particular technology.  The Internet system of identifiers has evolved over time and will continue to evolve.  However, as I'm sure you're aware, ICANN's mission is extremely restrictive and what it is that we are within the org able to work on, look at, develop, is tightly constrained.
If the community decides that the naming, addressing, identifying hierarchies associated with New IP is something that ICANN should engage in, then you know, we would look at doing that.  At this point, our role with regards to New IP is just trying to provide information to the community so that they actually understand the implications of the technology as proposed, what those proposals actually are, and how things might actually evolve in the future.
   >> MAARTEN BOTTERMAN:  If there is anything, I would add to that is please look at the strategic plan that we very clearly explain that we recognize that the addressing system will evolve over time and we follow that and not to protect all technology, but to see what serves the public interest best.  So fully agree with David here.
   >> GORAN MARBY:  May I also add on the specific point about New IP.  David's team wrote an excellent paper about New IP by the way, and one of the things that we find there is it seems like it's sort of built into the management of the protocol to be very closely related to governance.  So, it might be, you know, even if the ICANN Community, if it the ecosystem decided that it's interesting for us, it seems to be that's not the intention of the protocol.
But with that said, there are a lot of questions about the proposal as you can see, but it's a really good document and just it's for free and you can download it from our website.
   >> LUNA MADI:  Thank you.  No more questions in the pod at this point.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  All right.  Luna, I know there was.
   >> DAVID CONRAD:  Just got another question.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Oh ‑‑
   >> LUNA MADI:  I'm sorry.  Yep.  So yes, we did.  So, this question is, does this New IP naming system take into account related things such as location identifiers, Blockchain addresses, microaddresses?  David?
   >> DAVID CONRAD:  So, one of the challenges that we've had in the developing the paper on New IP that Goran referenced was to try to figure out exactly what New IP was, what the technology implied, and that it's not standardized in a typical way.  There aren't RFCs associated with New IP.
As far as we were able to tell, the New IP addressing structure was intended to be very general and allow for different types of addresses.  I don't recall there being any specific definition of micro‑addresses or the use of Blockchain addresses of any nature.  And it doesn't really get into the naming system.  I think there is sort of an implicit assumption that, you know, some form of DNS would continue to be used to translate New IP or names into New IP addresses, but all of that was or is sort of supposition.
Again, New IP seems to be more of a list of issues that people identified within existing IP technologies and some ideas on how potentially to address those issues as oppose the to a fully thought out and implementable technology, at least from my perspective.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Thank you, David.  We don't have any other open questions in the pod.  I'm mindful we have 5 minutes left.  However, we did get a request from a participant if some of the written questions and answers because there have been several that we handled through typing, whether any of those could be read out.  I'm a little concerned that we're running out of time, and so we'll look for a way to post that information, but I'd like to turn back to our panelists to see if there are any final comments.  Maarten?
   >> MAARTEN BOTTERMAN:  Thanks, Mandy.  Thanks all for being with us in this session.  For ICANN it's very important, and also to be exposed to those outside of ICANN because we may well touch upon your world of the Internet, and it will be relevant, and your opinion is relevant to us.  So, participation is key, and we continue to reach out and see how we can work with others to make all of these happen together.  The Internet has shown to be a very important means in our world to keep on going and to be able to continue to communicate, and the addressing system is key in that as well.  So, we're committed, and thanks for being there with us, and thanks all for your contributions here on the panel as well.
   >> MANDY CARVER:  Thank you.  Thank you, Maarten.  One last question is asking about the ICANN office in Geneva.  All of our offices are currently closed during due to COVID‑19.  That doesn't mean that our engagement and presence has changed in any way.  Just like the rest of the world, that engagement is taking place online, so we have to go through an internal process and determining when it is safe and appropriate based on local conditions, and in fact, the advice coming from governments about when certain kinds of meetings will be possible again, and we also have our own internal process for determining when it is appropriate for staff to be physically attending meetings.  But that is what we're doing right now.  We are still actively engaged in Geneva and IGO processes.
I'd like to thank our panelists, and I would like to thank all of our attendees.  This has been a very interesting and useful session.  Thank you very much.
   >> MERIKE KAO:  Thank you, everyone.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-4-%E2%80%93-of6-african-union-open-forum-%E2%80%93-raw^^

>> There is no interpretation.  I don't see.
>> MAKANE:  Let me know when I request start.
>> IGF:  This is on the IGF code of conduct and if you have any questions, please go and post your question.  We're going live in the next 30 seconds.  Thank you.
>> MOCTAR:  Can we go live?
>> IGF:  The session is live.
>> MOCTAR:  Thank you very much distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen, welcome to all of you wherever you are.  I hope you and your loved ones are all fine, well and safe.  My name is MOCTAR YEDALY.  I am very humbled and privileged on behalf of the union commission.  The forums are discussing digital inclusion specifically related to capacity building digital transformation.  More specifically, the forum shall focus on activities related to Internet Governance, capacity building with the support from the European union through (inaudible) project.  Being an acronym for the policy integration regulatory initiative for eastern Africa.  To do so, I have been requested to align speakers most of them you know.  From the African commission, Mr. ADIL and then Mr. MAKANE FAYE.  And the chair of the Mac, and then Sandro BAZZANELLA who is a project manager and I hope (inaudible) is joining us soon from the UN economic union from Africa and we are supported by madame (inaudible) who is the reporter of this session.  And the remote moderator.  Without further adieu, I would like to give the floor to Margaret who is the chair of IGF.  Mary, please.
>> Mary UDUMA:  Good morning, good afternoon, good evening wherever you are joining us from.  It's my pleasure to be here today to highlight what we are doing at the African level when it comes to internet governance.  My name is Mary UDUMA.  For now I'm the chair of the Africa Internet Governance forum.  I greet you all and welcome to this session.
The ninth edition of the IGF Internet Governance will be hosted by ECE.  And it will be virtually.  Before now, we thought that Nigeria would have hosted it in person, but due to the pandemic, we went through on uncertainty of the virus removed.  AU and the most international (inaudible) counseled or in person (inaudible) or events.  So we still have opportunity to do individually from the 25ing to the 20th of November, 2020.  It will be presented by the Africa school on Internet governance, which will happen on the 23rd of November.  And Africa used IGF will also happen on the 24th of November.  The theme that will be issued a call for workshop, proposals and from the community and we'll be informed we're working on the agenda for a 3‑day program which will start on that 25th.  And we're hoping to have breakout sessions and pair sessions.  The first day being the 0 or day 1, we'll have pair session in the morning or in the afternoon.  Sorry.  And then on the 27th and third day is 27th will also be doing a plannary sessions with lined up topics that we're finalizing to host those.  And one of the important ones will be the high level panel on those two and what happened at the global (inaudible) that is coming out of global IGF.  We'll have reporting session and we'll have opening and closing sessions as well.  The thing is we'll finalize and as soon as it is done, we'll share it with everyone in the community and the details on how you will join platforms you're going to use and speakers and other rest of the publish it on the website as soon as we conclude the finalization or conclude the theme and sub‑teams and the program.  So outside of individuals (inaudible) will be shared very soon.  Please set the dates.  Remember 23rd November.  Youth 24th.  The main IGF Africa IGF will be 25ing and 27th.  It will be as exciting as we used to have it online.  And with partners and support from AU and ACA, I know it is going to be a very good outing for us.  Join and publicize it as well.  The website will soon be updated for your information and communication and outreach.  This I very much.  That is what I have for us as now because we have only two machines I had to speak ‑‑ two minutes I had to speak.  Back to you, MOCTAR.  Over few, MAKANE.
>> 
>> MOKANE:  Yes.  Good afternoon, everyone.  We are organizing a second forum ‑‑  it was interparameter network on ICT.  We are here with three members.  Professors and Mary is the chair and did the first presentation today in the morning.  So the talk that we are going to lane as recommended by last year's IGF, the African governance forum network where we have the first here in (inaudible) will be launching the rest of African parliamentary network.  And I'm sure the request the African lists have parliamentary network and we hope we'll support this network.  But due to COVID‑19 couldn't go ahead on time.  Thank you.
>> MOCTAR:  What is a PRIDA, Sandro, and how is that working?  Over to you.
>> Sandro:  I would like to share the presentation that I have prepared for you here.  Forgive me.  I hope you can see my screen.
>> MOCTAR:  Yes.  We see it.
>> Sandro:  PRIDA built in fact from the African commission and Internet governor an from January 2018 and they were key principle where the idea was strength of the (inaudible) of the African stakeholders of IGA.  In fact an engagement from national, regional and African (inaudible) global debate.  This is processes and principles which are an open accessible resilient and (inaudible) internet.  That was feat the idea with localized content to support IG debate and policymakers from an African perspective.  From that ‑‑ PRIDA was therefore strategy that's been presented (inaudible) shared to you (background noise/voice talking)
>> MOCTAR:  Sorry to interrupt.  But we are interfering with ‑‑
>> Sandro:  Are these interpreters ‑‑
>> Excuse me.  Sorry to jump in.  This is from the IGFin secretariat.  Now we have the interpreter join.  We need to assign her as an interpreter from English to French.  So you will have two different channels.  There will be no interference.
>> MOCTAR:  Thank you very much.  Go ahead, sandro.
>> Sandro:  I was talking about the main of PRIDA it is to support an established national IGF and schools of IG which will be the focus to show and see how quickly we have to now.  It is an existing regional within IGF and to streamline the process to come with a voice and global debate.  Last year we had Open Forum, but in addition this year, we will have a hundred specific PRIDA workshop takes place.  This is taking place with the support of capacity building and sustainability, which is now started this year.  As you see, I was focusing on the first level which is the creation and the support of establishment of national IG forum and school of IG.  You will see ten countries that have been identified for 2020 on the left.  You will see that nine of them have already run the school of IG for this year and they have plans now to be finalized by the end of this year.  And we have already been able to support national IG in four of those ones and we are planning to support the remaining one to the end of this year.
2021 is already a (inaudible) open and those countries have responded positively.  But there is still room to other countries.  So this is a call for any countries that would like to have a national IG and school of IG in establishing this country.  If there is not, contact us and we will try to do our best.
Some figures coming out of that.  Nine countries that we have run, we have 267.  Out of that, we have 33% completion rate, which is for online session a very good success rate.  In addition, taking into account, there was no national IGF before entirely run and removed it to COVID crisis.  I think this is specifically impressive figures.  If you look, we also pay attention for a gender balance.  We have asked and Mo meet the female participation.  I think we have reached higher than comparable event for this kind of meeting now with a 33% rate of participation.  But we'll continue to try to work on increasing that number.  If we look to age composition, we are targeting relatively young participation level with the people mainly under the age of 30.  If you look to the kind of 20 impact that we had, there was a question asked to our 20s and the people with receiving that certification what was the view before the course and after the course.  You will see that most of them have moved up on the capacity and some of them even being moved to what they consider as master or event (inaudible) influencer for others which means that we hope by that and by continuously running this, people are able to create a more sustainable environment and therefore at a national level.  If I look now for supporting the content that have run in more general framework, what we have already achieved is a train of material which is here in the review.  We have an IGF used for creation of national IGF to set up national processees nationally.  And we have also developed content for those national schools of IG.  Now in the (inaudible) published, we will have a training content for a more general content for IG for African communities and another one targeting for (inaudible) and diplomat.  And then finally an action plan for creating a sustainable training on IG in Africa.  And a more lodger term, we have a status report specifically covering Africa and with localized data to the PRIDA network.  And that's I would say that is explaining for national IGF and regional schools for next year.  There is still possibilities of countries who do not have them at national level to contact us and try to do our best next year and the year after to take you on board and to have a creation of national IGF and schools of IG.  Thank you very much.  And I give you back the floor.
>> MOCTAR:  Thank you very much.  That was a great presentation.  The next speaker will be ‑‑ they will talk to us about the district transformation and strategy in Africa and AU activities.  Over to you, Adil.
>> ADIL:  Thank you very much.  I think I would like to give our condolences on the passing of Marilyn Kate.  She was one of the pioneers of the IGF and (inaudible) (low voice) secretariat.
Going to talk about (inaudible) for Africa and in a nut shell, I think this is a grouping for Africa to transform social and economic outlook.  To allow Africa to lead benefits of the force in the field of evolution as well as realize the AU agenda as well as the SDG.  So this is kind of a general objective of the ‑‑ of the GTS.  And just to be more specific, I speak (inaudible) and specific items from the digital strategy with the strategy aims at fulfilling number 1.  Built and secure single market in Africa by 2030.  Movement of person, services and capital (inaudible) and individuals and businesses can be accessing and engage online activity in line with Africa.  Second, by 2030, all people should be digitally empowered and able to access safely and securely to at least (inaudible) all the time wherever they live in the continent and affordable price of no more than (inaudible) through a smart device manufacture in the content in the price of no more than 100 USD to benefit from key service s and con tent of which at least 30% is developed.  The third there are so many obviouslyives, but I wanted to show case you have a specific target that the strategy can achieve it.  The third is 99.9% of people in Africa have a digital identity as part of the (inaudible).  If I have ability to share my screen if possible, otherwise I have a diagram.  I will illustrate what it is and what Africa is all about.  If you just allow me one minute to share my screen, I will be able to show you this diagram.  Can you see it?
>> Indeed.  We see.
>> ADIl:  This is the strategy in Africa and you have a foundation still up for the digital strategies.  There are four of them, enabled environments.  Infrastructure and digital human capacity and digital innovation.  And then it's going to go through cross sectoral environment in terms of digital industry, digital trade and financial services as well as digital agriculture.  There are also digital transformation strategies and digital content and verification, ID and (inaudible) and technology, security (inaudible) (low voice).  The good news is that it has been adopted by the AU head of government area this year.  And we are in the process of developing this implementation strategy.  So we are going ahead with the implementation of this.  The vehicle for which we are going to transform other society and our economy.  And this is a multi‑stakeholder and a (inaudible) of the multi‑tutorial and it remains me of the person that we took to develop to the (inaudible) of the government that I think it was also adapted by (inaudible).  Thank you very much.
>> MOCTAR:  Thank you very of, ADIL.  One of the cross cutting areas of this transformation strategy in cybersecurity private and person data protection.  Without further adieu, I believe Mr. (inaudible) was not able to join.  I would like to give the floor to Keith to something about the youth African IGF.  Is Keith around?
>> He is presently of the parliamentary forum.  (inaudible) on cyber terrorism.
>> MOCTAR:  Wonderful.  We believe we have two panelists that couldn't make it.  So I would suggest we start with the Q&A and I will be asking online moderator to start shooting with the questions, please.
>> Hello?  Hello?
>> Manager ACTAR‑‑ MACTAR:  Mary?
>> Mary.  I'm not sure what's on this.
>> MOCTAR:  At this point in time, we'll just ask questions from the participants, which is actually very good to have enough time to have as many interactions as we would with the participants.  So, are there any questions?
>> Hello?  Hello?
>> Sandro:  Thank you.  I think it is a very important question.  We are targeting and explaining my response and also participation in our national activities.  There's been a question that came to the west Africa regional forums which were actively targeting an inclusion of parliamentarian and that is something very important.  West Africa started to think about it and we started a discussion with them before when the COVID crisis started and we have been enabled to besides been on some ways extended the conversation, but now I am very pleased to see that currently this parliamentarian session takes place in west Africa online.  We are giving ‑‑
>> MAKANE:  (inaudible) online.
>> Sandro:  I think what the lessons that can come out of that can be shared with other regions and help other regions to set up similar regional initiatives especially taking into account that parliamentarian (inaudible) of conflicting views on how the society and therefore the Internet should (inaudible).  I think it is very important to have them onboard also.  So we're more than happy to have that current collaboration and I think we will do a debriefing with you after this west African experience and CIMA works, what did not work, what can be improved and how perhaps we can pass the same proposal or initiatives to the other regions.  I would be more than happy to support.
>> MAKANE:  Thank you.
>> MOCTAR:  Thank you.  There is two questions that are very pertinent to you, Sandro.  Is it possible to have to provide Internet governance at University of Bening?  That's question in 1.  And I will be working with you on that answer.  The African Union is using traditional approach ignoring and I underline that.  Huge population of the InterConnected population in your rural area despite all the funding through PRIDA.  But the impact is very small especially to people we are presenting where the community draws.  How can we improve this together?  The question is coming from remote hub in Tanzania.  But I will go to the first question.  I will answer to the second one.
>> Sandro:  Okay.  I don't know what is exactly the case.  The point is offer training there or work with them.  Just have (inaudible) to questions.  If it's to work together, I will be more than happy and they can contact us because we are always looking for local partners and if you ‑‑ do you want to add something to that?
>> MOCTAR:  ADIL, do you have something to add to that?
>> ADIL:  We are (inaudible) of ID training in Africa at the national regional level.  And we are, of course, PRIDA there will come a time when (inaudible).  So we are thinking about what happened after PRIDA.  We want to give the countries the ability to sustainably provide (inaudible) in IG.  The output of this study is going to be an action plan and we attempt to implement the action plan if it calls for giving the (inaudible) through universities or given the training through school of ID.  So we are awaiting the conclusion of this study and baited on conclusions, we are going to implement the finding.
>> MOCTAR:  Okay.  Thank you very much.  Let me try to answer three questions.  The first one with regard to access to rural areas.  Now, from PRIDA point of view, it was considered mainly to work on two major areas.  One is the building African capas I on Internet Governance to have and allow Africans to be present on the global dialogue on internal governance.  And the Harmonization of policies and regulation.  This is the right of the incision and two things we're doing.  In the course of action, then we had the transformation strategy in the COVID‑19 had them made us to think how better to reorient part of the activities of PRIDA in order to address the challenges brought by the COVID‑19, the need for digitalization and the need specifically for Africa to leverage on the ICTs.  And this is why we redesigned it a little bit and start addressing two priorities.  One is on the health sector and one on the edge sector.  Now, that doesn't mean that the questions related to rural area has not been addressed by the African Union.  There is another program for infrastructure development in Africa in one of the key approach to that is really to InterConnect and to provide Connectivity to the real areas and through a building infrastructure road, transport and ICTs in order to unload the population from the rural area to the more inclusive or included into the African (inaudible).  So that PRIDA is mainly addressing the issue of infrastructure.
Act project dealing with those areas is posture sector for (inaudible).  We have with the university postal union and postal African ‑‑ postal African Union, five years ago, we set up a project InterConnecting posture from electricity point of view and energy point of view to allow them in rural areas to financial inclusion for e‑Commerce and for (inaudible).  So although PRIDA is not talking about rural areas, (inaudible) are talking about it.  Now, this also address the question to address by other to show with regard to the issue of community network.  First of all, we are very supportive for the community networks.  We are actually the first among the big institution that really is endorsing through our ministry that took place this year in 2019.  And we have hosted many workshops events related to community networks and we will be including the issue of real areas.  There is an agency specific area because one of the first pillars of the digital infrastructure and distal infrastructure includes digital rural areas.  I hope I answered those two questions coming from those two speakers.
Now, there is an issue related to status sent anyway somebody in Tanzania saying that the African unit, let me read that slowly.  I don't see that question anymore.  However, my understanding that is we need to really be very supportive to the small and medium businesses and the African Union actually when they say that one of the element of the DTS was ready to promote.  We have started working on so‑called manifest first steps.  Actually, we started in 2017 where we had the first meeting and we were surprised by the evidence of (inaudible) looking for 300 start ups and getting 3,000 start ups and we still haven't really tapped into that potential to make it work, but it is part of the program.  Are there any questions coming from the floor?  Do you have any questions?
>> Mary:  There are a lot of questions on question and answer.  There's one from Lawrence.  Most indigenous businesses on our coppent in are mid‑sized.  Most startups bring into this number as global pandemic is forced, each impact in every small especially to people we represent in the real community.  Sorry.  Sorry, sorry.
>> MOCTAR:  I did answer to that question.
>> Mary:  There's another one.  Okay.  There's one.  Do you consider communities that we have answered that?  Is it possible for (inaudible) to get support to provide Internet Governance cost and I answered that.  What mechanisms are in place?  What mechanisms are in place to leverage on the relationship between the AU and the recs and insuring ‑‑
>> MOCTAR:  Let me answer that question, Mary.  You are aware that the recs are considered will building block of the African Union integration.  The recs are actually having an addition to that, they have assigned with the AU commission and agreement about corporation and how to coordinate together.  And every year, there is a summit between the African Union leadership and the Rex leadership.  At the level, at the technical level, there is a strong corporation between the African Union and the rec and specifically every project we have considered so far we have a community or Technical Community on that project and all the time include the last part of the stakeholders in part of the managing (inaudible) projects.  Specifically when they have a continent original impact.  However, there is a middle management kind of missing links that we need to improve.  I hope it will be considered that will be enhanced the relationship between the Rex and the African Union.  As I say, the top level there is a corporation.  On the low level there is a corporation.  We need to improve the middle links in order to make sure that the corporation is fully enhanced.
>> ADIL:  (inaudible) is on now.
>> MARY:  Excuse me.
>> ADIL:  (inaudible) is on at special point.
>> MOCTAR:  Let me answer the last question before we give the floor to talk about corporation.
>> Mary:  Following up with the participants that receive training recently in Internet Governance.
>> MOCTAR:  I leave that to Sandro to respond to that question.
>> Sandro:  You can repeat the question?
>> Mary:  How (inaudible) following up with participants that received training recently on Internet governance?  Any follow up?
>> Sandro:  I would present and complimenting on that.  As you are presenting, I would say last year for PRIDA was a strategy in building blocks and one of them the train the trainers aspect why we had a training developed and a session specifically to be dedicated to the creation of the pool of trainers.  That pool is called upon when we need to support countries of local stakeholder regional content and stakeholders when they are setting up the meeting and we as I was doing my presentation, we are currently working on an update of our training materials so that trainers have a follow up activity in 2021 and 2022.  But ideally, you want to compliment on that?
>> ADIL:  Thank you very much.  Yes.  What I want to ‑‑ on what you have said is the fact that I can hear somebody in the background.  If you don't speak, can you mute your mic?  So what we are trying to do was to create a network for ambassador in the country.  And in fact, some of you who do the training, we have approached you when we are about to do national training or regional training.  So you are going to be the national level as well as the (inaudible) continental level.  So this network is very important to us and in fact, during the (inaudible) this year, we've changing the format this year.  We will have a session or a day dedicated to making sure that the trainer along with the opposite LMNI to debate on the issues that are currently discussed during IGF.  So that you are constantly in the loop and rest assure.  Once we ‑‑ once we try to reach to do training in certain countries, you are going to be contacted.  We have your names or insided region.  We have your names and database of trainers.  So the pool is big.  We have almost 100 trainers and that's why maybe you have not reached out to you yet.  But eventually you will get contact and I think the first contact will be through this (inaudible).
>> MACTAR:  At this point, I would like to pose a little bit and give the floor to Mactar Seck.  Give your point of view and how as an African contribute to that.  Go ahead, MACTAR SECK.
>> MACTAR:  Okay thank you.  (inaudible) interpretation.  (speaking non‑english language)
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-accessibility-closing-the-gap-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> Let's go then.  Good morning, good evening, good afternoon, good night from wherever you are in the world from Gerry Ellis here in Dublin Ireland, welcome to the DCAD Session at IGF 2020, our strange be world of 2020 where everything is virtual.  We're going to jump over to Judith Hellerstein who will quickly tell us who is here and then have a few words to say. 
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  This is Judith Hellerstein for the record.  Thank you so much.  Gerry.  We would love to be in Dublin drinking sider and we would love to be in Poland, but it is not to be.
We have today 27 attendees and then an additional 17 who are panelists, which includes our international sign language interpret erts and then one of our panelists also has their own interpreter.  So welcome, everyone.
We don't have time, because of the large number of attendees to call them all out, but we'll record all the names and they'll be in our records.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Thank you for that.  We'll have that list and we'll post it at a later date.  Today is an important day.  It's the DCAD's 14th Session, 14th IGF as far as I know.  I was at one back as far as 2009 but there was one at least before that, so it's been going on a long time.  We kept that pressure up.  The IGF stands for the Internet Governance Forum.  We all know what the Internet is, but of course we're also talking about the services and amount kaitions that are on the Internet, and we're also talking about the tools for building and using the Internet, so it's not just the Internet itself but it's all things about and around the Internet.  Governance is not just about international ledge sleation, it's not just about the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and it is about all issues that give equitable access to the Internet, its products, and its services to everyone, and that's what we are here as a group, the Dynamic Coalition for Accessibility and Disability to promote and push as hard as we can.  Without any ado, I would like to just get going and get this thing started because we're not here to listen to me, so we're here to ‑‑ we're here to hear you talk.  So first I'm going to hand it over to Gunela in Australia that will tell us about some steps that allowed other people to join who may not have always been able to.  Gunela.
   >> GUNELA ASTBRINK:  Thank you very much, Gerry.  Thank you for taking on the facilitation of this DCAD meeting today.  I'm delighted to be part of it and to be speaking with you, and in particular about the DCAD IGF Participation Support Grants, and this is thank you very much to Vint Cerf and Google who has helped support DCAD to help increase the voice and participation of persons with disabilities at the IGF, and our selection committee has found people from figi, Uganda, Kenya, and also a group from Haiti who are here with us participating as a hub, and we are delighted to have you and to participate not only in this session but in many other workshops and sessions at the IGF.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you, Gunela.  Now we get into the drink of the meeting.  We've got a very, very full agenda, and you'll find the people have only four or five minutes to speak.  All speakers are going to hate me by the end of the day because I'm going to have to be tyranical about the time to ensure that people at the end have a fair amount of time.  So let's get straight into it without any more ado.  So what we want to know is about the experience by people with disabilities of online meetings, how have they found it, how have they found the tech nol, how have thre found all the support systems and whatever.  We have three kirch speakers coming from different approaches.  First is Paulina Lewandowska, so Paulina, straight over to you.
   >> PAULINA LEWANDOWSKA:  Hello, everyone.  I am Paulina from Poland and actually I am PhD student in pedagogy so I am a student and have different experiences in online learning because I can see both sides of online learning as positive anding initive ones.  First of all, I would like to say that, I can say that we have two kinds of challenges and difficulties.  The first one is a challenge with the difficulties to get full access to the content on the lessons of the classes because when we have online classes, we need to use very fast platforms that were not adjusted to the online classes, so the problem was that sometimes teachers and students, they didn't have a good quality video and possibilities to speak clearly into microphones because we didn't have any good quality devices to attend to these kind of classes, and it was a huge problem because of this situation we had to participate in the classes with our videos.  I had to be in person, so I need to use both a visual and audio session of understanding the classes, so sometimes I use ‑‑ sometimes I use really only hearing perception because it was not possible for me to see my teachers or to see students, but I had to discuss with my colleagues, with my teachers how they should communicate with me.  But I also see the positive image of the online class because it was very wonderful to hear directly into my hearing aids by using my iPhone, so I needed to buy an iPhone to use to understand the classes, and it is the expenses that it was very, very hard to manage.  But to conclude, we need to know that there are both sides to distance learning, and also we need to think that also people without any disabilities have also problems with understanding classes because of their not good quality devices or Internet connections.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Is that it, Paulina?  Peen peeb I think it was four minutes.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Perfect.  Thank you very much for keeping to your time.  I really appreciate that.  We've got our next speaker who will be using a sign language interpreter so we've allocated we're going very generous.  Petra, Rezar, maybe could you give us your experience, please.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Petra?
>> I'm not sure what happened to her I tried to reach her on WhatsApp also.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Let's skip to Muhammad and when he is finished maybe we can get Petra back.  Muhammad, would you like to give us input from a visual impaired point of view?  Four minutes.  Can you give us Muhammad?
>> Muhammad needs to unmute if he hasn't unmuted.
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  Am I audible now?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Yes.  Thank you, Muhammad.
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  Yes.  Thank you very much.  For the record this is Muhammad Shabbir awar and welcome everybody from Pakistan and greetings everywhere.  Yes, indeed, we are all living in strange times, and these times and the online IGF, this represents our case very well that all online spaces need to be accessible for everyone, regardless of disability or any other conditions that people may have.
Talking about the experience as a visually impaired of all of these 9 or 10 months.  These 9 months have been very crazy, eye opening, as well as an opportunity to learn more things.  Many of the applications and online platforms that I had not used earlier, I got to experience.  For instance Google Meet and Teams and all of that stuff.
As a visually impaired, there were a number of challenges with different platforms.  On some platforms, as a participant with vision impairment, it was difficult, for instance, with Teams to raise hands.  It was difficult with Google Meet to raise hands, to unmute one's self as well, and similarly there were also experiences and not good ones.  The experiences were of different institutions neglecting the needs of the accessibility for persons with disabilities.  For instance, some institutions or organizations would prefer the platforms which were freely available, number one, or they would prefer the tools their people were used to using, the tools in their institutions.  Some institutions were not willing to learn accessible tools to make their online meetings accessible, so this created a sort of negative impression, I should say.
On the other hand, not everything was bad.  Yes, these were challenging times.  These were the times that tested the patience and limits of everyone, but in these times as a person with visual impairment who feels a bit reluctant to move around in the world, it was easier to work from home.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  30 seconds.
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  Yes.  Not always, but yes, it was difficult sometimes.  But at the same time, you cannot have everything and anything at your homes, so at the end of the day, I would say the COVID‑19 got the world surprised, it caught us off guard, but I think the experiences that we are getting from these challenges should be enough to motivate the policymakers, the planners to state that accessibility is not just the need of 10 or 15 percent of the population on this earth.  This can be a need of everyone.  Thank you very much.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you, hiewmed.  Have we got Petra back?
>> Damjan will start although he's still not on camera.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  While Petra is getting ready, I'll give you a quick tip from a blind person.  If you're in Zoom and you want to raise your hand, just hold the Alt Key and hit the letter Y so you don't have to hunt around looking for it.  It's so quick and easy.
So when Petra is finished, we're going to have a general discussion, so raise your hand if you want to get in and our online moderators will try to keep tabs on who is trying to get in.  Petra, how are you getting on this?
>> Dam.
   >> DAMJAN SEBJAN:  From from 14 community and I'm now present and now because of corona time Deaf couldn't communicate so Zoom was the solution that we started to use worldwide.  I took on the organization to interpret to different countries, certain countries all over the world, and I was sort of a moderator and I was interpreting everything else, and everybody was very happy with it, they were checking it on Facebook, on YouTube, and everywhere.  So the question is maybe why.  For four years we had a conference that I was going there and I managed to contact different presidents, but a lot of Deaf couldn't join because of financial state so now because of Zoom it was possible.
The minus of the Zoom, so the negative things here are that the videos are very small, so something like that would be interesting that you could select different countries and have interpreter and speaker at the same time on the screen.  That's what I would like to have as a support.  And also, of course, monthly cost is quite a problem, and so some Deaf all over the world have struggled because of that, and because of lack of communication.  So now I think Petra will take over.  Thank you right now.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  3 more minutes, Petra, you've got a bit of extra time.
   >> PETRA REZAR:  Could I please use the screen share?  One moment.  Greet.  Thank you.
>> So the video will be very short like five seconds or so.
>> You were doing it before.  Oh, now it's back.
   >> PETRA REZAR:  Okay.  So there are 25,000 viewers with different languages, so we would really like support to have more and more Deaf viewers.  Okay.  Thank you.  That's it.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Thank you, Petra.  Thank you for staying within time.  Now let's jump, with our short time, or we can discuss what we've heard or your own experiences of online use of online tools as well.  So Judith, have we got any hands up?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  I do not.  I do not see any.  So if people want to raise their hand, we can actually get them ‑‑ allow them to speak or they can post it into the chat or the Q&A Pod.  So the Q&A Pod is either at the bottom of the screen or at the top of the screen if you're on a mobile.  And so far we have no questions, but if people want to post any questionings, they can about the speakers.  We'll have after that, we'll have a talk about virtual meetings.  But if anyone wants to do it, you're welcome.
Oh, Peter, yes, you can make a brief comment.  Thank you.
   >> PETER CROSBIE:  Yeah.  I was just going to say in terms of distance learning and accessibility in the disability community that one of the things we have to take into account is basically children, so people who are under 18.  Because if you look at the numbers of disabled people who are children, so up to 18, the vast majority of them are people with disabilities, con generalitive, I'm oustistic so I'm born Autistic and in the American figures that I've seen there are more people with cognitive disabilities as children than all other disabilities combined.  In fact, there is almost double the amount, so we tend to be there from birth and then right through, and then later on of course other disabilities that are more age related coming to ‑‑ come into play.  But basically, accessibility in terms of disabilities in children, kids with cognitive disabilities are being disproportionately having difficulties.  That's all I was going to say.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you, Peter.  Jid jid thank you.  We have a question in the chat.  Oh, good.  Questions are now coming into the Q&A pod.  The question is to Paulina.  In online classes, do Polish students get access to live captioning to support their participation?
   >> PAULINA LEWANDOWSKA:  No, we don't have because mostly students have to think about the captions and not teachers.  It's mostly, and thus there is a percentage of teachers that are thinking about accessibility for people with hearing loss, but mostly the students need to think.  And I am a member of the Polish organization and I can say that students and their parents are trying to contact us with their questions of how to get access to the online classes because even they don't understand the lessons.  So we need to prepare a short list of access that are free and access to platforms that can be used during classes, and so unfortunately we don't have, and because Zoom or maybe Google Meet or maybe Teams, they don't provide with a good quality captions.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  So I'm sorry for cutting it off.  Again, to give other people a chance, can I ask you, Judith, are there other questions there?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes, there are.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you, Paulina.
   >> PAULINA LEWANDOWSKA:  Thank you.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  So we have a question.  It's a feedback for Peter.  AndyHeath would like if Peter could clarify what he mentioned.
   >> PETER CROSBIE:  Yeah.  I just read something in the chat.  It's basically kids with cognitive disabilities, around 4.5% of the population, and I haven't written this down, this is what I remember.  Whereas most other disabilities in children, so under 18, is in the range of half a percent, .6 or .7, so cognitive disabilities, also, then that tends to stay more or less stable until much later in life when you start to get a lot more people with dementia and so on, but this 4.5% is more or less stable from childhood right through adulthood, whereas other disabilities, of course, increases through adulthood.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Thank you.  We have another question from Amalia and she wants to know has the takeup of speech recognition technology increased with the use ‑‑ or during the pandemic?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Who would like to take that on?  I can tell you myself, Gerry here, that speech recognition has always been actually quite good, but one of the things that is quite recent is the automatic production of captions, so instead of having a person captioning, you have artificial intelligence trying to interpret what's being said and producing captions at the same time.  I think it's fair to say that that technology is still in its infancy.  It's probably not good enough, we'll say for Deaf people or people that are hard of hearing, but it is getting better.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Thank you.  We have another question from Sylvia from the MAG member also from the APNIC Foundation and she wants to know if there has been any response from the companies manufacturing these tools to incorporate the features that we have identified?  Who will take that on?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Again, who would like to take that one?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  And if others, if maybe Shadi has an answer to that, we're happy to have him answer as well, he might know more about that than we do.
   >> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:  Hi, Judith and Gerry.  I don't have any hard evidence or specific information on this question, but I do think there has been quite at least awareness raising, subjectively, my own impression is that there has been quite some movement toward accessibility on some of the online teleconference tool providers.  My guess is that because it is being increasingly used in education and business in countries where there are accessibility requirements, and that this is having an international impact and benefit.  But I think it's still very spotty and different tools provide different advantages, but I think more tools now provide some sort of captioning support than it was maybe a year or two ago.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Thank you so much.  We have no more questions.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Well, we are approximately ‑‑ how far are we now?  Okay.  So, if we want to move on then, is there anyone else that wants to make a comment?  We have about two or three minutes left if somebody wants to make a last comment?
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  Yes, Gerry.  This is Muhammad.  Just adding to what Shadi has highlighted, there has been a lot of emphasis on online meetings since the pandemic started, so the organizations and institutions have come up with a lot of instructions and guidelines to make the online meetings accessible.  So in a way, I know it's somewhat selfish, but I would say the pandemic has made human people or humans realize the need and the significance of accessibility of all of these online meetings.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  And I would add one comment that one of the driving themes ‑‑ one of the driving articles, if you want to use that word, that's driving accessibility is our international standards and international legislation, not just the UN Convention, but also I'm familiar with Europe where there is now a European Directive on axe access to public websites where there is a new one coming up now which is on accessible transport.  There is one on accessibility of technology.  So that's doing two things.  One, it's setting the standards that people can follow because up until now, you find that people even if they want to do or make themself accessible, maybe they don't know how.  So a lot of these standards and technical documents behind them are helping companies to do it.  But the other thing is that governments are beginning to adopt these standards and build them into legislation, so if it a government makes ‑‑ or demands that a technology is accessible, then the technology is accessible for all.  So the movement, again, is in the right direction, but again, we still have a long way to go.
Okay.  Enough from me again.  So can we move on, please?
We always look at accessibility of the IGF itself.  It's always part of the DCAD session, and I think it's a very useful thing to do.  Accessibility, I think has improved, but there are some areas that maybe it hasn't.  So let's try to look at the accessibility of the IGF itself.  What I want to do here is in chronological order, in a sense, so let's start at registration and the website.  Let's start at accessibility to this meeting, and then talk about accessibility to other meetings that we've been at.  Does anyone want to comment about registration and just the IGF website to start?  We have about 15 minutes on this.
Remember to raise your hand to answer questions or use the chat box, we have all of those options.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  This is Judith.  We do have a question not necessarily about this.  It's not about IGF but about other meetings and Andy Heath talks about the affect on bandwidth when you have so many videos on at the same time.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Can you let Andy in to ask his question?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Sure.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Can you unmute Andy?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Hold on a minute.  I have to get Andy in.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Just talking about standards a minute ago and Andy is a great man for standards, a very, very great advocate.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Hold on a minute.  Oh, someone got him.  That's good.  Andy, are you allowed to talk?
>> Andy:  Gerry is right.  Hi, Gerry, I work on a number of standards.  I'm also running a number of Zoom calls for various groups, and you know, we've been playing with what we can do.  And also what we can do, you may not know, for the first time in my experience, Microsoft has beaten Apple to the accessibility table on this because in Office 365, PowerPoint, there is live captioning, which you have to be online to generate it, but you know when you're doing a Zoom presentation you can generate it.
Now, it seems to work pretty well.  I kind of suspect it's Otter behind the scenes that's doing it, but of course Microsoft doesn't tell you that.  But I tried it in a large group, and we had 90 plus participants, and they all had had the videos on.  And basically, at that level it didn't work at all.  It was completely, completely hopeless to the point where I've decided a practice to get around that next time, is to ask people to switch their videos off during presentations in order to improve the quality of the live captioning.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Andy, could you bring your experience to this meeting, to the IGF?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Well, I can answer that for you.  So at this meeting in the IGF, if we are in meeting mode and a lot of people have their cameras on, even in Zoom the bandwidth goes up significantly, and this is also another reason why IGF has a YouTube running at the same time because YouTube compresses the videos, and so for people with low bandwidth, they can see it.  YouTube will also lower the quality of the video, so the bandwidth can be seen, so that you have low bandwidth, so that is what YouTube is doing.
And Teams, Teams uses machine captioning for everything.  The higher versions of Zoom do have the Otter Live and also you could buy it, itself, the business version and you could have that too going all the time.  Although as a business version, one of the few companieses that has a specific nonprofit rate that is 50% of the regular rate because unlike a lot of companies who don't have nonprofit rates or make you go through a corporation so that you have to join another membership, they don't.  So there is a lot of other different things going on.
>> Andy:  Is that Otter?  I do it with other accounts.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes.  Otter has nonprofit rate of the business that is only $120 a year.
>> Andy:  $120, that's the standard rate, it's kind of a ‑‑
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  It's $240.  It's $240.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Can I just say we're going a bit off our track here, so can we try to bring this back to IGF, so maybe a recommendation or a thought which I wonder what the meeting would agree with here.  Because captions and because sign language interpreters can't be slowed down and can't operate if their bandwidth is being broken up because there are too many people at a meeting, is there a way that IGF can prioritize the access for accessibility services like sign language interpreters or captioners?  Is that something that we can bring to IGF?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  I think we could have Luis, is this something that we could bring?  We have to ask our technical people.  Luis is, is this something that is possible in IGF?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  It's something that we as a group can bring.
>> LUIS:  I'm sorry, I was in two meetings in parallel.  I'm sorry, if you could repeat the last part of the question.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  So the question is, is there a way of prioritizing bandwidth for the sign language interpreters or the other people that need to speak, or is it ‑‑ is there not a way?
>> LUIS:  Yeah.  Actually we're doing that.  We're protecting the bandwidth for the video of the sign interpreter.  This is also, we have a spotlight now for all the audience, which is like the speaker and the sign interpreter which is, in fact, being streamed to the YouTube signal.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.
>> ANDY.
>> HEATH:  One last point, Gerry.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Can I just ask, Judith, is there anyone else trying to get in.  Andy with all respect, can we let someone else in and if we have time at the end I'll come back to you.  Is that okay?  Okay.
>> Andy:  That's okay.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  So Judith.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  We have a question but it's not on this issue, but I do have a couple of things that were brought to my attention prior to this by our DCAD Members, and that is that the Pre‑IGF events that used to be on Day 0 and now are during this week do not have captioning, and this was not ‑‑ I think it was a communication issue, is that people assume since all the IGF events have captioning that the events during this week that were not the Dynamic Coalition, not the Best Practice, and not one of the other main IGF events, if they were classified of Pre‑IGF, they would not have captioning, and I think if we do another virtual one, that needs to be discuss and that any event held at the IGF should not ‑‑ should have equal access.  That's one issue I thought.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  So can we take it that is a recommendation from our group that all of those should get accessibility services.  That's fine.  Okay.  Judith, second one?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  There is a question where he's looking for advice and strategies from employees in order to have fairness and consideration for the integration to discussion spaces, but that will be for Q&A at a different time.  It's not about this topic.  But we will try to get the answers for you after the panel in writing to you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Yeah.  Or if we have time in Q&A at the end we might.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  We do have a question.  We have one more question, Gerry.  Lidia Best asks, is there a way, now that we have human captioning in English, is there also a way to showcase a machine or captioning in a language that is not in English?  So that is her question.
And then I guess the other thought is that there is different sessions at this IGF that are looking at that topic itself on extinct languages, so I would look for that session.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  I think Lidia's question is not necessarily about extinct translations, but maybe just being able to translate captions.  Maybe Petra might know because Petra works in more than one language.  Would Petra be able to comment?  I think we may have difficulty.  I don't know if Petra is still there or not.  The other people that may be able to comment are the ITU who do standards and have various people from around the world.  Is there somebody from ITU that might want to comment about multilingual captions or translation of captions and that sort of stuff?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  I can actually answer about that.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  All right.  Go ahead.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  So for automated captioning, there are different services that you could use to do that, and that you could actually, there is a company called Streamer Solutions and there are other different chats that have automated captioning that can do it.  What Stream was supposed to be doing is they use the Google translation engine, and if you sign on to their web page and create your account, you could have it ‑‑ you could have the captioning or the voice be machine translated for you into whatever language that you set.
Now, what we don't ‑‑ what we can't tell you is whether the captioning or the translation will be accurate because it's a machine.  It's not a human.  Shabbir would also like to answer a question.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  I would like to put it to Shabbir as well, but Judith could you put the name of the company into the chat box, please.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Sure.  I will do that.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Shabbir, shoot.
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  Yes, Gerry, actually I have a comment about the accessibility of IGF, the topic we are currently talking about.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Excellent.
   >> MUHAMMAD SHABBIR AWAN:  So I was looking at the schedule and the interactive schedule that we have online, and the version that we have in HTML where we can use that schedule to add sessions to personal calendar, I found the previous version, the version that was during 2019 IGF, more accessible than the current one.  Why I say so?  Because at that time I could see all of the sessions of the whole IGF on one page and I could jump by day and by session.  Because all the sessions were properly itemized using the heading levels, the different levels of headings.
This year we can see the whole schedule on one page, but I could not find the headings.  Probably this might be my lack of understanding or something, but I feel that there was not the use of headings was not properly used to organize schedule, and had this been used by IGF, the schedule could have been more easier to navigate for persons with screen readers or anyone else as well.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  I would agree with that, Shabbir, and I would say the system that they had for filtering between data and inclusion and so on was quite inaccessible as well.  But in general, the timetable I thought was good.  We have about a minute left.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Gerry we have one question from Joly MacFie.  Hold on a minute.  I have to get him.
>> JOLY MACFIE:  I should be good.  I just wanted to say about translation that StreamText has a function where you can enable Google Translate within Streamtext and it just costs money, but if you want to you could office it from Caption First and it just means that you could then go to StreamText to the page and get a drop‑down that gives you another language.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Luis, can I ask you are we capturing what's going into the chat box?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes, we are.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Ger Joly could I ask you to put a comment into the chat box and it will be captured there.  Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to move on because we're behind on schedule, unusualliy for a meeting like this, and I'm delighted at that so I want to try to keep it on schedule.  So I'm going to move on and thank you for that discussion because it roamed far and wide and I thought it was very good.
So Gunela, you want to tell us about a best practice form for accessibility?  What is one of them and how does it work?  Please?
   >> GUNELA ASTBRINK:  Thank you very much, Gerry.  Fantastic that we're right on time, so yes, the IGF has a number of best practice forums that are co‑sponsored by the MAG, the Multistakeholder Advisory Group, I'm a member of that, and they have been operating for a number of years.  So one example is the best practice on gender, and we have Sylvia here as well who is a MAG member as well, and she has been working on a proposal for environmental data governance and a proposal for a best practice forum on that.  She also has a lot of experience having been on the MAG for three years now, and I'm going to ask her to speak in a minute, but the idea is to consider that DCAD could put in a proposal for a best practice forum on accessibility.  And what that means is that we've just heard about all the different issues relating to accessibility of the schedule, the website for IGF, and we want to work proactively with IGF now that there will be the development of a new website to act as a model for how to engage a person with a disability to work together with a team in the web content development, and also to base that on the current UN Disability Inclusion Strategy, so we do have the existing policies, and it's really a matter of how the IGF could be a model for developing accessible online tools for persons with disabilities, and that could be used by other UN agencies.  So there is a lot of considerations here, and we are interested in comments about that and maybe getting support on how to move forward.
But I will ask I Sylvia to speak about her experiences of best practice forums in the IGF to give us that background.  So, thank you, Sylvia.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Sill strea, six minutes, okay.
>> Sylvia:  Thank you, Gunela.  When I joined the IGF three years ago as a MAG Member, there was a conversation that started about how the best practice forums that are currently happening at the IGF as intersessional activities had a term or how they were approved to continue or were selected, because as you know the BPFs and dynamic coalitions, as they grow, they require support from the IGF Secretariat and especially during the face‑to‑face meetings, the allocation of time and resources to support their meetings into the agenda.  Right.
So there, you know, to be inclusive of all the topics and other groups that want to bring new issues to the IGF, there was a process that started in to kind of draft some guidelines about how to bring new BPFs into new intersessional work into the IGF, and how that work can be linked to the activities and the outcomes that the IGF is doing.
So there is at the moment a BPF, own BPF, there is a session happening in the next few days.  I will find the link and send it to you later so that you can join that one where the guidelines in the new process that say it's going to be introduced and gather some input.  And the incoming MAG will be in the process of approving ‑‑ reviewing those guidelines and approving them for adoption.  So taking advantage of those new guidelines to be developed, we started a process to structure a BPF on environmental data governance as Gunela mentioned, in trying to stick to those guidelines as much as possible to make it easy for the MAG to approve it for next year, and hopefully that will happen.  So we'll see how that one goes.
So my recommendation to this Dynamic Coalition and those interested in working around a BPF in how to link that to the new IGF website is to first start by discusses the initial guidelines that are currently under review that have not been yet adopted by the MAG to see what you see in those guidelines that might prevent your idea to move forward so that those recommendations can be made before the guidelines are approved.  The MAG is incredibly supportive of being more inclusive in finding an opportunity to discuss with the local hosts how to incorporate these technology, and that is why also I asked the question about what companies are doing to respond to the requirements that you have identified, especially during this crazy COVID times where all of the digital transformation process was kind of pushed a lot faster.
So, I guess the discussion that you're having and the clear and concrete recommendations that your group is coming up with, can be you know, discussed by the MAG.  You have a fantastic advocate with Gunela in the MAG dealing with this and highlighting in every single step how important the accessibility is, and also support from the MAG Chair that is absolutely supportive of this effort, and so I think that there is a level of maturity, let's say, both in technology, and also in how these things come together, and hopefully that will be possible.  The funding for the design of the website is in a grant from the UK Government and they do have accessibility requirements in mind so that is also another strategy.
The part that I'm not that sure is if ‑‑ is because the BFPs are, you know, looking at best practices and discuss best practices from a variety of organizations during a pertd of time, let's say, if they approve the two‑year term, it's to analyze what's going on in that period and kind of have a picture, let's say, of how that looks in time.  Right.  I don't know if that analysis and that review might be in time for the design of the IGF website, so maybe one thing that ‑‑ one alternative that I'm not sure how it can work, could be to do that BPF in that proposal but complemented by trying to organize a Working Group as part of the MAG and work more closely with the Secretariat in this design.  Thank you very much for your time and for giving me a minute to share my experiences.  I'm in awe by seeing the interpreters and all the hurdles that you guys have to jump to be able to participate, and I am very humbled by this experience and I promise to do my best to make the work that we do at the APNIC foundation more inclusive as well.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thank you, Sylvia.  Can I ask you a quick question before you go?  Can we ‑‑ can we circulate the draft guidelines freely amongst the DCAD and other people for comments?
>> Sylvia:  Yes, the tbiedguidelines are on the IGF website so give me a few minutes and I will post them in the chat ?az I finish talking, I can't do two things at the same time.  (Laughing).
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  We will circulate those at a later date.  Thank you, Gunela, and thank you Sylvia, that's really interesting and particularly that the website is going to have a particular emphasis on accessibility.  We've been looking for that for years, so that's wonderful.  Thank you both very, very kindly.
Again, it's time to move on, so now an important part of the IGF are national and regional initiatives, so these are if you like, many IGFs in regional areas of the world or whatever.  So we're going to hear about experiences from that from Judy Okite and Judith Hellerstein.  So maybe Judy, do you want to to take the lead here?
   >> JUDY OKITE:  Thank you very much, Gerry.  Judy Okite from my robey, Kenya.  We have been working, and we have work plan as DCAD to work together with the national and regional initiatives, and one of our main agenda is to ensure that persons with disabilities are part of their national and regional initiatives.  It's easier to achieve a discussion when we begin from that lower level that these persons with disabilities can be able to address their accessibility needs when it comes to their disability, even to their ‑‑ at their local level, and in that way they will be the persons in charge of their local level will be able to understand what it is that is needed.
And so one of DCAD is to reach out to the national and regional initiatives and to be able to share what issues they could be having to ask the questions of what it is that they could be having, how could we be of assistance to them?  In our DCAD website, we have accessibility guidelines that are available for anyone to use, especially when it comes even to the virtual meetings and even to the physical meetings of what it is that we mean when it comes to accessibility.  And as we are right now, we have developed a survey whereby, we are asking for feedback on how accessibility has been to you in this year that most of the meetings have been virtual?  Have you had your national meeting?  Have you had your regional meeting?  What was the accessibility needs?  And we would really appreciate if we could have our feedback from you.  We will colate that feedback and then we plan to have a meeting with the national regional coordinators in December when the IGF is done with, but we can be able to share back the feedback and to be able to just discuss together how is it that we can work better to ensure that the meetings in 2021 IGF are beginning from the local level to the global level to make them all accessible for persons with disabilities.  And I think even that answers one of the questions that was asked from Haiti, that she was asking.  I don't know whether it's a she or a he, but asking how the persons with disabilities can engage into these spaces.  It is simply by beginning to engage at the local level.  Do you have a national IGF?  If you do not have one, then begin building on one.  The IGF website has all the guidelines on how to come up with a national initiative, and so let's invite more persons with disabilities into these discussions.  That is the only way that we can be able to understand the accessibility needs because sometimes we might say that there is no accessibility needs in these meetings, but the persons who do not have that need might not really know what it is that you require, so let's engage, let's have the persons with disabilities being part of this forum.  We welcome you to join the DCAD list where we have different meetings to discuss the accessibility and people share their experiences on what they've done and what they're doing even on regarding the policies that are available at national level at a global level, when it comes to accessibility for persons with disability.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Thanks so much, Judy, for that.  I will also put in that it is one of the other things that groups who are helping to fund the NRIs, we have two organizations.  We have the IGF Support Association who also gives some sponsorship and grant be money to help national and regional initiatives with NRIs to fund and help run their events.  Also, the Internet Society, its chapters are able to get grants for that, and we have been the ‑‑ within the Internet Society, there is a special accessibilities special interest group that is around and we are actually the Secretariat for DCAD, but we have been working with the Internet Society Foundation to get on the application form that these chapters apply for funding for these IGFs, for the national and regional IGFs to get some kind of increased awareness so that when the people who are applying for funds, our hope is that we can get some comments on the form that is filled out so that they're aware, oh, we should be looking towards increasing awareness for these people with disabilities, whether it's through captioning, human captioning or through some other type of format.  The idea is just to raise the awareness, and it's only through raising the awareness that people realize that we need to engage with everyone, just like people years ago continue raising the awareness that English is not the only language that they need to have speech interpreted.  Now we have sign language and we want that.  We want captioning.  We just need to raise awareness, and our approach is how do we raise awareness of this.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  The other thing, Judith, is that we can learn from each other because some are further down the line than others, so we can find a way of saying one NRI, one national or region can help support one another and learn from their experience rather than reinventing the wheel.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes.  Exactly.  And a lot of people say well we don't have funding for this, but what we did in the IGF USA is when I took this on, we decided to be creative and we created, and although our sponsorship is very neutral and people do not get their names on specific sessions, it's just as a whole, but since captioning was not included, we created a separate branding so captioning is provided by X, and we sold that idea to different organizations that they for a very reasonable fee could be having their name branded on this, so it would be captions provided by X, and in the IGF USA, it's captioning is provided by one of our other organizations, and then they have a branded idea.  So it's a really cheap branding idea and a lot of corporations would hike that, but you just have to figure out how do I bring it to them in their language.  How do I get them interested in this.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Judith.  I'm afraid we're going to have to leave it at that and move on if that's okay.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes, I'm done.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Oh, you are now.  (Laughing).  I've made an executive decision, everybody.  I've made an executive decision.  The next piece is called Mainstreaming Accessibility.  Oh, I'm sorry, it's called Dynamic Coalition Liaison and it's Judith again, but to give Judith a breath and to have a change of voice, I've going to just swop that around with the following item.  So Main streaming Accessibility, Shadi and Peter Crosbie, do you mind going now, just jump ahead and do that now and then we'll have a change of voice and then go back to Judith.  Is that okay?  Can we have Shadi and Peter in place?
   >> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:  Hi, Gerry.  This is Shadi.  Yes, that's okay, and I hope that's okay for Peter too.  So, yeah, I guess this discussion has been going on in the DCAD Group for a while about having accessibility.
(meeting ended).
(message that host has another meeting in progress).
>> LUIS:  So this is Luis Bobo United Nations.  I'm sorry for this, Gerry.  Apparently there has been a accident and someone else stopped this room and started a new one.  This should not have happened.  Please continue here.  I hope that we can recover all the people and they will rejoin.  Okay.  Sign interpretation is fine again.  And captioning should be fine again.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  We'll give it just a minute for people to get back in.
>> LUIS:  Very I'm sorry for there.  It should not have happened.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Do we know how many participants we have?
>> Currently 19.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  19.  Okay.  I think we had about 30.  Should we just give it a minute.
>> We had about 47 at one point.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Shadi and Peter, are they here?
>> LUIS:  Yeah, they are here.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Can you give them rights, please.  And Judith and Gunela.  Gunela is there, Judith is there.  Judith is not there.  Gunela, yes.  Sign interpreters are there.  Captioner is there.
>> Hi, Gerry.  Did I break the Internet?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  I won't comment.  Did you shave this morning?  What could do you like like?  (Laughing).
>> Sign language interpreters here.  If we could be given multiple permission again, please.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Most people only crack the camera, Shadi.
   >> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:  Yeah.  (Laughing).
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  Are we ready to start recording and captioning again?
>> LUIS:  It is started.  Everything is started.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  So Shadi, can you start again, please.  I'm sorry to everyone for the interruption.  Some external force broke our meeting and took over our room, so Luis has sorted it out, thanks to Luis, so we're going to try to get going again and we'll see we might rob a bit of time at the end.  Shadi, back to yourself and Peter.  Mainstreaming accessibility, please.
   >> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:  Thanks, Gerry.  Thank you for clarifying, I thought it was something I said and so you kicked me out because I know you're very strict.  (Laughing).  So just to come back to the topic.  We've been discussing in the Dynamic Coalition of Accessibility and Disability in DCAD for quite a while the aspect of not speaking amongst ourselves.  I mean, it is important that we focus on making the IGF accessible and inclusive for everyone.  That is one of our main objectives.  Also, another objective is to promote exchange, knowledge exchange amongst us, amongst people in the field of accessibility and disability, but I think equally as important is to reach out to other ‑‑ to other Dynamic Coalitions and other activities across the IGF and make sure that accessibility is included as a horizontal and considered throughout.
I think for many years we haven't been seeing as many accessibility sessions.  But I think I'm really delighted this year that I do see quite some sessions that are not necessarily organized by members of DCAD, and also topics that I haven't seen as much in previous years.  For example, on Monday morning, there is a session that I'm really looking forward to called Open Data for Women and Persons with Disabilities, just as an example.  There are several others in the agenda that do talk more about inclusion and universal design, but here just you know, very often people may not at first think about data as something that is related to accessibility and disability.  Whereas, it is.  It's very relevant, it's very important, especially in our world where we're talking about artificial intelligence bias against people with disabilities or other marginalized groups.  I think there is also a lot that we can learn from gender activities and gender studies and try to promote inclusion or accessibility as the big umbrella of inclusion.
So, yeah.  I think one of the things that we've been trying to do this year is attend more other sessions and try to bring accessibility if they have not already considered accessibility, to try to bring in discussions of accessibility and raise use cases there and alert them that some of the topics that they might be discussing like copyright, like human rights and ethics in digital technology, all of these aspects do relate to people with disabilities just as well, and maybe even disproportionately so.
This year has been particularly difficult.  On the one side, online makes it really easy to switch rooms from one to the other once you've overcome the hurdles of actually getting the links in the inbox, and that's a separate story, but the idea is that with the online you can be in multiple places and switch.
But the issue is really that speaking from the floor and connecting with the panel or even grabbing them for a coffee afterwards and chatting with them does not work as much online.  So this comes back maybe to a broader issue about the pros and cons of the online aspect of IGF.  On the one side, I think it's great that we can have more access and peamtion from around the world, on the other hand it's a bit more difficult to get this interpersonal and human exchange, and so I guess I'll leave it there because we're tight on time, but the question I guess for the Dynamic Coalitions, beyond trying to attend other Dynamic Coalition meetings and other meetings beyond the quote, you unquote traditional accessibility and disability, what else can we do to get accessibility more in the minds of people?  What can we do to really change the culture towards accessibility across the IGF?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  So, Peter, did you want to jump in?
   >> PETER CROSBIE:  Yes.  I mean, I'll leave my video off because for people that don't know me, I'm Autistic so this level of interaction is right at the limit of what someone like me can handle.  In fact, these kind of platforms like Zoom and so on, in general, are fairly inaccessible for people with cognitive disabilities for a whole lot of reasons.  So on the one hand, they're great and I'd much prefer to be sitting here doing this than at a live IGF conference which for someone like me is really overwhelming, but on the other hand, even Zoom and so on has not been designed for people with cognitive disabilities in mind.  It's a fairly overwhelming and a fairly intense experience, that as I said is the real limit.
I was just going to make a couple of points about mainstreaming and to pick up on that, and to pick up on something that Shadi just said about data as an accessibility related.  And certainly from the point of view of cognitive accessibility, everything, basically, is accessibility related.  Design and layout are accessibility issues, user interface is an accessibility issue.  Content itself, so for example even how long or short a sentence is accessibility issues.  One of the big ones, especially, is login, password, privacy, web security, all of that are real not so much even accessibility issues but as much as accessibility barriers for someone like me.
And so when we're talking about mainstreaming accessibility, what we need to be looking at is that basically every aspect of putting content online is an accessibility issue and it's just at the moment we're not recognizing it as such.  So we need to reframe some of that.  For example, seeing a good design is also meaning good accessibility, and not seeing them as two separate and often competing considerations.
The other just small second point I would make about mainstreaming is just to look at who we're talking about here because mainstreaming implies bringing people who are outside the mainstream into it.  But certainly when it comes to cognitive disabilities, we're already inside it's just that we're invisible and we're not only invisible to you, but also invisible in most cases to ourselves because, for example, 90% of adults who are Autistic do not have a diagnosis, for people with ADHD that figure is about 80%, and even something as common and well‑known as dyslexia, it's around two‑thirds of people with dyslexia don't have a diagnosis.  It's not just that they don't have a diagnosis, it's that you don't even know that you have a disability.  So accessibility has to be mainstreamed because we are the mainstream.  It's not a disability issue, it's not a medical issue.  It's a social issue.  It's about making a choice about who in our society we include and who we exclude.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  You are absolutely right.  It's something I always say.  If it's as normal for a society to include people with disabilities as to include people without disabilities so you're absolutely dead right.
Judith, you were going to talk about liaisons with other dynamic coalitions.  Can we make this very short and maybe we'll do a one‑page document after it and circulate it, so can you give me just one minute or so so we have enough time at the end to see if there is any other business.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes, and I think we can extend by like 5 minutes.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  We'll see in the moment.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes.  So one of the things that we also wanted to do in raising awareness to people about the DCAD is to also raise our awareness within the different dynamic coalitions.  So there are a growing number, more than 20 different dynamic coalitions and they each ‑‑ they grow every year.  So what we've tried to do is to create a liaison for most of these and I will just find ‑‑ I will share the screen here.  This is the document that we have that has a listing of what the different dynamic coalitions are, and what we've done is to try to get members of DCAD such as myself, such as Gunela, such as Shadi and Dierdra to sign up to be a liaison to one of these dynamic coalitions.  So, that is one of the things that we're trying to do to raise awareness so that when these dynamic coalitions are meeting or on the email lists, that accessibility issues could be raised within them and it's all an effort to get increased awareness.  So I will just stop sharing this screen and post a link into the chat.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Okay.  And hopefully afterwards, we can maybe write to people on here and see who is interested.  Because I think if you look at the last three subjects here, the national/regional initiatives, the Dynamic Coalition liaison, and Shadi and Peter's talk.  They're all about us coalecing and talking and hopefully intersecting and influencing other groups so hopefully we can try to get that moving over the next year.  Okay.  Thanks, Judith.
Before we go on, we're just about at the end of our time, but can I ask the kachtioners captioners, are we okay to go on for five or six more minutes?  Is that okay?  I.  Let's use the five or six minutes for any other business.  So what do you want to raise, what do you want to bring up with us?  And Andy, I promise to come back to you so I'll give to you ‑‑ is Andy back on eye.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes, he is but let me just allow, Andy, you can talk now.  Can we give Andy a shot because I promised him.
>> Andy:  Well, in fact, mynext question was going to be what I'm calling best practices, but I'm told I should call good practices now, and I think that was adequately answered in the subsequent discussion.  I think one of the problems here though is that really right now we need, really, really need good practices for particular platforms and particular context, you know, particular use cases for meetings.  And I think this is very, very difficult to do in any kind of international or national way because, you know, vendors don't like it when you tell people, okay, look, this is wrong with your platform and we're going to get around it like this.  You know, they tend not to like that.  I don't know if anybody has any solutions to that point?
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  One of the solutions, Andy, is standards and you're highly involved.  Do you want to say something about standards?
>> ANDY:  Yes.  Absolutely.  Standards don't solve that problem.  You cannot run down vendors in standards.  You can't.  You can't do it.  Okay.  So it's not a solution to that problem and everybody ends up moving around the real problem and is the devil is in the detail and we all know that aI don't have a solution to do that.  I'm happy to talk about standards at another meeting, Gerry.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Yeah.  Another day.  Judith, anyone else have their mand up?  Remember, AltY to put up your chat or the chat box or the question and answer box.  We have about 5 minutes.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  No, but oh, yes Sylvia, let me just see if ‑‑ yeah, Sylvia, you can say something.
>> Sylvia:  Thank you, Judith.  I just wanted to say that maybe another option to engage with the manufacturers is you know, they consider standards as part of the interoperability with other platforms and systems, and in many cases that actually takes the edge, let's say, off their marketing advantage.  So one of the things that this group could do is to pitch the incorporation of these features as a marketing advantage so that they can reach out to wider population that is working from home, that is participating in the digital economy, and that is supported by the different regulations to be incorporated into society in an inclusive manner, so I think that if the pitch could be switched to be on the positive side and not the other side, maybe that could have another impact.
The other thing to consider is that a lot of these companies are adopting software methodologies that are working into doing small increments they call it, around short periods of time.  One of those methodologies is agile for software development, but there are several of those and they're actually welcoming these small increments as they call them for improvements of the features that they have, so I encourage you to structure those ‑‑ structure that pitch in a way that is a little bit more attractive for those in the private sector and look for Allies in that respect and that might have a different outcome.  Finger's crossed.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Another positive approach that was published on December 3 two years ago was a result of Accentuer's research on accessibility that showed the clear economic benefits to business of including a wide variety of potential users of their products and services, so we could maybe circulate that if people are interested.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Yes.  That would be a great idea.  If you could post that link in the chat.  We have a question from Andy Heath.
>> ANDY:  Again just to address the standards point.  There are a lot of issues with standards.  One of the biggest ones is they're written necessarily in standard ease which is gobbley to most people because they're written for vendors and technical people and most people cannot read standards.  Okay.  And the stage at which you actually publicize them and write them fl in a form which is useful to ordinary people which is actually what we really need gets skimped or ignored or whatever because it's not funded.  What we need is a lot more is ‑‑ there are some good standards out there and I've got my name on some of them, they like you to put your name on them, but what we actually need is a lot of roll out of those standards in terms ordinary people can understand and say, yes, that's a good idea.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Yes, standards are voluntary, and we need people to say well standards are a way of achieving what we want to do so we've got to get to do is decide what they want to do is to include us, and then standards are just a way of doing it rather than the stick.
One last speaker before we finish.  One last person?
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  Judy has one short comment to make.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Judy, last but not least.
   >> JUDY OKITE:  Thank you very much.  Just to say something about the question that was asked about persons with disabilities in the workplace.  Maybe one way that you could approach is if there is a policy regarding persons with disabilities at workplace, if it's not there, please draft it and engage all the stakeholders at the workplace and then draft a way of how to implement it.  Thank you.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Thraw.  With that I'm going to call ladies and gentlemen, 2020 is one restrange year, COVID‑19 throughout recalled wo.  It's a strange meeting but a wonderful meeting.  I think we covered so much ground in a short time and we even had a little coffee break in the middle.  An unexpected one.  But I think what it does show is that there are as Shadi said, there benefits to online, disadvantages, benefits to physical meetings, but disadvantages, particularly for many people with disabilities because of physical access problems or whatever, and if we can get a good mixture and make sure that our needs are taken into account in both, we will certainly benefit.  I'm not going to thank anyone by name because if I do I'll forget names.  So I'll thank everyone in the DCAD who contributed over the last two or three months, and I'm not going to name names, but you know who you were and you know that you did a wonderful job.  Thanks to the IGF Secretariat and the Technical Staff.  Thanks to Google for the financial support to help people who otherwise could not have been here.  And most of all, thanks to everyone that turned up today.  I think it's been a great meeting.  And I look forward already to Poland in 2021.  Thank you.
   >> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  And also thanks for the sign language interpreters as well as the captioners.
   >> GERRY ELLIS:  Absolutely.  I should have said that.  Thank you.  Thank you, everyone bye‑bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-dc-lessons-learnt-from-evidence-based-research-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  As the dictator of this panel, I was thinking you could share with us the order. 
>> FRANK ANATI:  Starting the streaming now.  So we can begin in 10 seconds.  We are live.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you, everyone who are here and who will be watching.  This welcome to the Dynamic Coalition on innovative approaches to Connecting the unconnected.  This is a Dynamic Coalition that has been part of the IGF since 2016 onwards.  And we have had sessions so far on how we Connect underserved communities, profiling case studies of innovative approaches that have been tried all over the world.  Today's session's title are overall database has had more than 1,000 case studies and we have covered in depth case studies of over 125 cases, which are all available on a website called 1 world connected.  We here today we'll talk about some of the lessons that we have learned from studying these case studies from all over the world and we have Amidst us a very distinguished panel.  I will introduce them briefly at this time and then I will open the floor to them.  I wanted to have sno house rules in terms of how this discussion will go.
First, we will have introductions of the panelists by myself and then we will have presenting as along three dimensions.  Digital skills, community networks and health care.  Once for each segment of the session, we will have a presentation by a member of the coalition and a commentator by someone who is an expert in that space to make sure that we have and reflect perspectives about what we know about these things in terms of Connecting underserved communities.
After that, we will have a dedicated segment for Q&A as well as any comments that commentators have for this session.  Please post them in the Q&A section if you are using the chat, please change your default to all panelists and attendees so everyone is aware of the questions that you're asking.  As a rule, we would like to do all the questions and comments at the end.  Now, and if there are clarification questions, the panelists can type answers as we go along.  Thank you very much.
So today on behalf of the Dynamic Coalition's panel, we have Chrisifer Yoo.  We will be presenting our Dynamic Coalitions work on digital skills.  Commenting on that is Clair.  She will be commenting on the additional skills segment and the lessons we have learned.
On community networks, we have Leon Gwaka who is a post doctoral fellow who willing talking about his work and learnings from the community networks segment of the session.  And commenting on that, we will have Dr. Leandro navia row from catta lonia who has been involved in one of the, largest and successful networks.
Then we have Dr. Haseki.  And commenting on that will be Dr. SARBANI ask working on part of her new role.  And I would therefore now request for the first segment to kick off professor Yoo.  Over to you.
>> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Well, thank you very much for introduction and for launching us off.  I will note in the chat there is a reminder that this is being recorded and the event is being held under the code of conduct under the IGF.  As one of the co‑conveners of this Dynamic Coalition, I am delighted to have the opportunity to share what we have learned and to really focus my part will be on the digital skills programs.  Just so everyone ‑‑ just to frame it more broadly since we've at the beginning, the whole Dynamic Coalition and the work we're doing is framed by the idea that we need evidence‑based decision making.  We find that there are many innovative efforts going on around the world.  Many of them have no measurement whatever.  So we have no idea what is working and what is not which forces every project to reinvent the wheel and make its impossible for us to learn from prior projects and to take that learning forward.  
Secondly, we discovered the places that did have the information such as certain international organizations couldn't really do the evaluative work because of the nature of their role as an international organization.  They couldn't take the position that certain projects were more successful than others because that would jeopardize their political standing.  So they encouraged us to do this work.  And you have seen three different aspects of our desire to push this forward so people are not just giving you their opinion or even sometimes people are pushing the business model or product they have available to you to convince somebody.  Policy make was, regulators and everyone will use the information we pull together to solve the problem we're all here trying to solve, which is to insure that every global citizen enjoys the benefits of internet Connectivity.  So specifically, we generated a database of over 1100 Connectivity initiatives.  We contacted all of them and we have done over 125 case studies ‑‑ today my segment is about digital skills.  Just to let you know, this is one of the largest segments in the overall database consisting of 339 entries and 44 case studies therefore well over a third of the total amount of who we discovered.
So we discovered in writing this up that this very little good information.  A lot of opinion about what makes for digital skills, what are they and what makes a good initiative.  So I'm going to present to you what we found.
First is the regional distribution and the scale.  As should be probably unsurprising, a large percentage of these are concentrated in Asia and Africa.  There are additional skills initiatives in Latin America and North America, Europe and Oceana at lower levels.  We are always remindd and we'll talk about this in terms of vulnerable populations.  There are aspects of this in terms of low‑income  and gender in terms of senior citizens and disabled ability access where we need some sort of digital skills initiatives often in every part of the world no matter what the socioeconomic status is.  And we see the majority of them.  75% in Asia and Africa.  They occur in different scales.  Many are good 70% of them are larger than local either on a regional BASIS or national BASIS.  And this is an important decision when launching such an initiative to try to evaluate the scale at which you would like to operate it.
Target populations very widely.  43% the largest proportion folkity the at students often through in school training or specifically after school training.  20% to 6% are target on the BASIS of gender to try to increase and empower female poppualing as.  13% are done youth out of school and as we mentioned earlier, there are other lesser represented groups including seniors and disabled which are occasionally targeted, but generally not a primary target in our database.
Geographically, roughly speaking it is 50% in rural areas, 25% urban and, of course, many initiatives of the national ones will stand both.  So we do so a dispo portionate emphasis of the training appropriately so in the rural areas.  In terms of how it is delivered, this is an area where very little study has taken place.  The question is:  There's a great question about whether do you it through a computer as depictd in this photograph through a mobile device or through a handheld device or tablet.  And there's an obvious question about reach and in terms of cost.  If you can do it through mobility based devices, you can reach a lot more people quickly and do it more cost effectively.  We do discover just under 2/3rds of the training is computer base.  And second, do you do the training in person or online through some sort of streaming situation or through an app and we discovered that 84%, the vast majority of the training is delivered through in‑person training.  The content varies widely.  They can be everything from basics training literacy to employment and work related training, education, epentship, social skills, financial literacy, eGovernment, health and agriculture.  This is in decending order of importance.  Basic Itraining being the most common all the way through employment education.  And this raises an interesting question.  We talked about digital skills as if everyone knows what it is and it's a unit.  There are important choices about how to focus them and here it's not just a question of one versus the other.  You probably need some mix of a wide range of subjects.  It's a question of:  How do we marshal scarce resources and attention to create a portfolio of content and approaches that serves the goals of society.
In terms of how large the programs are, there are ‑‑ they're different whether they're folkitied on individuals or focused on institutions.  There are very small number on a very large scale that's over a million programs, a million programs targeted over a million people.  But what you see is a significant number of medium sized programs targeting over 10,000 to a million over 1,000 to 10,000.  So we see very large scale projects or medium scale projects that are very much part of this.  And in addition, there are some target the institutions, a large number of targeted and very large number of institutions and other at a smaller scale.
One of the most difficult problems that we face is actually how do you make the programs sustainable.  Many of the times 2/3rds of the time they're funded by grants.  Some by governments and some by subscriptions.  And with the ones that are not funded by subscriptions, their sustainability depends on the support of the funding agency N. that sense, we are encouraging funding agencies to do that on a conscious BASIS.  Know if you need to keep providing funding in order to sustain, you need to know that in advance.  Most by by NGOs and academia, one of our panelists SAR bane is one of the people who is doing it from an academic stand point and is a wonderful person who is also doing community networking.  Different programs use different impact assessments and different indicators.  Most use of qualitative measures.  Some use quantitative measures.  The qualitative ones tend to be surveys and other tend to find metrics and smaller do both.  Impact indicators with employment, academic performance, empowerment, financial wellness and health.
So there are a number of challenges which we asked them to talk about.  The biggest one is lack of sustained funding.  Others are electicity access, lack of man power to keep systems operational, access to devices, Internet access, resistance to the community and the need for local relevant content.  So in short, we are hoping that on a work we're doing we'll lay a platform for success.  And what's critical to us about doing evidence‑based decision making is develop the tools to evaluate impact to find out what is working and what's not so we can learn from initiative to initiative and improve.  We have to include to make sure people are deploying new projects if they include resources and time and effort to evaluate their success.  Otherwise we can't progress and we can't actually validate what's working.  You have to identify the types of training whether it's as I said basic skills or other types, which populations to train, determine the best mode for delivering it in person, through apps in the like or versus classroom, computer based, mobile based, identify the curriculum needed for each type of training, look at sustainability, analyze ways to overcome challenges and curate a repository resources that others can draw on so every person doesn't have to create them from scratch.  If you are interested, here is our website and thank you very much for your time.  I turn the floor over to Clair.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you for that presentation.  I now invite Clair to present any comments.
>> CLAIR SIBTHORPE:  Great.  It was great to hear that presentation.  Really important to have data on this.  Such an important issue.
I will make start with a couple comments about the broader on why we USS on it and what we learned in terms of responses and points that you make.  Right now there has been great strides in delivering Connecting the infect and the broader topic ‑‑ Connecting the topic.  There's a coverage gap of people who are live outside areas not covered by mobile broadband networks, but that's about 600 million people.  But much more importantly, there's a usage gap.  So when we look at ‑‑ so we have a lot of data on mobile Internet and mobile usage.  So there's approximately 3.4 billion people who live outside areas covered by mobile broadband that are not using it.  So basically so there's coverage, but they're not using it and that is six times bigger than the coverage gap.  So when we look at what are the reasons.  Why are people not using Internet or digital included and we do national representative surveys and we have a lot of data on this is that digital skills and literacy is a top barrier to mobile Internet use among people who have a mobile.  So this encompasses both traditional literacy as well as the ability to use a phone and use the Internet.  So clearly tackling digital skills is an important issue and making sure people can effectively access and use services.  I think it was really great that you highlighted gender and disabilities.  We again see these are segments of the population where there's a lot of significant gaps.  So for example, in the gender gap, we see since 2017 it is declining, but women are 20 are less likely to use mobile Internet in low (inaudible) countries.  There's a gap.  Similarly we're doing research on people with disabilities and we're seeing again gaps there, significant gaps there.  It's great and I would encourage anybody who is looking at digital skills to sort of look at who is not, who does needed skills and who has not been reachd and try and focus on that.
So just to respond to some of the stuff you also said.  You mentioned that a lot of the delivery of digital skills training is computer based.  That's also when we do our landscaping research and our work in this area.  We're seeing that too.  I think that's a challenge and again, when we do basics, we see it according to the IT U for example.  Mobile accounted for 87% of broadband connections in developing countries.  In our surveys again, we found that a high proportion of respondents access the Internet exclusively over the mobile.  They have no way of seasing it particularly in ‑‑ what is fighting and the training is not delivered on the device they are using.  It is sort business, but when it is not delivered on the device, it doesn't give them the skills they need to access and use and safely use digital services they need.  So when people are receive training on, for example, computers and laptops, they are getting stuck on app islands.  They don't know how to have the skills to effectively manage and access the Internet on the phone.  In fact, that's training not giving them the skills they need to use it.  I think an important issue is think about groups you are targeting and trying to reach and what are the platforms and tools they're using to make sure the skills and training is appropriate to that.  So ‑‑ a number of the towns we also see when delivering digital skills programs and not surprise by what you presented in some of the barriers is that again our research and our work in this area shows this cannot be looked at in isolation, but it needs to be looked at in the context of the range of barriers of them trying to use digital services.  I would call again what our research is showing is affordability.  That is a primary barrier to having a phone that is also a second biggest barrier to alsoing the Internet after digital skills.  If people can't afford or access the devices, you know, the digital skills training isn't going to be very effective.  There are barriers around concerns and security issues insuring this relevant content and services are available.  I would say that again in our research though, we're seeing that video consumption has been rapidly growing in the last two years.  It is much higher now.  But that ‑‑ that means that it is providing an accessible way to access content particularly for those who have low literacy and digital skills.  It's also an important thing to think about we can't replace face to face training, but sort of some of this digital training material and content is useful in the context of COVID where people are constrained and we are seeing much higher content to produce video content amongst some of the poppualations that we work with in low and miss countries ‑‑ middle countries.  We have mobile Internet skills to training toolkit, which is focused on getting people who just have the basic skills to access in youths the Internet.  It's freely available.  It's been (inaudible) by many countries and reached over 2.2 million citizens that we're aware of.  But we developed the initial modules looking at again taking every research evidence based approach research what people wanted and the user center design approach and identified that as people were looking for one of the basics on the Internet, how to keep themselves safe, how to understand cost and reduce costs as well as key modules on apps.  So that's an area we started to develop contempt on, but we're now currently doing more detailed research to understand than digital needs and capabilities of people in Africa and Asia.  Understand the journey from people when they first own a phone to use Internet to use it more widely and we'll be sharing that.  So basically I agree it is critically important we need to focus on this issue.  It would be great to see when you present next year if we can have more increased consideration of mobile given how important it is as a tool for people.  And in fact, because we think it's such an important issue, we are ‑‑ we think that we need to collaborate more on this.  We're in the process of establishing a community of practice.  We'll call it mobile digital skills and alliance to drive collaboration and anybody who is participating here and interest in being part of that, we feel we node more collaboration, research and evidence.  I will say that I agree with that.  A lot of what you're saying I think it is really important and I think about it in the context of the wider barriers if we're going to be success envelope delivering these initiatives.  So thank you very much.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you so much, Clair, for those comments.  If there are questions on the additional skills with the fining and commentary that you just heard, please do post your questions in the Q&A panel and we will try our best to have discussion at thed, but also if there are clarification questions, we will take them through the course of the presentation.
We have a slight change in order and next we will actually have the health care segment and I would like to invite Dr. Haseki especially in areas that understand the unconnected and we'll have the community network section after that.  Muge?
>> MUGE HASEKI:  May I share my screen now for my presentation?
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Yes.  I think you should be able to.
>> MUGE HASEKI:  All right.  It says sharing screen has failed.  Let me try again.  All right.  It works this time.  I would like to present some of our fivinging on health.  So we over the past couple years, we have generated 13 case studies on health, five of which were on maternal health.  And then we decided we wanted to know nose five maternal health services skilled at different levels and also had different outcomes.  So we were curious what made them in what ways they were similar and different than why they scaled at different levels.  They started at similar timeframes and some of them were more successful in terms of reaching their own goals and changing how behavior of pregnant women.  Today I will focus on too often given our 10‑minute timeframe and compare and cong draft to maternal health applications in ‑‑ implications in south Asia.  We wanted to know what challenges they face, what challenges woman face in those areas and how maternal mobile applications can address those challenges through design and change how behavior of woman intended ways.
So I'm sure everyone in IGF and in this panel are aware of the increase in digital infrastruckure all over the world.  So here you see how digital infrastructure has expanded over the past 10 years.  The two maps from GSMA show those expansions vividly.  And that also led increase in the mobile health initiatives over the past several years.  Here you see maps from 2015.  More than half a million have been implemented over the past 10 years.  But unfortunately, only around 700 of them are currently active.  So this also let us our research questions why mobile health applications are not sustainable or why they're not working as they intended.  And this digital increase in digital infrastructure, there's a failed gender gap still growing fast.  And the second thing we were curious about was why the gender gap is growing despite the increase in digital infrastructure and mobile health services especially those mobile health services aim to improve health of woman.
Here I would like to compare to mobile health services in Bangladesh and Nepal.  They ever both neighbor countries in south Asia.  Those two maternal health applications they had the same goals.  They both provide pregnant and postpartum women and have families with voice and tact messages.  So (inaudible) provides an access to a help desk.  So we wanted to know about those two maternal health applications.  They started around the same time upon (inaudible) in 2010 and (inaudible) in 2011.  But they scaled at different levels when it became national within the 3‑year timeframe and AMAKOMAYA became regional with only 7,000 and (inaudible) reached 2 million subscribers.  So we wanted to know why they scaled it differently within some other timeframe.  And at the same time, in what ways they change behavioral given gender gap is growing and how they address some of the challenges that are associated with woman in those areas.  Sory.  So we identified some challenges of woman in rural Bangladesh and Napal.  And those influence of gate keepers in how behaviors and decisions low literacy rates and limited leisure time due to overworkload, barriers to health centers and high 99 of local languages and patriarchal norms.  So we wanted to know how those two mobile health applications tried to address some of these challenges through design.  So both of the applications provide SMS and SMS reminders as well as voice messaging.  But different than upon ‑‑ different an APONJON receives messages twice a week.  In addition, they also provide SMS for gate keepers, timing choices, help line and self‑registration as well as they are available in three different local languages.  So here we kind of look at how they address some of the sociocultural challenges to their affordances.  And APONJON and Bangladesh provide literacy in AMAKOMAYA.  There are norms by providing weekly SMS messages to gate keepers.  There are messages to address leisure time of woman who are working and spending their time with domestic responsible (inaudible) working in the field.  They address the low level access to health centers and limited health care workers in those areas.  And also provided local content in three out of 38 languages unlike AMAKOMAYA, which is only available in one language to address the high number of local languages in those countries.
So in terms of results, again APONJON reached 2 million subscribers.  They were also able to change how behavior of woman ‑‑ help behavior of woman 67% compared to AMAKOMAYA that changed behavior of pregnant woman 60%.
So our key aways, access is not sufficient in including and marginal environments.  Taking an approach can help develop more relevant and sustainable programs, but what I mean by that is integrating gate keepers, husbands and opinion leaders in the community.  Single barrier through design may not be effective or cost effective.  Just providing and addressing financial barriers for woman in those areas providing them free mobile health service or free data is not sufficient, but they also need to address other challenges like gatekeepers or lack of time or lack of leisure time.  And all these areas and challenges they need to address them all at the same time rather than addressing just one of them.  If they want to be sustainable or effective.  So thank you.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you so much, Muge.  And we had some issues, but I'm glad to note it has been resolved.  If possible, Dr. BELUR, your comments next.
>> SARBANI BANERJEE:  Thank you.  So yes.  Mobile health applications my take on it is that mobile applications (inaudible) incredible promise to include health care delivery.  And it is becoming an important mechanism to improve maternal (inaudible).  In locations and connectivity, mobile phones (inaudible) dependent to receive messages (inaudible) as we have seen in the two mobile applications that use (inaudible) in Bangladesh and in Nepal.  Mobile technology has solutions that are being utilized for disseminating information, monitoring and tracking; however, the lack of providing training support to community has helped us.  Because that's one of the key issues that women in rural areas often face that because there have (inaudible) levels, they are unable to get the support from the community health workers because that's the go‑to person in the villages.  Mobilizing communities is also something and (inaudible) interpersonal communication with community members because if you have to go in to the villages into the rural areas, there has to be a certain amount of interpersonal communication within community members.  We have to as you have mentioned it, in your last slide that we have to take into account the amendment of the community leaders and others.  So there is a great dependency on that ownership of mobile phones.  You know?  If it is like a health application and (inaudible) applications have to work.  There is a great dependency on that mobile phones.  Especially woman and (inaudible) access information that women need because men often on one hand don't have the mobile phone, the devices, but on the other hand, they have auto mommy to access information because of the (inaudible) you have mentioned.
So some of the ‑‑ these are some of the stumbling blocks for the sickness of (inaudible) in various parts of the world.  And I would like to mention that in sense of social areas in a world of Connectivity of (inaudible) services and innovative ways by which ML service can work hand in hand with national health services.  How can they work well anily well low Connectivity locations.  So (inaudible) deep into these questions have been working together with remote rural areas in India and health information and dissemination if you go to each.  You can go into Connectivity.  And in the community network that's been seated, rural (inaudible) village and (inaudible) by association and communications as here.  This is a project that I'm a part of now.  So in community, (inaudible) community users have local access servers.  We host (inaudible) spoken in (inaudible) on maternal health on the local access server and the offline measure that we have set up in the community, users the government access and access in that local mesh.  At the health information, users (inaudible) that information is culturally relevant.  For the pregnant and new mothers are disseminated into the community.  And there is also not only one way of communication between us and the community, but also that new information based on the experiences of the mothers like the use of particular local grown (inaudible) which can please the weight of the babies or information about community, vegetable garden that can enable the right amount of nutrition pregnant mothers and new mothers should have.  So these are information that women in the community can last about.  And all this information is shared in local language by the community for the user community areas and can be accessed by all through the local access server.  So it is not only for women who are being empowered with this information, but also the husbands are coming into the (inaudible) by understanding that okay.  These are the things they should give to the women in the house and when they are pregnant and after they have given birth to babies.
Training the community health workers is also another important mode which we go through these and continue remains for a long time within the community amongst the women because these information for (inaudible) tutorials that we create and download it and (inaudible) offline mode by the women in the community.  And in order to make the reliance on the mobile phones less, what we do is (inaudible) we use a lot of ‑‑ a lot of this offlin ‑‑  a lot of community review content is information that is generated by the community and some of it is like broadcast (inaudible) television by downloading detected offline.
So during the COVID times, what we see, what we have seen is that.  This type of content we have made specific content related to best (inaudible) during COVID because the new mothers, the mothers who give birth to the children, they're asked by companies to not feed their babies with breast milk because that has a great chance of the baby acquiring the virus.  So what happened is that we made special tutorials on breast feeding for new mothers in the COVID times for these women in the (inaudible).  It made them aware of the use of face masks, how to use the face masks, how to meet the face masks and how to clean the face masks.  (inaudible) help to the women in the community in gaining information on COVID as well as their own health awareness.  Regarding to me the take of it is that I want to mention the (inaudible) services should not be (inaudible) each night in the sense that a fire times (inaudible) services of ML mobile applications, but it has to be a period of timer inship between ongoing governments.  So there are government teams and private places and help in the mean time of these services because sometimes if is only people working in silos.  So there has to be a multi‑stakeholder partnership and we need to utilization of Connectivity should be roll the out as an part aspect of important Connectivity.  It is not that we enable Connectivity for the sake of Connecting, but also meaningful utilization of Connectivity such as the reliance and community networks and like enabling work online and offline Connectivity in the sense they don't need to be 24 into 7 online, but certain amount of offline Connectivity that the users deliverance of online things can also be involved.  So this will enable the services reach remote (inaudible).  Overall, these are my commands and ‑‑ comments and thank you.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you so much for those comments and for your experiences.  I now ‑‑ I am looking for any questions in the Q&A and I don't see any.  So I want to make another request to all attendees and those watching.  If you have any questions or comments, please do use the Q&A box or use the chat with all panelists and attendees.  So everyone can see your question.  Finally, we have Leon GWAKA has just joined the Connective feel at the University of Pennsylvania law school center for technology and innovation.  He will be presenting some of the findings on community networks that we have discovered over the last few years.  Thank you.
>> LEON GWAKA:  Thank you.  Let me change my screen.  Can you see my slide now?  All right.  So in this presentation, we're going to look at community networks as models to Connect ‑‑ and Connect and underserved communities.  So I think the starting point of this work is we acknowledge that over the years, there's been progress in terms of Connecting the unconnect the communities and in receipt reports, there's been suggestions that mobile Internet is actually surpassed to get 1% of the global population.  But when you think of this 1% on the website, it simply is an indication of how much people remain connected.  So it's still not connected mobile Internet.  And when we dig deeper into the regional ‑‑ into the different regions, we start seeing that there are regional disparities way in Africa, in Asia that even many more people that actually are not connected, not even close to the 51%.  And you start to see the different access rates among different social groups.  To a particular focus on women who continue to have less access as compared to men.  So when you look at the whole idea of why do we have so many people who remain unconnected, we think that the current models that are being used to develop Internet infrastructure, telecommunication infrastructure they have demonstrated over years that they're not reliable.  We cannot rely on them to actually achieve access or provide that further access to especially to rural communities.  What I call the current models, we look at governments that mainly funding the governments that have traditionally been charged with responsibility of developing communication or telecommunication infrastructure.  But in most of the poor regions, those governments simply do not have good resources to provide access to everyone.  And the second part is when you look at the Private Sector, they're much more concerned about financial returns on the investment.  And the ‑‑ there have been claims that in usual communities and restrained communities, there isn't much demand that can warrant them to make those investments.  When you look at community networks, I think that there is possibly an opportunity to provide Connectivity to resource constraint communities.
Now, when you look at community networks, these initiatives that are viewed in the March and mostly we say they're forecast and also community driven.  So they lay an eventual role in developing this network.  We also look at it that require less capital expenditure and operating over time.  You require less financial resours as compared to traditional systems.  I think the idea really addresses out of the challenge that is governments that are not well resourced and also Private Sector that is profit driven.
What we have seen in developing this has sprint across the globe in exchange that we have diverse visions of community networks.  So ‑‑ there was ever since ‑‑ there was a studdie in Africa and that study identified things such as village where there were different initiatives and some qualifiers community networks or even just Internet ‑‑ Internet centers.  We believe in each of those initiatives, unique lessons that we can lend, but also when we compare them especially if we can compare one region from another or those that I understand region there are many lessons that can guide us in terms of developing this community networks.
Now, we have 21 case studies in our database.  They are distribution.  You can see that we have most of the initiatives in Africa followed by Asia and then we have Europe and we have America and then we have oceania.  What this indicates is that the case studies are distributed across the globe.  It is not only one region where we find the community networks and if we look at the number of years this network has been in existence, we see that community networks that would be 1 in 5 years and others that have been 6 to 10 years and then we have others beyond 11 years.  So we can see that there's a distance spread when you look at the number of years coming to accept the number of years and networks have been in existence.  And we believe that we can lend and produce lessons from those that have been in existence for a long time to also inform the units that have just think about informed.  When you look at the location, we see that there is also other community networks that are actually implemented in urban areas and most of them from our case studies, most of them in rural areas and in terms of scale, we have more community networks that are implemented at village level and we have others that are at district level; however, we'll clarify that in terms of the district, different countries use different ways of classifying whether there's a district.  So I think that will be important to note.
Now, given that we have community networks that are from diverse regions and different sizes, we need to develop a mechanism to understand how best ‑‑ understand community networks and an individual case study or how best we can develop mechanisms to compare them.  So we believe that we can apply the technology organisation development approach and classify or rather we can use this approach to try and characterize either one case study or characterize different case studies and it enables us to draw (inaudible).  Now, from what we have, we found that we have 90% using the unlicensed spectrum.  And also in terms of cost, 28% reported that the initial cost of their projects was less than 10,000.  And they continue innovation and investment which is informing new technology that can be used to do at the community networks.
In terms of organsation, 72% reported they consulted and have been involved in the management of the community networks.  That includes the process of repairing and maintaining.  Then we have in terms of revenue generation, 67%.  (inaudible) revenue generation module; however, the revenue generation model that we are seeing in this community network is such that it does not match what is currently on the market because they are trying to serve the resource constraint communities.  So they're trying not to over charge.  So even though they say they have a revenue generation model, they are enabled to recoop either the capital expenditure or sometimes the operational cost so they continuously rely on funding from government from Private Sector and the main lesson we find on this aspect of organization is that most of the community networks are trying to engage in strategic partnerships with academia, with industry with governments so that they are able to generate or to have sustained funding for their operations.
One of the ‑‑ then we move on to the environment and in terms of the environment, we are looking at where the community networks are operating.  And we found from (inaudible), there were indications on the impact that regular frameworks are having on the community networks.  But from our case studies, we found that community metrics are finding ways to actually overcome this challenge and others have managed to achieve license exemptions from the government and others have managed to demonstrate to governments that the usefulness of this metrics and as a result, they have actually prompted governments to update and review their regulator frameworks, but this does not mean that the governments implements those new regulator frameworks.  And we can also just so maybe from the technology part that 90% of the community metrics I use on a license spectrum and they are overcoming the regulator requirement.  Then the other aspect in the environment is that most of these community networks are set up in areas where there is no electicity and there is the option of using solar option.  Then in terms of anchor institutions, this is where we're looking at where this community metrics can set up.  We see that in Africa only 33 have responded.  33% responded that they managed to have anchor institutions or managed to have facilities where they can set up and operate.  In Latin America, it was only 20% who had site support.  Now the main concern with anchor institutions is the security of the equipment.  So if there is no pro facilities that can lead to the equipment being stolen or destroyed.
The next part we tried to understand when this community metrics is being set up, what drives them ‑‑ what drives those who are setting up the community networks and from our findings as you see that the main or the most reported reason was simply infrastructure development.  So we had 19 ‑‑ 19 who reported that there was (inaudible) studied this community metric was to provide Connectivity.  It was just for infrastructure development and along with that is about developing technical skills in the community or in part in communities to be able to Connect themselves.  And the others we have reported that community metrics are being implemented to support development dimensions and we can see these education, which is with 15 from education and we had 10 from health with 9 from gender and we had 7 from agriculture.
Now, we know that is important to understand what is important to your community.  If a community is manically best on agriculture, then we need to find a mechanism to link the community network intervention to the particular dimension that the community is interested in.  And this approach we believe can assist also in terms of finding of the community metrics.  So the different dementions, which is health, education, agriculture, they often have some support in terms of addressing challenges which they face.  And we believe that community metrics part of the interventions that can be implemented in agreeing challenges which are across the different dimensions and we need to develop strategy partnerships with those institutions, education institutions or agriculture institutions that you can utilize or we can somehow support the community metrics to in terms of funding.  So this is work in progress.  What we have at the moment insures that community metrics are available Connectivity models and in our case studies, we have documented successful case studies such as the (inaudible) network in Africa.  What we need is to continue producing evidence to demonstrate what works.  And at the moment, most of the studies link towards demonstrating the technical aspect what technology works, but we also need to produce more evidence in terms of the organsation, the nature of the organsation and also the environment in which they're operating.
Then the next part is about integrating this community metrics with development dimensions and we ‑‑ by integrating them to develop or by tieing them to development dimension, it provides an opportunity to also develop other melt wrecks for impact assessment to understand what the impact this community metrics are having.  And also educated when we tied them to the other development dimensions, maybe where there is an argument to persuade some funding from those dimensions to support the community network initiatives.  And in terms of the legal frameworks, why we did not find this particularly to be a major challenge that reported by in the case studies, we believe that there are changes to legal frameworks, but we should insure or provide support to push for implementation of the changes and supporting the different community metrics pushing for those changes in the legal frameworks.  I think that's the end.  Thank you.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you so much, Leon, for your presentation.  Leand row, comments?
>> LEANDRO NAVARRO:  Yeah.  Thank you.  So I ‑‑ congratulations for the study because it is difficult to gather evidence from many initiatives.  In my experience also, I found it quite hard.  And, um, and I found the draft report very useful to give an overview of the different initiatives.  Evidence depends on communities to report and probably some support from academics to report them in a form that can be used and can be integrated in front of studies.  I found many initiatives don't have any interest or any priority on generating evidence from their activities and it's perfectly respectful, but, um, but it happens.  I suppose that the studies even more relevant because when we talk about connected or unconnected, there are many differences.  So there are those who are connected and I remember in one talk that among the connected, there are those who don't care about monthly bill, which simply they get it and they pay.  Those who when they see the bill coming, they need to find a seat.  They need to take a good moment, take a coffee and then look at it and see if they can afford or they get disconnected in the middle of the month.  So there are different types of connected.  And then from the unconnected, you have the self‑connected, which are the community networks those who find their ways to Connect themselves is like saying, well, we are looking at how people eat and then if you only look at the restaurants, of course, not everyone uses the restaurant model every day.  And the business mods makes a difference and then if you only see that, you don't really understand how people sustain themselves because they cook at home and they cannot afford to go every day to a restaurant.Noa days with the man demic, there's not ‑‑ pandemic, there's not an option.  Or maybe because they don't have the skills to use a device or because as I said, they prefer to do it at home and, um, also sometimes the unconnected they mismatch is they simply cannot afford.  They don't have money or they don't have enough money because they live in a subassistance economy.  Money is very scarce resource and they need to invest that money into some other services.  It also Connects with the previous parts of the discussion about like digital skills and especially health care and other aspects.  So you may have a limited amount of money and you have to prioritize which one you want.  And also there is remaining category of those who are not self‑connected.  They are simply isolated and we don't know for those isolated, we don't know anything.  Maybe there are no evidence.  Maybe there is evidence that they are not connected.  Maybe they have fragile forms of Connectivity.  Maybe they don't really need it.  Ones ‑‑ who knows.  I saw it also I saw in the draft report that's also connected to the general aspect of infrastructures.  So maybe it has to do with electricity.  Um, and, um, also education in these times.  If you want to continue being educated, you need to be on a school and have home connection.  Otherwise things do not work.  The need and the use of Connectivity and community networks also has to do with if people use it for enjoyment or if now people use it for survival.  So, ah, we can see in the current situation, we found that some families realize that what used to be a tool for getting information now is about a tool to getting education, getting medical services, getting a lot of thins that have to be done work from home.  So I think that has changed a lot meaning of Connectivity and the importance of having ways to self‑connect yourself if you are not like at a target business of the ‑‑ of service providers.  And, um, one thing that is difficult to see, but you also mentioned is how this Connectivity is organized as said in many forms.  The commercial business model is one, but it is not the only one and some communities can have like, um, traditional ways of creating and governing their infrastructures and, um, it is difficult to compare because they are not the ‑‑ that's the way a particular community works and another community works differently and then, um, it's not a choice.  It is simply the only choice is that there are ways to work which is more like formal or informal based on money exchange or based on assistance to Bartering of things.  So it's a challenge.  It's nice to characterize.  It's useful to have to know, but you cannot really do too much about comparisons or rankings or anything which makesless study challenging ‑‑ makes the study challenging.  Also, I mean, to what extent is useful to collect evidences is useful to understand scenario and see diversity.  And also as you mentioned in the presentation, it's useful because some communities rely on external contributions from technology knowledge or from investment from subsidies and some others do not.  But I find that the start up resources are important like initial knowledge, initial hardware, initial loans or the money to set up, expand and maintain the networks.  Even I saw reference in one interesting case where a community has its own infrastructure and then they inteconnect with a commercial provider so you can also find this interesting panelships between community initiatives that will ‑‑ that deal with the retail with the local services and the local support, connected to back hold providers or some other commercial providers that certain point where ‑‑ both is a win‑win situation.  The community provides the best possible support and, um, they collect money and might be they pay a fee and commercial providers find a way to make a business in a way that is respectful with the community.  So yeah.  (inaudible) to your work because I think it adds to and brings entry point to other detail studies and is focused on a specific community and you do the hard work of trying to put them together and extract some commonalities and differences and situate the communities with respect to other possible business models and other ways of delivering Connectivity.  It is just a really, really hard problem.  So yeah.  That's my analysis and comments and my encouragement for you to continue this work.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you so much, Dr. Navarro.  Can transpost like a bus be a place for Connecting the unconnected?  I think this comes from some of the newer projects that are trying to have connected buses.  I'm aware of this being piloted in Peru as part of an operation that the World Bank is financing which I now also am a part of, the organization of the project.  But I wanted to understand what thoughts might exist around transient Connectivity more broadly.  Buses are transient.  They're not consistent Connectivity.
>> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  If we can ask SARBANI to join us.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Absolutely.
>> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  One of the interesting things about bus travel is they tend to be along arteries where there's a fair amount of density, but in addition, there's access to rights of ways where people can actually lay some of the Connectivity that will work that support things.  So you'll find that you'll see bus kiosks in a lot of places and Wi‑Fi hotspots, places where you can get Connectivity because they tend to have certain facilities and resources around them and did is much easier to Connect buses even though they're transit and mobile because they do collect people and they tend to move among the mobile Internet.  Those serious of roads are sometimes the first things Connect and are often among the first connected.  So you can see some potential.  But what I think you're getting at is it's not one technology or one solution to solve everything.  You'll see some solutions work in some areas and we shouldn't say that will not Connect.  That's great.  We solved part of the problem and it may not be one grand solution, but many overlapping solutions that allows us to Connect.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Any other panelists have any on transient Connectivity?
>> LEANDRO NAVARRO:  Yeah.  I think the advantage of self‑connecting is you can choose how to do it because when you talk to Telecom providers say yeah.  The quality metrics that we need to comply, well, in case there is nothing or do you it yourself is like when you cook.  You like what you cook because it's what you have.  So it's your solution.  And also you can see that when you see a community from distance, it is difficult to imagine what would work, but when you are part of the community, you can realize and you can think a lot and find out how to use the local resources the best.  For me, one nice example is there is computer aid that used to ship computers second hand computers and containers to remote locations.  And then when they did realize the container itself was interesting.  Now they ship coptainers that are classrooms in which they put computers and then they have a classroom where they also have solar panels.  So they bring their electricity and they only need a satellite connection or cable connection to power up.  Now a rule used to be outside the box to bring the computers.  Imagination is unlimited.  And this is ‑‑ anything that works is fine.Y is yeah.  Imagination to the power.
>> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  I love the idea of imagination to the power, Leandro.  There's a lot of these ideas, but I mentioned there's the box and we have seen in our studies a lot of questions about back haul and the costs sorted with that ‑‑ associated with that.  These are things that need to be studied because satellite a lot of latency, but it is ubiquitous.  There are tradeoffs and one of the things is to study this in more detail.  Something I should have said earlier is really affecting Clair and her leadership through this area through connected societies, connected women, the current leadership of the equals on gender and the new GSMA skills alliance.  It is really pushing out the information we have to make decisions about this on an evidence based way which we think is the most important.  And I appreciate her emphasis on the growing important of mobile, which is absolutely true.  What is interesting is it is true that computer base programs dominate and they tend to be in terms of (inaudible) schools.  Afterschool programs dominate.  What we don't have is great metrics to understand what is the most effective.  That is opportunistic.  I think mobile based education ‑‑ digital skills training has a tremendous amount of promise.  We have to hash it and validate it and figure out how to start creating plans to implement this as well as we can.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  I don't see any other questions, but I will take the moderators prerogative to ask the last one because we have a few minutes left.  To all the panelists today, what do you think are the biggest open questions in terms of understanding how to Connect the unconnected today?  Let's start with the commenters.  Clair?
>> CLAIR SIBTHORPE:  Sure.  I think ‑‑ I think while we have a lot of answers and certainly that's why we do these big national representative surveys to answer of these questions, there's still a lot more to be answered.  So, um, so I will say a few things.  First of all, we don't understand the impact of COVID.  So we're very lucky that we're continuing with our surveys at the moment.  The reporting will start to see what that impact is.  We'll be an impact and I think from a gender perspective, I am concerned it is not going to be a positive one.  I think COVID has changed things and will change key barriers and affordability and such.  I think that's an area we're hoping to fill with more.  And then two others general comments I would make.  I would say that we don't have as much for grasp on the ‑‑ some of the impacts around policies in this space.  So how do they affect digital inclusion and some of those policies ‑‑ the impacts of some of those policies in different areas.  So I think kind of a more detailed understanding of policy impacts around digital inclusion and arrangements of things would be useful.  And we don't ‑‑ we don't have we're working now with the University of Pennsylvania team around and also looking at individual impact on that.  There is a lot of impactability information around household level or national level, but what is the individual impact.  And then I would say on digital skills specifically because that's what I was asked to comment on.  I think there's a lot more learning we needed to do around what mechanisms are ‑‑ we know ‑‑ there's a lot of content, but what other mechanisms needed to be delivered?  So when is it appropriate to deliver it on skills.  So when we do it, we're learning, for example, you can educate people about what is the Internet and some of the basic stuff via video.  But some of the more detailed more advanced skills perhaps need to be more face to face.  What are the delivery mechanisms that will have the impact and how can we ‑‑ how can we ‑‑ and on which type of skills and which type of audience because I think we need to understand that in more detail if we scale up our efforts.  A lot of work we're seeing is done face to face.  That is very resource intensive.  Mobile operators have an advantage they have a network of 8 (inaudible) which can deliver it, which is great.  But not everybody does and I think we need to ‑‑ there's a lot to be understood around delivering mechanisms which is appropriate and which type of skills and which is audience and how effective is it and how can we kind of get it so that these things are more effective and we can get the numbers up scalable.  I said quite a few things, but I think there's a lot and I think on gender, for example, some of the policies around gender, what is their impact (inaudible) to learn from that.  I will hand it over to somebody else now.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Yes.  Dr. Navarreo?
>> LEANDRO NAVARRO:  We need to get out of the trap of Telecom monopolies that we got into several monopolies of large Telecom providers in general.  I think it's like a stretching model too much.  There's a point where customers can not afford the prices and it is not profitable for them.  So no need for them to cover everything.  If we allow the unconnected to count because they are unconnected and how they can raise their voice and how they can find ways or propose ways.  It's difficult for governments to typically (inaudible) in the capital towns to realize and to understand what are the needs for those connected and who maybe do not speak.  Some people say that it's important to enable people to selfconnect because it's like saying enabling people to (inaudible) a home.  If you don't have a kitchen at home, you don't have a choice.  You need to go to the restaurant or starve.  We know for food it is not acceptable and Connectivity is not either.  And this pandemic situation has shown that governments have to face sometimes the trade off of preserving health or preserving their economy.  So I think this is the same thing for Connectivity.  So sometimes I need to preserve the private companies and to empower them, but also at the same time Thas to preserve the rights of those who are connected and those who are unconnected.  And these diversity of models is really a challenge and that Connects the policy definitely.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you so much, Dr. Navarreo.  Dr. BELUR?
>> SARBANI BANERJEE:  (inaudible) but now it should be that unselected should be able to Connect themselves.  So given that opportunity to the people that are connected, there is a lot of understanding (inaudible) on how to Connect themselves.  So like for example, starting from particulars and the use of technologies that they can (inaudible) assemble in the villages or how to generate contain in the villages and the communities, how to use the contained in the day to day lives.  Everything is around that and I think because how much we are going to discuss about policy makers, with the Telecom operators to please take connectivity to the last mile the other ones (inaudible) need Connectivity.  You don't have any other means of communication.  And but then (inaudible) Connect themselves in the communities.  They too did a very good job of connecting.  In India, what we have seen is that during the COVID times, the gender enunciation has increased and it's become the digital divide that's widened.  And some of the articles that are there, I have read that the long struggle that we might have control to become independent, to become (inaudible) and has again come back to zero.  Now again, women are back into the houses and then they are (inaudible) who don't have jobs.  They are relegated to the homes taking care of the children.  For all that struggle, I think it has to again perhaps like Clair mentioned next year's report and we look forward to understand what has been the real impact of COVID.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Any other comments from Dr. GWAKA?  Sorry, Dr. Haseki?
>> LEON GWAKA:  For me the open questions stem from the current situation.  I think after current situation we have seen a lot of momentum in terms of discussing about Connecting them.  Name momentum in terms of initiatives lead from governments and lead from private sector.  People have demonstrated willingness to actually contribute towards overcoming the challenge.  But I think it remains to be seen whether that momentum can be maintained post pandemic and see where the governments are willing to still commit resources as much as they did with a Private Sector that was willing to contribute as much as they did and even the discussions around the Internet.  Then also maybe commitment to using, I think, Connectivity for different initiatives.  I think those are interesting things that I'll be looking at.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you.  Professor YOO?
>> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Before I do anything else, I want to thank everyone for their insights and participation on this panel.  I do think it is interesting we talk about the impact of COVID.  There is evidence in the U.S. that the job losses have been much hard or women than anywhere else.  So I don't think any part of this world is immune to be impact, but there is a gender differential there.
I guess what I would encourage us to think about is to be openly experimental about nie ways.  And to try to do it in a way that allows us to learn from case to case in a much broader context.  I find many people want to latch on to one model and say, oh, this is the solution to everything.  Or fixed wireless or some particular model and the answer has got to be more complicated than that.  What we need is analytical structure to break it down into components and patience.  Learning takes time and you don't generally often get the entire information about the entire system all at once.  You get local knowledge one piece at a time and then as you get multiple pieces, you discover what worked in one context doesn't work in another content and you know the reason why.  It is an incremental long run play.  So what that tells you is someone once told me the best time to plant a tree was 30 years ago.  The second best time is today.  So on some level, we need to start planting some streets and understand that we wish we had a forest already.  But given that we don't, that is going to take a long time that we take a longer term perspective and do what we can to generate that decision and make it going forward.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you, all.  So we are almost coming to a close on the session and I actually learned a lot from this session.  So I want to thank all of panelists and all of the attendees for being with us today.  But also for the generous amount of insights of where we are today in terms of knowledge, what we know of in terms of different models around the world and also a lot of discussion especially now at the end on what remains to be known.  What are the things we need on focus on?  What are the open areas we need to work on and I think that is really the spirit of the Dynamic Coalition which I have been very, very lucky to be a part of.  The spirit of the coalition has been always to try and go out there and get as much data as possible no matter what shape or form and try to get lessons that synthesize so everyone is not doing the same thing over and over again.  And having a discussion on that every year, the platform of the IGF has been really useful because it brings together so many different stakeholders from different parts of the world to both realize and understand where we have gaps that are still missing, but also what we have learned so far.  So it has been really enlightening and I want to take the time to really thank everyone for sharing their time and being gracious enough to share their insights as well as their knowledge in the session today.  I know that the session will be available online for a long time to come for others to also get to know and access this and I hope the attendees both here as well as in the future benefit from the discussion we had today.  I certainly did and I'm incredibly grateful for it.  Thank you.  We are just coming to a close and we are closing exactly on time.  So I am also very, very happy that we are able to do so on time.  Thank you, everyone.  And very, very grateful for your presence.
>> LEON GWAKA:  Thank you so much.
>> SHARADA SRINI:  Thank you so much.
>> LEANDRO NAVARRO:  Great moderator.
>> MUGE HASEKI:  Thank you.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-dc-the-criticality-of-the-internet-for-sids-in-a-global-crisis^^

  
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Welcome, all, to our annual Dynamic Coalition of Small and Developing States meeting.  Good to see you all today.  Just for those that just joined us, as you see, all panelists, it means that we're operating as if it was ‑‑ I guess a Zoom meeting or ‑‑ you all can speak and share and at some point during the session we ask you to take a picture.
Thomas will welcome us and will quickly share our intention, it is for us to discuss what's happened in the last year when we met last in Berlin, Maureen was remote, everybody else was physical will there, Rhea Yaw Ching, June Parris, I believe everybody else, was there.  We have talked about doing a whole list of things and unfortunately, what's happened since, COVID.  Our session today actually is going to really push that agenda, as you see in the chat, I see a lot of people joining us.  Hello.  We're discussing that today and in the interest of time, I'll ask Maureen to give us an introduction and I know Maureen would like to share a bit about the memories of Marilyn Cade that passed away unfortunately untimely yesterday.
Over to you.
>> MAUREEN HILYARD: Thank you.  Thank you.  Thank you, everyone who is here today.  Just very briefly, I just want to welcome everyone to our 2020 IGF session of the Dynamic Coalition on Small Island Developing States in the Internet Economy and I'm really feeling really good about today's session and it is really great to see we're growing as an organization, gaining traction within the regions and the IGF as well.  Thank you for being here, for acknowledging that we're an important part of the IGF ecosystem and I'm really looking forward to the rest of the session.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you.  Thank you for introducing yourself and the session.
I would ask you to say a brief bit on Marilyn.
>> MAUREEN HILYARD: Yes.  I just wanted ‑‑ I thought it would be really good if we sort of acknowledged, she's someone special who, you know, has just become so dear to the heart of many people, you know, within our area as well especially through ICANN and the IGF.  I think more than ICANN, we'll miss her voice in public if he rim announcing, "Hi, my name is Marilyn Cade, also with a searching query on an ICANN issue that concerned her.  To many of us, Marilyn was also a woman of joy, she will be so sadly pissed by all those that knew her and were inspired and encouraged by her.
Thank you.  Thank you. 
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much.
If you wish, you can post some thoughts in the chat on Marilyn and for those that don't know, there is an IGF link, there's a place to post comments and memories of Marilyn.  We'll really miss mare her.
There is a memorial service later.
>> It is 4:00 p.m. eastern which is 9:00 p.m. UTC. 
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: We'll look for details.
If you can, that would be great if you can get to that today.  Thank you so much.
With that sad news, Marilyn probably would have been with us today, she's been a friend of the SIDS, a friend of the world, pretty much like Glen and we'll really miss Marilyn.
All right.  With that, in the agenda, as you see, for those that are ‑‑ I guess I should share it now.  For those that are watching, we will be able to see our first item, it is really a report on this year's meeting, the year that has just gone, our intention is to help this run about 30 minutes and we would like to follow the order not of the speaker names but in terms of the groupings, so we want to start with Pacific, and what I will do, I will ask Maureen to facilitate this.
I will unshare my screen again and ask the Pacific members here today to share thoughts.  Our intention is to have each speaker not run more than 3 minutes for their initial interventions and certainly we do want to have everyone jump in as necessary to fill in the gaps with regard to the specifics.
Maureen, perhaps you can assist with that.
>> MAUREEN HILYARD: Correct.  Thank you.  
Thank you, Tracy.
I see that there's Cherie and I here at the moment of the people that were going to speak.  I'm not quite sure if ‑‑ I know we have another ‑‑ I'm not quite sure, we have some of the others from the Pacific joining ‑‑
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Dalsie is here as well.
>> MAUREEN HILYARD: Great.  We'll give a brief overview of what's been happening in the Pacific region and I want to start off with Cherie Lagakali, of course, our Chair of the PICISOC and doing wonderful things in the Pacific, and, of course, Dalsie Baniala, our MAG member.  So grateful to have her and I'll finish with a few bits and pieces.
>> CHERIE LAGAKALI: Thank you.  Hello, everyone.  My name is Cherie Lagakali.  I'm from Fiji.  Thank you, Tracy, Maureen, for having me here.  This is my first IGF, and I think that Maureen has learned the secret of if she needs me to attend something, she puts my name down as a panelist.
We have been lucky here in the Pacific, in fact, when talking about COVID‑19, the internet for the Pacific survived COVID‑19, I give credit to our hard working engineers and our Telecom operators, internet people, everybody has been at home but everybody has been able to work and work from home, it is a new thing for the Pacific to learn and to get used to.  Some things we have had to talk about, some of the things that's been done in the region, we started off the year in February signing off a memorandum of understanding with the APTLD, Asia‑Pacific top domain Association for an event that we'll be holding in Fiji in 2021, September, and the whole purpose of that MOU, it was that we could collaborate online and offline outreach educating and creating awareness for the larger at‑large community as well as the managers in the Pacific and that's something that's on track with, even though hotels in Fiji have been closed for the last 7 months, we're still putting that together, planning that.  We have been able to put together ‑‑ because that event, it will be a colocating for the Pacific IGF and we have created a Pacific IGF Working Group which has about 21 people in the Working Group and we're trying to make sure that it is very multistakeholder approach and also forward‑thinking approach.  We have people from the internet as well as the regulator in Vanuatu represented in that.
This year, even though after March, Fiji went in lockdown in March and before that, we were working towards a Girls in ICT day and the Internet Society with PICISOC and ITU to get people to where it was being hosted, but because of the travel, it had suddenly stopped.  In the middle of March some of our partners, we were I think ‑‑ it was a privilege for us that some of our partners were able to put together the Girls in ICT Day virtually.  And that was through the ICT and the Women in the Solomon Island Groups and they had a day event virtually and they had ministers represented in that.  We had some partners with information technology, it has been running eLearning in COVID‑19, putting together modules and going, visiting schools, helping schools getting more used to and learning online as well because schools were hard hit and closed as well.
There was awareness raising and we have had two fellows in the APRIGF and we have had people represented in a multistakeholder group and the program Committee, one of our members from PICISOC is a region of the Asia‑Pacific IGF and the mailing list, it has things being affected because of COVID‑19 and we have launched a project where we have virtual meetings, gathering the community on topics relevant to us.  We had a free, opensourced software discussion and we have had a discussion on cybersecurity where we invited the CERTS in the region that have been collaborating, on events we're regionally collaborating and that was good, we have launched Pacific Women in ICT and we have had two events and we're looking at an accessibility discussion, collaborating with ISOC's accessibility and the Pacific disability forum at the end of this month.  We have an education area that we launched in May and there is an eLearning at the end of this month as well. 
Another thing I'm involved with, putting together a global forum of cyber expertise specific hub but because of limited travel I'm having to make appointments with relevant stakeholders in the Pacific and have meetings with them virtually and online.  We also had thanks to Glen, we had some members that were invited to the virtual School of Internet Governance earlier from the Pacific that a number of people had signed on and also Maureen had been taking ICANN learning classes.  A lot of things we have been doing and a lot of things that we have still planned for the coming year for them.  We're excited, even though we couldn't do face‑to‑face outreaches we were doing a lot virtually and a lot of people were engaging, connecting with us.
That's it from me.
>> MAUREEN HILYARD: Awesome.  Yeah.
Cheri has given an overview of what's been happening in the Pacific and it is really cool.
Dalsie Baniala, decide want to add?  There will be another opportunity later.
>> DALSIE BANIALA: Thank you.  Hello, I'm Dalsie Baniala, I'm from Vanuatu.  I'm not on video right now because of my internet connectivity.
Anyhow, just to add on to Cheri, COVID has contributed positively in the development of ICT, especially for the leaders, it is precious for them to stay connected with international stakeholders and also COVID contributed with leaders and even internet leaders at all levels to discuss data protection activities, data protection issues and similarly, with the cybersecurity framework, so that's happening, for example in Vanuatu now, we realized if we continued to use virtual meeting, there has to be a cybersecurity legislation which is going to be debated this week ‑‑ sorry, next week ‑‑ and hopefully it will be approved and endorsed and enforcement.
At the same time, the Prime Minister and the team, they have started to discuss about how can data protection be taken onboard and how could that be addressed, not just nationally but maybe also internationally, regionally due to the limited resources.  Yes, we know the effect of COVID is very bad, people are dying, but at the same time, on the world of technology, I think it is also giving some positive opportunities for development and to especially address those who are disconnected, those who are yet to be connected and now onboard because, for example, for education, they have to stay online and connect with teachers.
Similarly, with the environment, so just to be short ‑‑ I think that people now are starting to move forward with more discussions and more actions in the ICT development.
Thank you.
>> MAUREEN HILYARD: Thank you.  Yeah.  
I guess that just to round it out, from my perspective, I think that it has been mentioned that one of the things that's been pushing with our Pacific members, it is to take greater interest in ICANN first of all through newsletter, announcements, and also through our ICANN learning courses where they can learn not only about at large but other communities within ICANN and what they need to know to participate and engage.
Cheri, you mentioned that the School of Internet governance, we're pleased, you know, that members of the Pacific have taken advantage of that and hopefully more will in the future sessions that are ran.  For nations like our own, we have not been able to establish our own SIDS but with all of the engagements we're trying to encourage with ICANN, it doesn't matter which part of the ICANN community you have, we want people to be involved.
It is important to recognize just how influential voices from our small island developing states are within the ICANN ecosystem and I think, for example, the ‑‑ I can attest, just because ‑‑ because people cannot see the small dot that represents your island and the Pacific and the Caribbean, whatever sea or ocean you're in, it doesn't hinder you from becoming a leader in ICANN and SIDS have had other successes this year that I have to mention.  I noticed my good friend Samuel is here and he's been a long‑time at‑large member, of course, and now he's been appointed to the council of the GNSO, the name supporting organization, the generic top‑level domains.  A recent member Javier from Puerto Rico has been appointed to the council of the CCNSO, the name supporting organization for country code domains and not forgetting Tracy, our own Tracy that's been recently appointed as the Chair‑Elect of ICANN's NOMCM, Nominating Committee, an important Committee of ICANN and I have to mention my own colleague Paula Hunter, one of the Vice‑Chairs of the Governmental Advisory Committee, the GAC for the second year.  These leadership goals are major achievements within ICANN, but it shows it is not impossible for anyone of a Small Island, Developing State actually get there.  What I'm trying to encourage is, yeah, you get involved in ICANN and, you know, it is doable and achievable.  
Thank you. 
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much.  We have had a few people joining us Henriette, a dear colleague from the ICANN NOMCOM and I'm privileged to have you with us today.  We have Pablo, many others joining us.  Thank you for all joining us today and contributing.  
Thank you so much for that great summary.  It is not all that we have in the Pacific team, but that's an interesting and informative introduction or discussion for today.  We have coming up next, we'll have a discussion from the Caribbean and in that list we have quite a few speakers.  I'll ask given that it is an overview, that would be relevant, I will ask Nigel Cassimire, the CTU's Telecom specialist and acting Secretary‑General and happens to be the Caribbean IGF convener to discuss with us some of the going-ons in the Caribbean, especially with the COVID‑19 and how that's affected us here in our IG discussions, plans of action, as well as everything else.
Over to you to start that discussion.  Thank you. 
>> NIGEL CASSIMIRE: Thank you very much, Tracy.
I'm not sure how many other presenters we would V I see Carlton and June and I'm not sure what aspects they want to bring that will be interesting.
I'll basically say that since the last IGF the CTU basically, the telecommunication Union, we convened the Caribbean internet governance forum where we seek to build consensus among our Caribbean stakeholders on internet governance policies related to the Caribbean.  We have also taken the approach of trying to identify, focus on the IG issues of greatest relevance for the Caribbean and that's priority for the Caribbean because I'm sure that being a small island, developing states forum, you will appreciate the limitations to the availability of resources and in particular human resources where people are committed to a broad range of activities.
We in the CTU having done this for several year, since 2005 in terms of internet governance we have documented our consensus on a documentary called a Caribbean internet governance policy framework and part of the ongoing work of the work in the governance forum, it is to keep that consensus current.  Part of what we're doing, updating the last issue of that document, which is in 2016, which is work we have been doing with updated SU4 which we had hoped to get out this year, 2020.  Given the restrictions put on because of coronavirus, restrictions particular, we have made progress but not the amount that we would have expected to have met.  Notwithstanding, we were able to hold our 16th Caribbean Internet Governance Forum in late August, August 26 to 28 this year and COVID‑19 has brought home the realization to the world, I think, the need to accelerate digital transformation, use the technologies to continue life, livelihood.  The theme was accelerating internet governance, internet governance matters and the overall objective, we south to discuss key issues, particularly in the context of COVID‑19, we did what we usually do, taking liaison reports from regional, international internet governance fora and we worked as I said on updating our policy framework document.
Just to give you some numbers in terms of the level of success we have had with this forum, we had 72 registered participants.  It is a little higher than our normal average, normally we would get around 50 or so.  With the online modality, we have used Zoom conferencing, that also allows you to bring in additional participants.  We had 72 registered participants and we had liaison reports from four other IGF, three ‑‑ I should say ‑‑ we had from Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago and then we also had the UN IGF, the IGF secretariate also participating.  Over the three days we had 7 panel sessions and a new feature in our youth forum, a youth‑themed session, that was basically ran by the students guild of the local University, the University of the west Indies, their campus, and they looked at different aspects of digital transformation.  We also had three workshop sessions where we looked ‑‑ where we advance the work of updating our work and policy framework document.
I think we did reasonably well there and I expect that we'll have a report, I had hoped to put the link to it in the chat while talking here, but it is not quite ready and it will be ready soon and will be available on the website.
Just to let you know, we have identified six strategic priority areas for the current year, one unfortunately, it is the infrastructure for appropriate connectivity, broadband infrastructure or broadband connectivity or otherwise depending on the applications we're talking about.
The second, internet technical infrastructure, and there we look at critical internet infrastructure and all of the procedures around the internet governance work.
So ICANN stuff and IP address, all of these things.
The third area, legal and regulatory frameworks.
The fourth, internet content, everything around the content with a special focus on local content.
The fifth, capacity building and the last area, it is research.  Those are the areas that we tend to focus on and those are the areas that we have documented in the policy framework.  It is available on the website, the SU3.
What we got done was that we were successful in updating fundamental statements of vision, mission, priorities for SU4 of the policy framework.  As I said, we initiated a youth‑oriented segment.  We addressed infrastructure services and government related aspects of the theme of accelerating digital transformation, and in doing that, we had a session on things like enhancing XPs, data protection, privacy, that's a recurring theme in our recent IGFs and government service, putting government services online, we had a rendition as well about fin techs in the system and technology service, Cloud policies and content standards like, for example, Facebook community standards and that sort of thing.
Specifically related to the COVID impact, we looked at the strategies for achieving recovery in the areas like tourism and education as well.
I think there was some good discussions, some areas that we may have been able to identify common action going forward. 
As I said, the report, it will be posted shortly on the CTU website at CTU.int.
Looking forward, we're going to continue our thrust to build Caribbean consensus.  The existence of national IGFs has come through the work of the CTU and the IGFs and we'll continue to push the development of more national IGFs and we also will leverage online facilities to continue and enhance intersessional collaborations.  It is still the plan, to resume our online discussion fora in internet governance and we were supposed to get it done earlier this year with a launch of a new website because of the delays caused by the COVID‑19 lockdowns and so on, the website will not launch until probably next month and we will again seek to get the discussion going.
I'll stop there because I know there are other people to speak.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much.  I appreciate that.
In the interest of time, we have exhausted our first block to cover what's been going on in the region.
However, the second block that's in the agenda, we'll segue to the changed screen and I'll put the title in the chat, to discuss the importance of the internet for SIDS and I would ask a couple of our other speakers to kind of bridge the gap between what's happening in the region and the Caribbean and the second topic immediately so we can get this really going, it is a matter of covering the Caribbean as a whole so the other regional speaker that we have today, Bevil Wooding, from ARIN, giving us a brief synopsis of the ‑‑ of what's been happening in the region and also bridging fully into this discussion and on the impact of COVID‑19 and what that means to Small and Developing States, especially the Caribbean and after that I will ask other speakers, Carlton and Lance, June, others to jump in to sort of give perspectives from their particular countries.
Over to you u.
>> BEVIL WOODING: Thank you.  Thank you, again, for convening this.  I think this is a really valuable for rim for the SIDS, it is good to see so many familiar faces even virtual, it is always good to be together however and whenever we can.
I don't think there is much difference in terms of the impact that the pandemic has had on the developing states in the Caribbean as in other parts of the world.  I mean, one of the things I would start the summary around is the whole issue of how much the crisis that COVID‑19 has represented has actually been a blessing or a benefit in terms of the acceleration of a lot of what was proclaimed and a lot of what was prayed for and pleaded over the past few years concerning the need to build out internet infrastructure and putting a focus on technology as an enabler.  COVID‑19 has been an accelerant of unprecedented effectiveness I would say in terms of the impact in the region.  Like so many other parts of the world, economies have been locked down, borders shut up, people have had to work from home and what happened in the short‑term is that the pandemic put a spotlight on many gaps we have been speaking about for so long concerning weak infrastructure and the unevenness of internet access and the issue of meaningful connectivity, not just internet access going to rural communities but connectivity that can actually enable economic activity and social activity in a particular way.
I want to look at the impact of COVID‑19 and the internet and its evolving inference on SIDS in this light, small businesses, micro enterprises, I think they're a major contributor to the community.
There is also a unique role in terms of how deeply they're embedded in local communities.  It makes sense that the types of job loss, the suspension of economic activities in many sectors have triggered some very important public policy discussions around ePayment, digital circuits incentives for local hosting, encouragement of local digital content.  None of the information is unfamiliar to us, we have talked about them for some time.  What we have now, it is a new attention being placed by policymakers on what does really take to strengthen that infrastructure in our territories and how are these things best funded when the typical, traditional routes like development agency funding can't move fast enough or will not be tailored enough to meet the specific requirement of local communities.
What's happened in the last 8 months is that the discussions around educating governments, public sector officials, public policies it is going to a other level, the impact of the CTUs, the public policy forum, the collaboration that allows for a lot of the issues that do the simple task of creating a new level of consciousness around how does the internet impact economic decision making, how does the internet and all of the mysterious things we teach about so naturally how do they factor in to the public policy decision making process and what's the bottom line impact on constituent and communities that are facing such hardship as part of COVID and those discussions have been a big part of why the acceleration has taken place.  This issue of digital transformation to me, it is now no longer just a buzzword, it is a necessity for survival with the cutting off of revenues for many of the countries in the Caribbean I can say, tourism revenues represented the largest contributor to GDP, with the falling off of a cliff of the revenue, governments are scrambling desperately to find digitally enabled alternatives.
Getting people back to work requires the internet, keeping kids in school, requires the internet, having businesses continue to operate, requires the internet having telecom operators who monitor and scrutinize to ensure that they provide effective quality reliable, consistent internet services, it is now a requirement, not an urgent requirement, but it is with the regulators across the region and they're up to the task and the ISPs are responding because the businesses now depend on it.  If I had to sum up with digital tall transformation and how it relates to, trying not to go too quickly but I want to leave time for further discussion, critical internet infrastructure, deployment, autonomies network, those have been the spotlight of the conversation in communities like the Caribbean networking group and others, cybersecurity is receiving attention like never before.  Part of what happened in the midst of COVID, there was a spike in cyber attacks and there is a spike in misinformation and false information coming across the channels as new unprepared users started to get online and the cybersecurity discussion is one of the major issues that has to be contended with.  Many of the jurisdictions are dealing now with the issue of trying to find a working definition for meaningful broadband connectivity.  On the dim tall transformation services side, the electronic services, online ports, justice delivery, it is actually critical to keeping society stable in the midst of this current issue, online marketplaces, online portal and hubs, electronic payment, these are not discussion topics any more, it is implementation topics, the hot topics around digital transformation has to do with enabling that environment and the persons that live in it.
I would like to point to the ‑‑ I would like to highlight the importance of education as part of the response characteristic that we have seen, the digital education content, digital literacy and train, both within the public and private sector, significant skills training to create a new class of competent economic contributors that are able to take their place in this evolving are landscape and we have seen the impact of that in Community Colleges, institution, in informal learning programs that are attender tempting to quickly onboard skilled people to deal with these services.  If I have to give an overview of the impact in the Caribbean, I believe it is also relevant to the smaller ‑‑ to the SIDS, that's key points, infrastructure, security, transformation services, facilitating rapid movement of sectors online and education of the human component that's looking very holistically both in the formal, informal education sector at skills that enable a new class of worker to emerge in the times of crisis. 
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you.
What I will do now, asking a couple of our colleagues from the Caribbean region to jump in on the same topic and specifically what they have been doing in their country. 
>> JUNE PARRIS: Thank you.
I don't have a lot to say, two colleagues, Nigel Cassimire and Bevil Wooding have said everything.  From my perspective, as a citizen, I have never seen things move so fast in the Caribbean.  I really have to congratulate ICT and governments because all of the things I have wanted over the years are happening in six months and I'm really proud of the Caribbean and the way they have moved and the guys behind this, the only complaint I have, the price of wi‑fi has increased, so that's something that we have got to come to terms with.
I think because we're getting so much in such a quick time we can expect increased prices in some aspects of the internet.  I'm not really complaining about that.  I'm just really happy that things are moving so fast that, you know, from 2021 I think we're all ready for 2021 and we'll catch up with the rest of the world hopefully by 2021.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much, June.
Let me see.  Is Carlton ready to jump in?  Lance? 
>> LANCE HINDS: Good afternoon, morning, night, good afternoon all, depending where you are.
On the Caribbean side, I'm from Guyana and we're slightly different from the rest of the Caribbean in terms of terrain.  Certainly when COVID hit and the restrictions were put in place and there was a move to go to the internet space to provide services in education, we ran into immediate difficulties, primarily because of the same terrain, the mountains in the South, the connectivity, rail connectivity probably 14 miles outside of Georgetown, anything beyond that becomes difficult so a lot of it was creativity in terms of how do you continue to provide this level of connectivity, providing education, providing service, despite the fact that you have these challenges.  A lot of things were tried, community wi‑fi, community networks and so in a village you have the internet connectivity and we would get devices like putting content on devices so that students can access those and then there are some connectivity so we take it over there, we update the information and bring it back and all kinds of things that we had to do in order to see as much as possible if we can provide basic services.  In particularly, education, to those rural, internet communities who simply could not get it and I think certainly in our case, when we talk about public policy, we're going to have to continue the conversation as to how we provide persistent connectivity in these areas, it is huge, it is vast.  I have gone to villages 10, 12 hours out of Georgetown, 15 hours’ drive from Georgetown, just to look to see if we could provide some decent connectivity of some kind in those areas.  Certainly as we talk about connectivity, and it is a give than internet is necessary.  It is a given that we have to be able to find a creative way to do that.  There are some projects onboard that would seek to provide connectivity in those areas.  The challenge, of course, it is going to be even though the capital is a loan, a grant, the costs for the activity it is a currently stands, it's a challenge.  It is all of those things that are they ‑‑ there are many moving parts in terms of how do that.  Certainly as we have to tailor some things in terms of in the SIDS context because we're a little different even though the philosophy is the same and the need is the same but we have some specific challenges that are going to be ‑‑ will have to be addressed directly, if the internet is spread, for a sort of business and to be able to spread in such a way that we deliver the content, deliver the services and we deliver all of those things that are required.  That's a work in progress.
We hope that ‑‑ there are restrictions all over Guyana, some of the villages are closed.  We hope that next month and by December, early 2021 that there is some relaxation of the restrictions and we can get back to see how we can provide connectivity and see creative ways to develop content going forward.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much.
On that same note, I just want to perhaps close off, the countries who are here from the Caribbean by asking ‑‑ I see ‑‑ 
>> CARLSON SAMUELS:  Can I jump in?  Hello everyone.  You can hear my choice I imagine. 
What I want to kind of emphasize is how the COVID crisis is a blessing in disguise in terms of accelerating digital transformation.  It has a tail on it that will do things that all of us who are here have been working on for so many years and seeing very little in terms of progress, as you say, June, it is something that's just wonderful to bow hold.
The big issue here, in a digital transformation, it is in government and how the government works and the requirements to make it work, so simple things like now that we couldn't do face‑to‑face payments for social payments, you have to go to ePayment, and the role of the internet in enabling that as part of what the things that you need to do.  For example, in policy areas, you have identity and you have to ensure that people are knowledgeable about what they do with the technology that they have.  There is now greater emphasis on digital literacy and the public policy perspective, the public policy posture, it has changed rapidly around that.  Same with education, the problems in education here it emphasized what it means for meaningful connectivity.  This is something that others would know about and what some of us have been saying for years, that we need the internet to do things with it, the economic things with it, our measure of this has to be different from just having a connection and that's it, whether you're online, offline.  These are the kinds of things that are coming forward now.  I don't know how many of you would have seen the paper by the Association for the internet, our colleagues are on that, they have had a conversation with Michelle and ICT Pulse, I don't know if Michelle is here where that became the issue as to what we do now to determine what is meaningful connectivity.  The regulatory responses, they're being pressured to move forward.  This is a great thing.  You have people that are ‑‑ that wouldn't understand what the quality connection means and all of a sudden, they're using their phones to send kids to school and the service is dropping and we can't afford it.  The payment systems that they have, and the needing of the service, all of these things are being heightened regulatory attention so it is a good thing.  I hate to say it.  It is a good thing for the things that we have been advocating all of these many years, the crisis.
There is one thing that's of concern and this is where I think that we have to keep an eye on, it is the way ‑‑ it is the response, the public policy response to misinformation on the internet.  It has become now a matter of grave concern and the public policy response, we have to be guarding against that and that cannot be the answer.  Those of us that understand how these things work, we have to ‑‑ I know it is a stretch, folks, all of us who have been in this fight for a while, we're going to have to take a little bit more on in helping people to understand what kinds of responses are responsible responses.  It is very important for us to get involved and begin to understand how the response from the public policy perspective might actually hinder the kind of things that we're talking about, more access, more meaningful connectivity, more use utilization for economic activity and economic development.  This is the kind of ‑‑ these are the kind of issues that are coming forward now and I hope we don't ‑‑ we don't want to give up the fight just yet.  That's about all I can say.
Thank you.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much, Carlton.
I appreciate that intervention and just to repeat, Carlton is from Jamaica, a larger smaller development state in the region.  Going from large to smaller, we have St. Lucie and Diedre is asking for the floor.  Go ahead. 
>> Deirdre Williams:  Can you hear me?  Hello.
I'm from a little island.  I happen to be team teaching a history course with my husband at the Community College here when the virus broke and a lot of other things broke as well.  The thing that's troubled me all through the situation of participants has been the fact that the necessity to upgrade the human beings has been glossed over and forgotten about, we do a lot of talking about the technology but I was amazed how many of our colleagues at the Community College really were not digitally literate, how many of the students, young people are supposed to be ‑‑ they know it all, but they don't.  They got lost and stuck as well, they needed ‑‑ there was a lot of things they needed to learn so one thing I would like to see happening is a growth in bringing the human beings up to speed because I think nothing else will work.
You can have a wonderful broadband, but if the human beings don't know how to use it, you just may as well go and whistle.  Another thing that happened, when the virus started and everything very abruptly switched from face‑to‑face to online, it was the disconnect between the techies and the non‑techies, and the proliferation of really clever bells and whistles software apps to do things the capacity of the broadband ability to do things on, that may sound doomy and gloomy but there are things that we can do about it and I hope we'll begin to do them.  
Thank you.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much. 
I see Paolo would like to speak, but I'm asking if there is anyone from Trinidad and Tobago to jump in and to give insights and input into the discussion.
>> JACQUELYN MORRIS:  Hey.  I was typing ‑‑ I thought we had a short time but since we have time, I'll talk from the judiciary from Trinidad and Tobago which I work for right now as well as the online education area internet in Tobago where I also work and if I have time, I can mention the government part, the government implementation part where I also work.
To start with the judiciary:  The judiciary had started this going virtual since before 2013, but in the 2013, 016 Strategic Plan, one of the reason was they wanted to become the citizens of the judiciary out towards a lot more of the people in Trinidad and Tobago but there is a cost.  The legal court, it is very expensive, outfitting a court is very expensive.  They decided to start doing that, there was also the cost of running the risk of bringing prisoners into the courts and there was also a risk of people coming in and paying money and having lots and lots of cash in these areas and courts.  They started off with programs to do remote court.  They started videoconferencing and in about 2018/2019 three switched to internet base and none of this, it was really focused because of COVID, they were doing this already.  COVID just pushed the speed of it a little bit because a lot of people who are internet ‑‑ that were really already on the way to digitalization, but they weren't ‑‑ they had started their digital transformation but there was no real urgency, they were taking their time, going along.  That also happened in the government where projects had been onboard with the information since 2016 and there had been projects and so on and the government, they were moving slowly, they needed approval, cabinet would take time, and everything ‑‑ a lot of things were ready and proposed so that when they decided yeah, we have to go ahead, start doing this, that's when we have only now really started implementing program, a lot of things, so that cabinet would like a two‑year program for digital transformation for the government, which is a really, really short time, but a lot of things could possibly happen in that time because there were plans earlier.
Education, it is an area that we had had some training since 2012, they had been sending people to learn about blended learning, integrating internet and virtual learning, training them ‑‑ into the teaching that they were doing.
At the end of that time, we had trained I think 5 to 7,000 people, but since they were not using it, they obviously didn't remember anything that they had learned 5 years, 6 years before.  So a main issue that we have had in trying to train them up very quickly, it was that a lot of people don't understand the difference between face‑to‑face learning and online learning and there's been an idea that we must translate it literally so that we have children logging on to Zoom or Microsoft teams, Google people, whatever, at 8:00 in the morning and then logging off at 3:00.  Recently they have adjusted that and they still need children online for four hours or so.  The teachers are also keeping to that mindset, that's what they know.  That's what they have been doing for 15, 20 years, they don't have time, they have not had time to be trained in that before it was implemented so the training, redoing courses, teaching, that's all at the same time and of course what the natural response is, it is to fall back to what your accustomed to, comfortable with.  That's one of the major issues.  It is not even ‑‑ we can get laptops, we can get tablets.  Those are not real basic issues.  A real basic issue, it is that people do not know how to translate teaching in the classroom to teaching online and even if they do understand that there is a change, they don't necessarily want that change and that's one thing I have noticed across the board, it is that it is culture, it is a mindset change that we have a real issue that we need to focus on there because the technologies, you can buy it, you can ‑‑ that's not ‑‑ I don't think that's not as big of a problem as the people buying into it and making the changes.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much.  I think we have covered what we will call the English‑speaking Caribbean.  Before I move on to our final section, where we will want to have all of the regions jump in, I know we're missing some, but I would ask our colleague from the Caribbean, Pablo, who is probably watching the results as well of the election, to jump in.  Pablo is from Puerto Rico.
Let's see what you have to say about what's happening on all fronts.
Proceed. 
>> PABLO RODRIGUEZ:  Thank you.  It is an honor to have an opportunity to speak here and a pleasure to see so many familiar faces which I have not been able to share face‑to‑face with a big hug to all of you.
Just to notch on a few points, I was applauding what Maureen brought to the table on specifically I have heard several times we're small islands and we sure are, geographically.  As you all know, we're giants, and we have lots of things to contribute, and have to contribute to this community, to the global community, and as you know, already as we have mentioned, there is a number of leaders that come from this ‑‑ of these islands that are making an enormous contribution to ICANN and so many players in the ecosystem.  Let's keep that in mind.
Like has been mentioned from many of you, Carlton, Nigel, others, and you, Tracy, COVID has without a doubt become an accelerator.  This is the one positive thing when many people, the baker, the secretary, the paralegal who has small office did not think it was important to have a presence online, much less to charge for their services and or sell their products online, it was a big priority and now it is their number one priority.  We are talking and we have heard on all of the important subjects that were needing to be discussed about cybersecurity and so on, and just recently I completed my doctoral dissertation on the perceptions of IT decision makers on the use of technology in our region.  Out of the 47 to 60 LTDs in our region, 44 participated in this study and by no means think that when I talk about this, I'm talking about the technological part of that's been ‑‑ that wheel has been invented already.  What I'm looking at, it is the social aspects that may promote or impede the adoption, but not only this but so many protocols.  When it comes to that, I realize that every one of us play an important role in the adoption of the technologies and we need to become aware how the technologies may affect us and why it is important that the organizations with whom we do business or obtain services from have these technologies in place.  In other words, the cybersecurity is not an issue that belongs only to the technical community.  It belongs to the everyday person, for example, it is important to know if your bank is using IP receipts or not and if you don't, you should find out, you should ask.  If you don't know who to ask, there are so many people in this panel with whom you can talk to.  We have experienced many of the same issues that you have where our children have to go online and all they have is a phone for 3, 4 children in the house and how much are they paying per minute or per a gigabyte of services rendered and how much is that costing?  Is there a role that regulators should play in not only what becomes the billing but what is the role that the regulators have to play in order to ensure that our connections are safe and how much do they know about all of these protocols that need to be in place and should the government get involved in those things.  What I am trying to bring to the table here, it is that our participation, it is critical in the measure that we can become more involved in different venues such as ICANN learn and the virtual School of Internet governance and other virtual school and that's been virtual schools as you can get involved and begin to bring this idea, these questions and to get answers to it and act on them.  It is going to make a tremendous difference.
So the operator, it is in my interest to promote any initiative that can educate, enhance security and access to the internet and I think this is a fabulous venue that I am honored to participate in and I'm honored to be able to promote.
Thank you for this opportunity.  I put a link on my doctoral thesis on the chat if you would like to read it, it is free, if you have questions or want to comment Firth, don't hesitate to contact me.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much, Pablo.
It was a really good intervention especially coming from I guess a slightly different perspective.  Yes, we're in the Caribbean, but Puerto Rico, as you know, as many of you know, it is in many ways a part of the United States and given the situation that the U.S. is facing currently there is some significant challenges that a country like Puerto Rico would be extra sensitive to.  That's important to bring to the table essentially amongst us in this small island and developing states category.
In this point, I put in the chat our next block of discussion which is really our next steps.  Most of our discussions in the IGF, you know, sometimes people criticize us for not having a way forward, next steps, decision points, so what we're trying to do as a Dynamic Coalition, it is to really formulate something specific that we can put forward as part of the IGF they have asked to us create a list of voluntary commitments as well which would look in some way going along with the action plan. 
What I would like to do now, is to have an open discussion.  I'll ask Maureen, she may want to jump in, I'll ask colleagues ‑‑ sorry about the vehicle driving, very loudly!  I'll ask colleagues to jump in now and to try and participate as fully as possible in the final 20 minutes.
Maureen, is there anything awash to add at this point to kick us off and for everybody else, please raise your hand to jump in at this part of the discussion to contribute in terms of formulating the next steps of the action agenda.
>> MAUREEN HILYARD: Thank you.  Thank you, Tracy.  I want to be very, very brief.  I just ‑‑ I have really appreciated hearing from and seeing everyone participating today.  It has been absolutely fabulous.  I think from my perspective, based also more than I have been involved in the IG side and like Cherie, she may have a summary of what's our next steps.
I think I just sort of would like to consolidate sort of what I said earlier, it is that we really do need to get more people from our small island states involved as Pablo mentioned and also that there are resources there that we can actually help and just remember that we're always available for any support that you might neat.
I'm really keen to hear what others have on their plate as well.  Thank you. 
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: We're not seeing hands as of yet.  If we wait one more second ‑‑
>> RHEA YAW CHING: I would like to contribute.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Please!  Go ahead. 
>> RHEA YAW CHING: I have been listening to the very vibrant discussion going on, I want to jump off something that Pablo said that could help us with our commitments.  It is that we do ‑‑ we do contribute, that's clear, and Jackie said something that was also important, we have been dealing with this for many, many years as a vulnerable set I've lands, particularly on the disaster recovery side we have been talking about this and making iterative steps along the way.  COVID presented this boon for, I want to highlight based on what everybody was talking about, some of the ‑‑ some of the areas that many countries, and if we combine them all makes this a great opportunity to have various test labs if you will.
Talking about IXPs, we have an obvious lead in Granada, education on ICT and education, I have seen an indigenous solution rollout and that's impressive, the Bahamas, the OCS, decash, both numbers 1 and 2 central bank, 1 and 2 deployed worldwide when talking about digital financial inclusion we're on the map.  Digital legislation, precursors to national digital identity systems already passed in Jamaica, moving on to the next steps.  Barbados has gone light years, you know, ahead on the smart government initiatives while other governments have done activities, I don't want to discount that.
I have seen Antig have open‑innovation architected in the education policies which means that they were able to create opensource‑innovative software and platforms to pivot immediately as they went digital.  Guyana, the test bed for connectivity opportunities in remote, not just rural, but remote areas and, of course, in the judiciary, we have talked about the judiciary pivoting the judiciary in Trinidad and Tobago long ago.
We have so much to talk about and we have so many examples that are being led by different countries and this is just the Caribbean speaking and of course I heard from the Pacific as well talking about free, opensource software initiatives that I think going forward if I have to triangulate the opportunities for commitments we should be doing them as test beds looking at various areas in countries or in countries with specific areas that are actually advancing faster than others based, of course, on local realities and showcase the efforts being done so that others can jump on that bandwagon. 
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: You set an excellent stage to proceed forward with this action plan and voluntary commitments.  I see Nigel would like to jump in now and I just want to remind everyone to feel free to raise your hands and jump in to the discussion.
>> NIGEL CASSIMIRE: It was an idea formulating in my mind.  I think what Rhea Yaw Ching's intervention, it was a perfect lead‑in to what I was going to say.  Yes, we're ‑‑ she gave all of the example, so on, but around the SIDS, do we know what success is that we're having?  Possibly the way forward, something we have to create then, it is some repository, someplace where we can share and maybe make contacts, leave contacts so we can contact one another.  Maybe there is an opportunity for this.  I was going to throw that out as general framework, but from the long list of things that Rhea Yaw Ching went through, some of the interventions before, there are so many things we could start with in such a case.  Thank you.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much.
This is something that we have actually discussed as Rhea Yaw Ching will recall in Berlin last year, we discussed the very same potentials of shared platform unfortunately as you know, COVID‑19 has derailed much of each island's thinking but as we push together, we wanted to push forward joining our hands across the oceans as we say it and this is moving and it is the right opportunity to find that space to go forward.  I list this as a voluntary commitment among the first ones, that we commit to share on the platforms and tied to this, we have discussed obviously developing a website for SIDS and that fell through the cracks.  I think that's something else I want to list.
I'm waiting for contributions from my numerous colleagues in the roundtable.  Numerous colleagues and I'm looking virtually at for them to jump become in and help me so I will not have to continue talking and filling time and space and I'm waiting to see if anyone would like to jump in.
Judith, thank you for helping me out.  Jump in, please.  Thank you. 
>> JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:  We have touched base on a little bit of the cyber challenges, and I think ‑‑ I think we should in the Pacific countries, other countries, we should work from a presentation I was at yesterday, that the GFCE has been doing a lot of capacity building, helping small islands create cyber strategies and so I would like to hear Cherie talk about the new capacity building tool but that could be one thing that we could also focus on because as more services get online and more people get online, the hackers are following.  It is a very short time when they're going to be attacking hospitals like they are in the U.S., hacking into cities like they are in the U.S. and holding things for ransom.  Everyone needs to build up their cyber capacity tools.  
The other hook, it is also we should look to the governments and get the governments to all work on acceding to the Budapest convention.  Once you do that, you then, instead of having only one country, you could have a whole bunch of countries at your ready and they're putting together a new protocol that will be helping more countries together and especially I think it has especially helped out other smaller countries, it is that they have a place to call and as the U.S., as many of the larger platform companies are based in the U.S. they are responsive to requests for the preservation of data.  I think that's something that we want to at least look at.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much, Judith.  Yes.
Those are some key potential action items that we can list on the table.  I'm hoping that my Rapporteurs are taking these notes for me so that we can compile these voluntary commitments for submission to the IGF secretariate.  Those are fantastic points and I see in the chat, yes, there is agreement.
Just before you jump in, Cherie, I want to remind everybody we have about 10 minutes left and I would like to end with a group shot.  If you need to touch up and fix up as we say, we'll turn on our cameras for a brief moment at the end and do a group shot.
>> CHERIE LAGAKALI: Thank you for highlighting that.
I have been recently appointed the Pacific liaison because of the scoping of a Pacific hub that the GFC is looking at for better coordination and collaboration in the area of cyber capacity building in the Pacific and they also have a civil portal where there is a lot of information sharing on work and tools that she's mentioned and I wanted to comment on the further discussion that I was involved in earlier this week where from a security perspective that's been found in the Pacific with the COVID‑19, a lot of organizations, countries have had to accelerate, get themselves online but Social Security is becoming an issue and the tough challenge of working between ‑‑ between ‑‑ yes, security is an issue, what cost what, are the tools out there, what's been mentioned and how do you convince organizations that this is something that you need, what is the priority and we're so quick at implementing there are no strategies on in two years what have you implemented now because COVID‑19, is it going to last, be sustainable?  One of the challenges that the Pacific is going to face or is starting to face, it is that it is a small community, it is a small community that is doing this work in cybersecurity, cyberspace, how do we get the rest of the communities and other people involved, how do we expend this community so that more people will be interested in interesting these discussions and, you know, it can't just be on the CERT, but community awareness and everybody involved and really how can we look at that.  That's something that the SIDS could focus on.  A point we can look into on how to grow the community, that would be something really great.
Thank you.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Thank you very much.  Yes.  I really think that especially for the Pacific perspective, we really need to get moving on these action items so that the SIDS can drive forward, I really believe that we need to cooperate together and push forward as a unified grouping and I have very strong belief in that.  I'm hopeful that maybe this platform, the coalition, maybe they can drive us forward in this area.
We have 7 minutes left.  I'm waiting to see if there are any further interventions coming in.  I don't know if I could probably lean on Andrea, Jane, someone who may ‑‑ you know, not from a small island developing state or Peter, just to give us some thoughts, quick shuts on what they're thinking that could happen from their work from the services perspective.
>> Jane Coffin:  I will go quickly.
My father comes from an island, I come from a sort of island, there is a land bridge between the points on where I'm from and the northeast part of the U.S.  I have lived on islands, worked on them as well, the environment is very different and you do know everybody and there are things that do need to get done and COVID is making our work a little bit hire but also easier as many of you said.  You're see change, June mentioned this, let's take that opportunity, there is so much great knowledge here and across the IGF and in our different organizations where we can help you, we have toolkits, we have brains that can be put to use, and I like the idea of staying in touch during this period because we do need to see change.  We need to see people get connected, making sure that they're secure, we need to make sure that kids are okay online, that parents can work and study and do what they need to do and to stay in touch with people right now.  This is really important, the social side of things, because you get a little depressed with what's going on around the planet busying all of you, it always invigorates me.
I'll be quiet and touch it over to others.  Keep up the good work and continue the connectivity with others to build a bigger community. 
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: Yes.  Just asking for your perspective especially as the MAG Chair, how do you think that SIDS can work together especially within the coalition to really get us really moving on these action item it is and the voluntary commitments.
>> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thank you.  It is good to listen to you.
A thing that really strikes me about SIDS, it is that many of you are in government, regulator, in Civil Society, there's a ‑‑ it seems fast you're just that much closer to actually working together tan is the case in many other parts of the world and I think what the pandemic has done, it is highlighting the need to go back to basics, it is as people were saying in the beginning of the session, we need to address the equality, the inclusion, the access, the infrastructure, the human capacity and that is something I think ‑‑ as Jane was just saying ‑‑ people should stay connected but I think the ability you have to quite quickly connect policy with action, with implementation, it is actually quite unique and that's something that you can document and mobilize and I think inspire other people.  I don't see that happening, I don't see government pulling together with business, with Civil Society in most of the places where I work, I see them often just pulling in opposite, different directions.  As for the IGF, I just think it is a privilege for the IGF that you find it a worthwhile platform and I just hope that the IGF can continue to be a worthwhile platform for you.
>> TRACY HACKSHAW: I know you fought very hard to get this Dynamic Coalition moving and together and I'm very gratified to see us altogether.  We need to move beyond talking amongst ourselves and as far as action as soon as possible.
I think it is time for group shot.
I will wrap up by saying thank you for joining us today.  I think your Rapporteurs have gotten plenty of submissions to share with you if you have not joined the meeting list, let me know.  Many of you know my contact information, you can let me know and I'll share that with you so that you can get the report as well as the voluntary commitment listing.
It is a different IGF this year, a different meeting.  Certainly it is good to see everyone.  To do that, I would ask that we all turn on our cameras and straighten up ourselves.   
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-net-neutrality-at-times-of-covid-19-%E2%80%93-raw^^

>> I will share the link.  I am going off for now and I will come back after.  
   >> LUCA BELLI:  It looks like we can get started.  Good morning, to everyone and welcome to the 2020 session of the IGF Coalition on Net Neutrality.  We have today a quite wide and diverse set of panelists, and we are also presenting our annual outcome that has been developed in partnership with the Coalition of Community Connectivity, and the book, “The Value of Internet Openness at Times of Crisis,” and that is the main issue we will discuss today of Course from a net neutrality perspective, and highlighting the various faces of this and I think we have ‑‑ we have all understood very harshly over the past months the value of Internet governance, the value of Internet access.  We have been obliged since the beginning of the years when COVID‑19 started to spread to digitize everything in our life, health, leisure, public services, our essentials, everything migrates to online work.  What we still have to understand is that first, a huge part of the world's population still doesn't have Internet access.  And opt other hand, a great part of the Internet population that is connected is partially connectedded, and it is one of the key points that we want to explore today.  So not only the essential value of Internet openness, meaning open access for those who have access, but how this is essential every human being in this specific moment not to be kept out of any basic social or work interaction and keep enjoying his or her fundamental rights.  What we're collecting in the book today is a set of opinions that really describes the different faces of Internet and also describes that even if you have, if it you have the luck of having Internet access, there is still a huge variety of, a huge number of restrictions that can either be politically or economically motivated, and that affect how we enjoy connectivity, and this can enormously restrict how we enjoy Internet access.  What's very important to understand is that statistically, someone that has a charter or limited blocked Internet access is as someone that who doesn't have Internet access.  So we don't really have an idea of fen on none of how people concretely enjoy Internet access because statistically speaking, the current definition we utilize to identify someone that has Internet access a person that accesses the Internet at least once over the past three months, and this fails to consider a huge chunk of nuances of how we could enjoy Internet access.  Someone that enjoys, that can access Internet, but only can access the websites that are approved by his national government is considered as a individual that is connected and someone that only receives zero‑rated applications is considered someone that is a connected individual, but of course it is not their reality.  Someone that only has access to a part of the Internet is not a true Internet user that can contribute to the evolution of the Internet through the connectivity that can content and services that will contribute to the Internet.  That is precisely the Internet openness and that is precisely what we'll discuss today with a excellent set of panelists.  I'm not going to introduce them all now but one by one in the interest of time management, and actually I would also like to say that together with me to give introductory remarks, it was also supposed to be here with us, Nikhil Pawha, a co‑editor of the book, importantly for some quite serious health issue, he's not here with us today so we wish him to be if good health as soon as possible, and we start with introductory remarks of another star of Internet Governance who is Anriette Esterhuysen the Chair of the Multistakeholder Group of the IGF and also one of the co‑authors of the book having penned the post‑phase of the booklet that gives us a lot of interesting thoughts and elements on why Internet openness is also very important for an open Internet governance.  Anriette, without further ado, I would like to ask you to start the dance with your introductory remarks.
   >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thanks, very much, Luca and thanks, everyone.  Don't call me a co‑author.  That really doesn't do any justice to my contribution.  I'm an admirer, and I'm a supporter of this initiative.  It's really extremely important, and I think that thinking about what it really meensz to have openness and neutrality on the Internet is a continuous task, and I think that's what is so powerful about this collection, is that it's taking principles that we've cared about for a long time, but it's putting them in a contemporary context and thinking about how they need to be applied now, so that's all I have really to say, Luca.  I just want to express my admiration and support for the endurance of the work that you've all done and the tbact that it's been continuous and evolves and that it responds to the question that you address, but that it responds to it in a fresh way every year taking on new challenges.  So that's all from me, and I really look forward to hearing the authors.  I do have to leave for a while, but I'll come back.  Back to you, Luca.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Anriette, for these encouraging points, and actually it is also very important to have you as a part of the discussion, in not only this discussion, but several discussions we have had over the week about Internet openness about digital comments, interoperability and many of the dots that we are trying to connect.  So thank you very much for this opening elements, Anriette.  Now let's start to dig into the details of our session today.  The first speaker that I want to introduce is Frode Sorenson.  He's a good friend and also a Senior Advisor at Norwegian telecoms regulator NKOM and has been chairing the expert group for almost a decade and he is one of the authors of the book and exploring how net neutrality and COVID‑19 met over the past months in Europe and what sort of emerged with the increased traffic growth in Europe and how this has affected or has been effected by the relationship in Europe.  So Frode, without further ado, please go ahead.  The floor is yours.
   >> FRODE SORENSON:  Many thanks for this kind introduction, Luc, a.  I've been looking forward to this presentation.  Acknowledging the different situations in the different places of the world, this is a European experience, which I will give you now in three main points.  The first one is about the relevance of net neutrality.  The second one is about the impact of the Internet technology, and the third one is about the impact of the open Internet regulation.  Looking first at the relevance of net neutrality.  When the pandemic reached Europe in March, we were faced with lockdowns in many countries and people had to go back to their homes in teleworking, online teaching, and also social interaction was done from their homes, and there was thereby a significant increase of Internet traffic allowed, and in particular because of video conferences that were used extensively in schools and in working area, and this really showed the importance of the open Internet because without an open Internet, we would not be able to do these kind of activities from homes.
Then the problem arised would net neutrality regulation cause any problems, for example, for operators regarding limitations for how they could manage their networks, and that leads to my second point, the impact of the Internet technology itself.  When looking into the technology, it's important to distinguish between the network layer and the application layer when we discuss net neutrality.  The regulation of net neutrality applies to the network layer, but measures can be taken in the network layer but also in the application layer, so the network layer measurement, measures are typically referred to as traffic management.  The application layer measures are typically done in the endpoint, referring to the end‑to‑end paradigm which is well known on the Internet.
If you look at the application layer first, we have several functions that really came into play in this situation, the transport protocols, TCP, and now much used Quick Protocol executes congest I don't know control which means that the endpoints are actually slowing down when there is aian situation in the network so the endpoints are cooperating with the network to manage the situation.
This is also done for some of the applications, video streaming typically applies dynamic adaptive streaming, which increases mechanisms that are doing the coding or the video whereby the traffic load is lower when there is congestion in the network.  Large could be tent providers are also using extensively CDNs, content distribution networks, which are locating content closer to the end users whereby the traffic load on the network is decreasing.
So all of these measures applied in the application layer and they're automatically conducted when the congestion situation arises.  So what about traffic management on the network layer?  That leads me to the third point.  The European Open Internet Regulation is applicable also in this situation, so shortly after the pandemic came to Europe, Baric and the European Commission had a joint statement presenting the views of the situation, and they committed to preserve the open Internet in the understanding that the open Internet is really important for us when we are not able to meet physically.
In addition to that, it was also emphasized that the ISPs, the Internet service providers, also have tools that they can do reasonable traffic management, of course, and in the European law there are also measures called exceptional traffic management that are allowed if necessary, and such measures could also be application specific, actually.
And finally, the regulators typically also went into a close dialogue with the different stakeholders of the network to follow the closely and cooperate with the stakeholders in case problems arise where the governments and regulators might facilitate the development.
After this first announcement from the Commission and Barac, they regularly reported on the traffic situation on the European Internet, and the results from that showed that there was an overall traffic increase, a significant increase, typically around 30, 40, 50 percent in many countries so there was an increase in pressure on the network, but the overall situation, there were no major network congestion issues reported in this period.  There were actually minor situations that occurred, but ISPs were working with maintenance and operations in the networks to mitigate these problems.
In conclusion, what are the takeaways from the European experience?
First of all, the network neutrality rules are designed for such exceptional circumstances.
Resilience of Internet technology does a good job and ISPs may also use exceptional traffic management measures when needed.  At the same time, end users rights are safeguarded by this regulation.
In conclusion, overall, the European Internet infrastructure has coped well despite the increased load in Internet traffic.  Thank you for your attention.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much for this.  A very good technical points and policy points to start the debate, and we have also the chance of having with us today, who leads the net neutrality unit, the French Telecoms Regulator and it's very important to have their perspective today but only because the President of today could not with be with us and is one of the co‑authors of this book, but also because has very well implemented what is the impact of the pandemic of Internet traffic in the annual report, and has a very interesting conceptualization of the Internet as a common good that has to be fostered by public authorities, so without giving too much of a spoiler of your presentation, Aurore, please, the floor is yours and thank you very much for being with us today.
   >> AURORE TUAL:  Thanks.  Thanks for the invitation.  So a French regulatory authorities for electronic communication and contribution in France.  As a consequence the architect and guardian of the countries fixed on mobile telecoms.  As in many countries, the COVID‑19 crisis illustrated the degree to which people in France weren't only to stay connected to their working, personal, and cultural environments when at home.  The fact that a number of users were modified during the lockdown resorted in increase in Internet traffic as much as 30% according to estimated in France.  Also led to significant change in traffic profile with the usual evening spikes spread out across the day.  The situation raises a number of questions about Internet operation.  Were the networks properly scaled for certain traffic related to the crisis.  How can we ground compliance with net neutrality rules during this exceptional situation?  Regarding net neutrality took place both at European and national levels from the beginning of the public health crisis, and indeed to meet this unprecedented and increased demand for connectivity, one of the questions that was raised was whether it would be possible legally and technically for ISPs to prioritize the networks for certain content that was deemed essential, working, distance learning, and internal medicine.  The nondiscrimination rules imposed by Europe he's Net Neutrality Regulation it is not set in practice particularly when having to distinguish between similar streams, for instance, video conferencing and video streaming, or when services are being used for something other than their original proposal.  For example, using video game platforms for home schooling.
As explained by my colleague from NKOM Europe's net neutrality framework allow ISPs to take specific measures in case of risk of congestion on the networks provided these measures satisfy certain conditions, notably preventing having as little impact as possible on network traffic and giving equivalent treatment or equivalent traffic categories and not being applied any longer than strictly necessary.  This opens a permanent dialogue with ISPs.
In the end, the best way to tackle the issue was was a joint effort from all players, of course through for instance mentioning the interconnections when necessary.  Government and regulators through close monitoring of the situation, the issue of best practices and constant contact with the players and users modifies to lesson the load on the network and provider through modification of the practices and direct with ISPs.
Indeed, major content and service provider challenges impact on the networks warrants attention.  Today between this player of improving network management to place under the crisis, for instance, when rolling out new services, introducing certain options or posting updates to popular games online.  The benefits to establish a dialogue mechanism that would enable operators to anticipate and plan for these events even if permissionless innovation needs to remain the rule.  So far for the subject under asset purview, the development of contact tracing solutions to fight the spread of the epidemic also how important it is to ensure an open Internet being just telecom operators, and as for the role played by the two main mobile operating system providers, it seems increasingly vital to challenge the partners under technological choices what they place on app developers, extending the principle to an open Internet to include an operating system which is a step since 2018 seems more present than ever before.
To kk conclude, networks in France did not experience issues during the COVID‑19 lockdown that lasted from March to May and thanks to the telecommunication network capacity and performance and on the other to the mobilization of the ecosystem.  The net neutrality regulation has once again had had relevance and capacity to adapt.  More importantly, it's showing that when it comes to common assets, the law under the law of the strongest.  Baric and European Commission already reiterated this principle through the crisis, and ensure that this principle continue to be fully enforced despite the very singular circumstances and we'll continue net neutrality.  Is this ongoing crisis already has several lessons that will be useful to cope with lockdown in France but also to ensure that Internet remains a common good.  Thank you.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Aurore, for this illustration of the work that has been done by Baric also to cope with the current exceptional situation.  Also for raising a very important point that many of us also ‑‑ maybe of the members of this coalition have been voicing over the past couple of years, which is also the importance to look at Internet openness and not only exclusively for the classic net neutrality perspective, but also from other perspectives like the device neutrality perspective has been champions over the past couple of years and also thinking about the openness in terms of interoperability of operating systems or even maybe of applications, and that is something that has been raised along the week, but in several debates I have been participating in, and I have been receiving several feedback from friends and other members of this coalition with regard to the interest of orientating a little bit much ‑‑ or a little bit more, I'm sorry, the work of this group also on these other key issues which are indeed key for Internet openness besides, of course, looking at net neutrality.  Now to move a little bit it of our perspective from Europe and then to other parts of the world, let me invite KS Park, another good friend that is championing Internet openness and net neutrality since probably of this concept in South Korea, and he has been founding, he founded Openness Korea several years ago and professor for at Korea University scoip Law School and we have pleasure to have him here today speaking about latest evolutions in South Korean regulation and some concerning provisions that have been adopted in many, if I'm not mistaken, regarding the service utilization measures and other regulations that may contradict Internet neutrality in South Korea.  So please, KS, the floor is yours.
   >> KS PARK:  Thank you, Luca.  I think that COVID‑19 is forcing us to focus on the economic aspect of network neutrality, essentially the issue of termination fee.  Pre‑internet, formal free of speech granted us freedom to speak whatever we want, but never provided resources for actually delivering our messages to many people.  Post‑internet, network neutrality made sure that we are equipped with substantive freedom of speech which meebs means delivering messages to millions and millions of people without ever having to worry about the cost of actually delivering that data.
Pre‑internet, sending your message to 1 million people would have costed 1 million dollars in phone bills or postage, but post‑internet as long as you pay access fees to your local ISP, it is basically free, regardless of how many people are actually access your message.
But in Korea, there is an attempt by the government and the IS Ps that have formed an oligopoly to charge termination fee or equivalently charge for delivery of data packets, so it already back in 2016, they have implemented SPPR, sending network pays rule among ISPs where ISPs receiving more data or ISPs sending more data than they are receiving have to pay the other ISP that they are sending more data to, and that has already put a lot of pressure on the ISPs to be reimbursed, to be reimbursed for this SPNP fee exchange between ISPs from the users of the Internet, especially the content providers that are putting a lot of content online.
I think that COVID‑19 has increased the time that people spend online and essentially increasing the amount of data packets coming from those content providers through the network, and that increase in the volume of data has given excuses, given or opened the windows of opportunities for ISPs to make an argument that, oh, we got to be paid for delivery of all of these data packets, and to oppose that Mozilla epic early access now that have written letters to Korea's, to the country's science and ICT Ministry to stop trying to charge the termination fee or charge for delivery of data.
And but you know back in May as Luca said, the Congress, the legislature has passed a law that put the obligations on the content providers to make sure that the data is delivered to the users, which will again, work ‑‑ which will again break network ‑‑ which will go against the network neutrality because then whoever pays more for delivery will reach more users and more audience, and substantive freedom of speech that was guaranteed to everyone, even without much economic resources will be broken.
And I think at this point it's very important to notice that in California's Network Neutrality Law, there is a provision that specifically bans charging termination fee or charging for delivery of data to the telecos or ISP users, and because the California law has been locked in litigation battle in the U.S. because of a conflict with the Trump Administration, people have not paid much attention to it.  I think it's time to pay a lot of attention to it to make sure that the same thing doesn't happen outside Korea.  Thank you.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, KS.  Very interesting points that you are raising that have maybe learned from Korea's experience are but also from others ‑‑ from other countries or states experience and applied further context.  Very good points.
Now, to keep on continuing our world tour let's move to India where we have Smriti Parsheera, fellow of CyberBricks project and of public pollty of New Delhi, and Smriti who penned two chapters of the book and you have explored net neutrality and other issues from the Indian perspective.  We know that government has mandatessed Internet shutdowns and some restrictions in two states of India, so we have very concrete examples of restrictions ongoing in India in this moment, but we also know at the same time, the regulator is also designing a framework body to monitor net neutrality in India.  So, please, Smriti, the floor is yours, so tell us a little more about what is happening in India.
>> SMRITI:  Thanks, Luca.  A pleasure to join everyone in the session and to have contributed to the e‑book.  I have a couple of slides which I'll just put up.  There we go.  So as you know all of us who are following this space would know that India is one of the countries which could be said to have one of the most robust net neutrality frameworks in the world, and this is something which has come about between 2016 to 2018 through two instruments mainly.  One is regulation TRAI telecom regulatory authority came out with to ban any discriminatory tariffs based on the kind of content that one accesses, so all zero‑rating like services were barred.  Then later in 2018 we had more wholistic net neutrality framework come about through license and telecom agreements.  The interesting thing at that point was one of the recommendations made by TRAI to the government was that in addition to having these rules, we should have a monitoring framework where you have a multistakeholder body which takes an acteddive role in ensuring that these rules are being implemented.  And this is something which hasn't opinion put in place yet, but just about two months back we had a new set of recommendations from the regulatory authority, which went into some details about how this body should be rolled out.  So first on the question of who is going to be a part of it, what they recommend is that it will automatically be all of the telecom and Internet service providers, but also other stakeholders like content providers, researchers, Civil Society, people from government agencies, et cetera, who will be invited or nominated, so unlike the automatic members, these people are supposed to be nominated, but unfortunately the regulations are silent on how the nomination or invitation process is going to work.
The next part is what this body is expected to do, so there is some more clarity from the regulator and the recommendation is that it's not going to be something which does the enforcement on its own, but it's supposed to assist and advise the government in that enforcement function so advisory role on doing things like receiving complaints from people from their own members or from consumers investigating those complaints, making recommendations based on that.  And the other interesting thing, they role they want to ascribe to the body is they say they'll help in the monitoring and transparency of traffic management practices, so they say that basically every TSP and ISP will have to report what kind of traffic manage they plan to do or are doing and this will help with a public repository and putting it on the website so there is information and knowledge to consumers.  So while these are are, of course, great initiatives and we're moving in the right direction, where we're lacking in the recommendations is, of course, the question of how all of this is to happen, right.  So if we say all the ISPs will automatically become members, we're talking about, you know, 400 odd entities which are going to be members of this body, will we have 400 non‑ISP representatives also is the question that remains unanswered.  You know, will there be a balance between broad stakeholder groups, and of course among the ISPs there will be differences between large and small content players, whether Civil Society and consumer groups will genuinely represent the interest of these groups or is there a conflict of interest.  So those kind of issues are something, you know, which yet need to be looked at.  And also will there be transparency in the functioning of the body, will have to announce what investigations it's doing, why it's doing one versus the other investigation, and so those are questions that are remaining unanswered, but it's an interesting initiative which is being recommended.
The other, you know, issue that I wanted to touch upon is now that we've had these rules in place for about two years, the question that arises is that what has happened in the interim, like you know have we had any unauthorized actions being taken from the TS Ps and on regulatory we have nothing known publicly at least about any kind of enforcement action, but there is some interesting work that has come up and I think Apar will take more about it in a moment which is around researchers and crowd source data from consumers talking about differential practices where they're not able to access particular websites using particular ISPs, right.
Now, one of the exemptions in the law as in most net neutrality frameworks is that if there is a government authorized or lawful order from the government or from the Court then that would be an exception to the net neutrality restrictions, but there is a painful tension between the government blocking rules and the rules of net neutrality.  So the government's blocking rules through which these authorizations for lawful orders are to be made, they have a requirement that you have to be in strict confidentiality of any request that comes in for blocking, and any action that is taken on that.  Whereas the net neutrality rules say that any exception that is applied has to be transparent, has to be transient, has to be proportionate.  So clearly from a TSP perspective, we are in a position where either they can leverage this disconnect between the two regulations and you know get away with certain practices, or they're torn between two different ministries and two different regulatory authorities trying to implement two absolutely divergent rules on them, and that's something that we need clarity on in the times to come.
Finally, one of the, you know, interesting developments that came up in the last few months in the early days of the lockdown, we saw this proposal come up from the COAI the cellular operators association of India, a powerful telecom industry body and they proposed to the government that you know, given the load on the websites, given the fact that people are not able to reach us, the data, and maintain connectivity in terms of having active plans, there should be a proposal to have a free access to certain critical websites, so you know as you would recollect the zero‑rating regulation that India adopted does not allow any kind of differential rating including free services, but there is an exception in that which allows for any kind of access which is for public emergencies, which clearly COVID would satisfy or things which are emergency service like contacting an ambulance or contacting, you know a hospital would qualify as emergency services, so those would be exceptions where a service provider can go ahead and do that with within 7 days they have to inform the regulator and then the regulator will take a call on whether that's something valid and they want to authorize.
So in this particular incident, the proposal didn't actually go anywhere because, you know, data prices in India already over the last few years the way it has evolved are very low, so really I'm not sure there is no disclosure on what the regulator thought about it, but probably this was on their mind that, you know, cutting ‑‑ it's more about access to devices which is the blockage for Internet access at this point and it wasn't so much about data price, although that's one of the factors, but one thing to think about is going forward if this exception is to be invoked, what are the principles that we would expect to be deployed in that case, and unlike the scenario of the net neutrality the broader regulations, these regulations don't give out guiding principles, but clearly we can draw from the license agreement about certain preansz, so one should clearly be that it's proportionate, transparent, and transient and cannot be long term measures that exceed the purpose being sought.  And there should be no commercial arrangements possible at the back end when you're dealing with this kind of emergency situation, and finally so as to ensure that there is no undue burden even on the telecom providers for providing this sort of a service, there should be at the back end an arrangement where the government has the capacity to compensate the providers for such a service out of the universal service obligation fund.  So these are questions which will probably come up again if we're again in a status where the zero‑rating question comes up and it was not something considered and decided upon in the present circumstances.
Finally with that, you know, clearly what we achieved in ibda in terms of net neutrality framework is a great policy achievement.  No doubt.  It's been a political battle with strong stakeholder on every side, but the job is not done and I think Apar will add to that in a few moments and the job is not done because questions about enforcement remain open, questions about monitoring the role of this multistakeholder body and will it genuinely be multistakeholder and participatory, are things which remain to be seen.  Thank you.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Smriti, and now it's time as we already have a lot of good elements from many very different jurisdictions, it's a very good moment to open to a bit of debate.  I'm sure there will be questions comments from the audience.  Let me just remind the participants or attendees that if you want to raise your happened, to ask a question or comment, you have these Zoom functions that allow to you raise your hand and then you will be given privileges to speak.
We are going to have a little bit of a very short debate now for 5‑10 minutes and then we'll start and go back with the second slot of panelists.
Now, there was some ‑‑ we can also, of course, add questions on the chat.  I saw that there was a comment by Chris Marsden on the fact that Zoom views increase 1,000% in March according to the measurement which is indeed pretty interesting.
But do we have any comments from the attendees?  Again, let me remind you that if you want to say anything, don't be shy, and just raise your hand and you'll be given privileges to speak, or if you have any questions, please also of course use the chat.
As I'm seeing that we have a pretty shy audience, I will take advantage of my moderators capacities and I will ask ‑‑ I will put forward a point that I think has been mentioned, and it is quite essential for not only for today's debate but also for the future work of this group, I think, which is amongst this set of distinguished experts that we have here today, do you think that there are other elements of Internet openness besides the simple net neutrality debate that should be addressed, that we should start to look at?  Because let me provide a little bit more on this point.  We have been having many discussions over the past week at the IGF, although we were not all together, there were many occasions, many webinars to interact and speak in custom networks, and really I have a feeling that there is a lot of appetite for expanding the debate on Internet openness besides the net neutrality, the simple traffic management or zero‑rating, so price discrimination debate.  So do you think there is some specific topic we have heard or stressing the device neutrality perspective, do you think there are other perspectives that should be included in the work of this coalition, and then I see that there is also a hand raised.  So first the general question if anyone wants to provide an answer amongst the panelists, and then I see Ian Brown has a question or raised a hand.
>> Hi, Luca, am I connected now?  I'm sorry.  It's not working.
>> We can hear you.
>> Okay.  I can hear.  Luca was muted, I'm sorry.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I will just say that now you are connected.  I was expecting the panelists to reply before you were speaking but let's do the other way around.  Make your point and then we will reply.
>> Yes.  Okay.  Briefly you mentioned interoperability and that does seem like something good for this group to can go not least because it's something that several major jurisdictions seem to be moving forward with the EU in the proposed digital markets act and the U.S. House antitrust committee suggested in their report that the Biden administration might take toward and significant reviews in Japan, Australia, and other countries and so it would be great working together in this group to bring a really international perspective on what's happening and ways that the jurisdictions might work together.  It would be terrible if all of these different jrlds regulated interoperability in different ways.  It would be very anti‑interoperable.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Yes.  It would not be legally interoperable.  Let's say.  So do we have any ‑‑ thank you very much Ian for this point.  That is one of the key issues or dimensions of the broader Internet openness debate that we may also think to introduce to the work of this coalition.  Do we have any other perspectives on this?  Any panelists willing to venture?  KS, please, go ahead.
   >> KS PARK:  I didn't raise my hand, actually.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I'm sorry.  I thought you were raising.  So Smriti.
>> Smriti:  You mentioned questions about web censorship, shutting down the Internet, blocking a website, and processes around that both because these are important questions of openness and there is this interaction with net neutrality essential in the blocking debate and these would be interesting perspectives to bring in.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Do we have any other reply or comment from the panelists?  Otherwise we'll move to the next slot of presentations.
Okay, so we'll move to the next slot of presentations and we stay in India, but with some different points we have the pleasure of having Apar Gupta who is the director of the Internet Freedom Foundation and they have been working a lot and they have played a very prominent role in the consultation of TRAIs recommendations and traffic management, and they have also tabled a very interesting and progressive proposal to have Internet access as a civil right in India, so that is a very interesting spective that really deserves to be heard so please Apar welcome to the debate and the floor is yours.
   >> APAR GUPTA:  Thank you so much, Luca, a warm welcome to the panelists and people attending.  I would like to thank Smirti for setting the foundation and a solid understanding around network neutrality, and also I would like to go back to Luca's framing of how net neutrality and openness squares with the larger political questions around continuing Internet shutdown.
It just seems paradoxical because it is.  Firstly, just some core demographic data from India also will be useful in terms of people understanding how far we have reached in terms of Internet access by itself, where there are close to 600 million active Internet connections, this is not reflective of the number of users because a single user may have more than one connection.  However, it speaks to a very large number of Internet users.  The second is in terms of the usage by itself, across the top social media platforms, Indians essentially constitute the largest number of Facebook users, WhatsApp users, and this essential concentration in terms of usage does have consequences both for openness as well as network neutrality and is factored into the larger political decision‑making both around how restrictions on access to the wider Internet operate as well as how the regulators and policymakers view them.
So, firstly, just talking about Internet shutdowns and the recognition of the Internet as a political and civil right.  It flows from very constitutional understandings, legalistic understandings where it's linked to the fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression which is recently litigated in the Supreme Court and the decision came actually in January of this year, and the Supreme Court linked it to the fundamental right of freedom of speech and express as well as to carry on trade and business.  And in times of COVID, we've realized that both are essential facilities, and this understanding is also reflected in how telegraphs have been actually and spectrum usage has been considered by both the courts, the constitutional understanding, and then carried forward actually in splan tri memorandum by the telecom regulators, the TRAI when it first prohibited differential pricing of Internet ‑‑ of the application layer, in a way that any website could be charged under commercial arrangement and discounted or be overpriced by Internet service provider.  So this understanding is reflected also in the network neutrality regulation to a certain extent, if not expressly, then through explanatory memorandum by the TRAI.
Now, the ongoing Internet shutdowns, while they do recognize the political and civil rights, there are large exceptions that are carved out which I think need to square much more closely with network neutrality because it's not only about Internet shutdowns but also encouraging other practices and proposals, for instance, the white listing of websites which essentially means that a mandated list of about 400 to 500 websites may be permitted in a territorial region or geographical region which may be classified as a government to be a bit sensitive.
And secondly now it's coming to much more of an understanding of just purely in terms of network neutrality.  I think Smriti's comments were excellent when it comes to looking at the actual enforcement of the network neutrality protocol when you step beyond the Internet shutdowns to the maximal larger part of how it's governed, despite having recognition in law that even that technical measures for discrimination are not permissible unless those exceptional practices, which are provided within the regulation are satisfied, industry does not have an implementation framework and that's the question that essentially concerns a lot of us, and we have looked at through crowd source data that the same website is sometimes blocked on four ISPs but available on six different ISPs, and one presumes that if there is a lawful order, which is the basis of the restriction on the access of that website, it should be blocked for all ISPs rather than just four.  So I just end this by saying that a good basis to proceed with the conversation around Internet openness and network neutrality is to go back to these constitutional principles at least in our domestic law, and I think that recognition is also already, which is very strong and fairly positive and that the access to the Internet actually fulfills a fundamental right, and that kind of understanding also goes beyond the traditional understanding of regulation and it's much richer, it's a human rights perspective.  Secondly, it gives opportunity in regions which are outside Europe and America, which may implement practices which may be restricted such as just permitting smawl websites in certain zones and finally a lot of this depends on the actual implementation framework and ensuring that it should be multistakeholder, and I know that's a word which will actually depend on the enforcement, but this is what we're looking towards when we look at enforcement.  So I think we do have some road to actually charter in the future and our work is not yet done possibly for the next IGF we have more learnings to share.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Excellent.  Thank you very much, Apar for this and raises the very important issue of enforcement.  I remember I think it was four or maybe five years ago we actually seven years ago we crafted the model framework of net neutrality and we already suggested the importance of enforcement and also to involve a wider range of stakeholders in the enforcement and also users in the enforcement and in the monitoring of the enforcement is a key point, and I really hope that India will develop a very, not only efficient, but also inclusive and sustainable framework to allow the most ‑‑ or the best possible, or the highest quality possible monitoring of Internet traffic practices that are regulated under net neutrality.
Now, speaking about restrictions that are not really clear in how they are framed, it really ‑‑ it's a really good segue to then move to another country by coincidence is one of the BRICS countries, Russia, that has implemented some really interesting, to some extent, measures to cope with COVID‑19, and we have two Russian speakers today.  I would like to start with Anna Orlova and they have authored one of the chapters of the book dealing with restrictions and limiteddations that have been introduced by Russia over the past months and it's very interesting to understand how they have been perceived also by Russian Administration.  So Anna, go ahead the floor is yours.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Thank you very much for this opportunity to participate.  We have prepared some slides that I will share with you in just a minute..  Please let me know if you can see the slides?
>> Yes, we can see them well.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Okay.  Great.  So the title of our chapter was on net neutrality times of COVID, and the case of the Russia.  So, we did a study together with Andrey and he will talk after I present, and our research period was from April to May 2020.  The main focus of our research was on Moscow, the capital of Russia because it was and still is the epee center of the pandemic, and also due to the fact that mass cohas the most advanced combination of e‑government systems in the country that were used at some point and implemented and used to introduce counter measures against the increase of infections.
So to reflect on dynamic of new cases in Russia.  Russia is still the fourth highest country among the top five, and the cases continue to rise.  We could say that Russia had two waves, and now it's in the second wave of the pandemic.  As of yesterday, the numbering of new cases was 20, 582.  Here we can see that Moscow, if I ‑‑
   >> LUCA BELLI:  If I may interrupt, I think there is a problem with the transmission of the slides.  I don't know if other panelists can see the slides properly?  For me it is blocked on Slide number 8.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Let me check.  Just a second.
>> You may need to go full screen.  Maybe that is the issue.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Okay.  I cannot actually share the entire screen.  The application doesn't allow me.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Can the tech support please give Anna co‑host privileges so that she can share.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Excuse me, Luca, maybe I will demonstrate those slides.  Maybe that would be better.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  We can try.  Maybe it will be faster this way.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Just browse down without going full screen.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I think it's better, Anna, could you try to do it again or otherwise we will ‑‑
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  What was the advice?  I didn't quite catch it?  I can browse ‑‑
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Browse down to the next slide without going full screen.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Let's try to.  I'm sorry for the technical problem.  Let's try to do the slides again.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  I could share the screen, Luca.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Let me go back to Slide 1.  Is it working now?
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Perfectly.  Perfectly.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  It's working, right?  So as I've already said.  I said about the period.  And this is just to reflect on the dynamic of the new cases of coronavirus in Russia.  And here you can see the map of the cases all over the country, and Moscow stays the epicenter of the pandemic and within the last two days, on Wednesday and Thursday, Russia was breaking its record with new cases of on Wednesday it was more than 19 and yesterday more than 20,000 cases.
So, basically, what we wanted to show here is that although there is various measures that Russia has been implementing, the situation hasn't really changed much.  So regarding the restrictions that are taking place in Russia since the beginning of the pandemic, there has been various observations, also by international NGOs, and there is a project that is called Pandemic Big Brother which is basically a monitoring of various restrictions regarding civil rights or regarding digital rights, or around the world and here we can see that the case of Russia.  So for example, if we look into two waves, during the first wave we had the following restrictions implemented by the state, the cell phone surveillance, video monitoring, and domain facial recognition, violation of freedom of speech, which here we specifically referred to fake news law and although Andrey will talk about this in more detail, although there were some other examples of violation of freedom of speech.  And also surveillance using governmental apps that continues until today.  Then there is also restriction in the form of legal prosecution.  Here we will specifically talk about the emergency law.  And then there are examples of drone control to control people doing the isolation properly, et cetera.
And then there are examples of access to official information or limitations in this regard.  If we look in the second wave, we haven't really covered in our study, we can still say that there are still is continuous surveillance by means of governmental apps.  There are continuous violations of freedom of speech, and there are also examples of legal prosecution.  So we will talk today mostly about the study and the data we have, and we will talk about four main points.  I will talk about digital tools that were used in Russia to survey online and offline, and about automated face recognition system.  And then Andrey will continue to talking about legislation, in particular about emergency and fake news laws, and also about the incidental tal process that took place in Russia during the pandemic.
So the first point we wanted to talk about is the digital tools that were used at some point in Russia during the coronavirus pandemic.  As Russia was continuously the epicenter of the pandemic, and the government didn't manage to restrict the movement within the capital and to impose rules of people staying inside, there was a decision taken to implement a system called Digital Pass Entry System and starting from April 15, the system was implemented in the City of Moscow in the Moscow Region and some other parts of Russia a bit later in some regions of Russia.
And this system presuppose that every citizen has to either by going online on the governmental website, by calling, or by sending SMS messages to request a digital pass, and there were introduced many different forms of digital passes for people who had to go to work, for people who had to go to the hospital, for people ‑‑ for various needs, basically.  And the problem was that the system was not working very well, especially in the beginning of its introduction, and there were many problems.  Also on the point of control, so for example, in the Moscow Subway, everyone had to show their pass.  It's a digital number, and reading this information was taking a lot of time and creating people in jams and people were being stuck in one place trying to just enter into the subway.
And the similar situation happened with the drivers because at the entrances of Moscow, the drivers had tools to demonstrate the passes and that created a lot of traffic jams, especially in the first days of the system.
There were also a lot of complaints regarding protection of personal data.  The system had certain some flows, and also there were difficulties for using the system for certain vulnerable groups of citizens, for example like elderly people, there were a lot of complaints because if you don't ‑‑ if you don't have already ‑‑ if you didn't have a proper smart phone with a proper version of smart phone, it was pretty much impossible to receive the digital pass over the phone, for example.  And people who didn't have electronic devices like computers or smart phones, specifically like elderly groups of people, they had a lot of difficulties receiving these passes.
And then the second point that I will talk about is the automated face recognition system that was also introduced during the pandemic.  It was first implemented in February of 2020 this year to control the movement of people who were coming back from China and especially people prescribed to follow the 14 days self‑isolation regime or those who had to self‑isolate themselves.  This system later was used for other purposes to monitor the movement of people, specifically those with suspicion of infection, and it combined various technical, online, or digital and also technical infrastructures of the Moscow e‑government systems, for example, Moscow's CTV system, artificial intelligence, and smart phone geodata that was provided by the telecom operators, and also face recognition solutions.
And in the end the system was Novembered to the point it was capable to track almost every citizen of Moscow; however, it was not used in this capacity.  There were certain groups of citizens that were targeted, and there were ‑‑ the lists of those people who will be tracked were provided by the Russian authority institutions or bodies, so there was a system of how this monitoring process was created, so it was not used for monitoring the whole city.
However, both of these measures that I talked about, the surveillance and the control measures of the digital pass system, they are based on the Moscow's electronic government framework which is embodied in the Moscow smart city project that has been taking place for the last, more or less last decade in Moscow, and the combination of the online and the offline surveillance allowed the government to control people's access to information and to freedom of movement, and although the point that we wanted to make here is that online surveillance is not authorized by the Russian law, and it doesn't fall under the legislation that justifies as the users of such technology and also specifically in the case of coronavirus pandemic.  And now I would like to pass the floor to A, in ndrey that will talk in more detail about the Russian law passed as countermeasure for the coronavirus pandemic.  Thank you.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Anna, and yes, it was very good to also have this picture of how things have been evolving in Russia and now not only with this debate that we're having today on net neutrality and COVID‑19, but it's very good to contextualize also how the measures that the Russian Government has been taking and which contexts have been taken.  Andrey, you are a professor in Moscow, and actually you have been I think one of the first in the world to analyze the fake news bill at the time proposed by Russia that then became the fake news law and how this has been amended during the COVID‑19 crisis, so please, Andrey, go.
>> Yes.  I would like to talk a bit about the state censorship part that is increased during this COVID‑19 pandemic when, first of all, in early 2019, even prior to the pandemic, Russia passed ee federal law amendment on the law and information.  According to this law, the distribution of deliberately unreliably socially important information on the media shall entail the position of the administrative fine for citizens in about $400 to $1, 500.  So in response to the COVID‑19, this law was a bit amended.  For example, regarding the spread of fake information that threatened people's life and safety, and this law was actually used in April 2020 when the Russian newspaper published information about the situation with pandemics spread in Chichna which is the region of Russia, and this is well‑known region of Russia in North caucuses actually and part of Russian Federation and these journalists in the situation with COVID‑19 pandemic is a bit dangerous there actually, and there is investigation on violation of this fake news law, and also there was an order from the prosecutor general's office to remove this article, and this article is now unavailable and available now only in I think in memory and in, for example, but this article is currently unavailable on the Internet.
This is the first point of how the censorship is used.  But also, I'd like to provide you with a bit of background of the state of emergency in are Russia which was not introduced during the first stage of pandemic, it's not introduced now during the second stage of pandemic of the COVID‑19.  Instead of that, they used so‑called high readiness regime, high‑readiness regime is not state of emergency, but it allows for the subjects of the federation because Russia is actually a federation like United States, for example, and Moscow is one of the subjects of the federal subjects.  And this law allows to, for example, for the heads of subjects of federation to introduce decrees, special decrees of the, for example, Moscow mayor had a federal subject for this high‑readiness regime, and because of that, because of the limitations of human rights, for example, digital passes, sur ens, restriction for free walk around the street is not introduced by the law and it's actually introduced by decree of the federal subjects.  We should not have this opportunities according to the constitution and legislation.  It's only entitled by decree, and this is the problem here because when the state of emergency actually is introduced, people are able to claim compensation from the state, for example, when their businesses are in trouble, when in other issues related to the pandemic, but according to the high‑readiness regime, nothing is actually introduced, and there is no social protection of the citizens, according to this.
And this actually refers to the incidental tal, the so‑called digital protests of the citizens.  Could Anna please share these slides, actually about the online protests?  You can see ‑‑ you can see here like the interactive map.  An interactive map is marked with different comments because there is no actual crowding of the people.  This is crowding of the people gathering on this interactive map, and this is here we can see political slogans actually, acts of resistance putting against the Presidents, against actually the authorities of subjects of federation, against authorities of Moscow, for example, in because authorities are not able to address if you see a state of emergency to keep people's rights safe and people's rights and people's security and Social Security because businesses are in danger when they're closed during this lockdown and first wave of coronavirus.  And now, actually it's also no state of emergency in Russia instead of cases of coronavirus are raising, higher and higher and higher at the moment.
And this interactive process, online process is actually a reaction for people and I think it's the voice of the people that should be heard, and this is very interesting interactive of digital protest this year.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I'm sorry to interrupt you but I'm mindful of time andwise we still have.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Yes, I think I just finished actually with this.  All has been said and I'm able to answer all the questions that you have, I would be glad to answer all the questions.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thanks very much, Andrey and now last but of course not least, Alejandro Pisanty is not only a very good friend but one of the true leaders of the Internet governance ecosystem since decades, and he is professor of autonomous University of Mexico and the author of one, I think of the most intriguing chapters of the book this year, precisely because it has us to think about openness, adopting a broader vision, and he offers an architecture of how this broader vision can be structured with his six‑factor framework for Internet openness.  So please, Alejandro, the floor is yourses.
>> Alejandro Pisanty:  Thank you very much, Luca I'm also publicly congratulating Anriette because she's been able as Chair of the MAG to pull this meeting completely online without face‑to‑face meetings of the MAG and that's is a great challenge and an honor that she's also participating in the session, and took part in the book, and thanks Luca and the other co‑editors of the book because I think it's an extremely relevant collection and it was already so earlier in the year, but now that it's in book form, it really looks very, very good and I hope it will be a great asset.
To be very concrete, as some of you may know, and as Luca has mentioned I have been working for a time on trying to have a larger picture and understanding of the effects that the Internet brings to different types of conduct, or adversely to analyze things that appear to be completely original to the Internet ‑‑ you can see the slide, a framework and I have it in full screen so you should be able to read it, so it should be quite readable.
The purpose then is mapping conduct between online and offs can line and the way we were doing this before, before I came to this framework, which I have this partially with all the participants and I'm very glad everyone is in the meeting as well, and next time we'll find a way to be on a panel.  So what happens very often is that we see people saying that the Internet is the end of the world because there is so much cybercrime, there is so much abuse, there is so much disinformation and they remove the Internet from that analysis and see that we actually have, I mean, phishing is happening people come to you with paper and this happened last December, last year to people I know, a guy comes with a paper, a piece of paper and ask them to sign off, and they do.
So, on the other hand we have things like positive actions that are also rooted for example on generosity the will to share knowledge that suddenly clainged in the way they have their effects because of the Internet.  So these six factors that seem to be able to allow us to map iewl of these types are the mass scaling, including within it the network effects, identity and an anymorety management, transjurisdictional effects, barrier lowering, friction reduction, and memory and forgetting and all of these come with the way the Internet is built as best effort, interoperable, open network with intelligence at the edge and with principles of purpose and designed purpose of scalability which has no borders in it's IP address and also identity layer of its own, the IPI a volatile type of identity and the only type of identity that you get from the Internet layer itself.  If you speak of the MAG address that's below and the IP management of facts or email accounts, that's an upper layer and that's an application or even a use of the application.
So, what happens when we come to the COVID crisis?  We have an immediate use of the mass scaling of the Internet, we see everybody who can go online and many activities like education, many types of work, purchasing food for your home, or creating a new business in order to be able to be a supplier of these things, even just going on a store like Amazon to sell your goods instead of having Amazon compete against you and drive you out of business.  That's the kind of usage of mass scale that we see.  We also see mass scaling in other positive effects like the spread of positive information of health information like wearing masks, non‑pharmaceutical intervention, or the massive collaboration we saw between laboratories that were able to share huge datasets that were able to the structure of the virus and immune system and so forth and also like the spread of this information and forps forms of krieber crime specific to COVID and so forth.
I'll skip the other factders in order to focus on what I think will be most important because I mean all of these have an effect as I mention and being able to go online, being able to perform social life, and of course we have limitation that's very serious.  This mass scaling worked well, for example, with the traffic in the core but it hasn't scaled well in expanding access to the Internet during the crisis.  Here we see what's commonly jokingly said when the water recedes, when the tied goes out, you see who went without a bathing suit.  You see the lack of preparedness of society, you see governments that didn't have a national digital strategy for access or for forcing lower prices or anything like that, and you have 40% of the population offline.  But for the ones online, this has been working.  Concentrate on factor 6 of memory and forgetting, we need to keep memory and we will use the openness of the Internet to keep our memory even when some people will not want to have this memory.  All of the decisions that we have heard taken in Europe, for example, in Russia, or in India, the ones in my country, Mexico, everyone who took part in deciding a policy, whether it was using masks or not using masks or social isolation or it was relaxing social isolation, we will need a memory of that.  A co‑editor of the book on the symposium made me realize that we have to be very careful also about protecting personal data and privacy in this new huge memory that is being built up explosively around the crisis, but we will need the memory and we will use the memory that the Internet gives us in order to hold officials accountable for their decisions which are maybe saving hundreds of thousands of lives or in some cases are costing hundreds of thousands of lives.  I don't want to use much more time.  I hope this gives a glimpse on how this thing can be used to analyze every Internet event that has a mapping tool previous or non‑internet.  Thank you.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much, Alejandro.  Really, an excellent way of then leading us to our final debate.  Obliging us to think in a systemic fashion about Internet openness and not only to about the usual topics that we follow.  This is a group that is Ted Kateed to specific issues, but first, it doesn't mean that we have to think only in the silos in the country, we never have to do so, and on the other hand that doesn't mean that we then have to expand the range of issues that we can also associate to do work that we have been doing so far, so thank you very much, Alejandro, for bringing this perspective into the debate.
And now I think it's time again to open the floor for intervention and from any of the attendees if they want to chip in and provide a comment or a question, please go ahead.  Just raise your hand and you will be given privileges to be a panelist, to be a speaker.  I see there are a couple of questions also in the chat.  There is a comment from Chris Marsden saying that the disinformation regulation that is now rampant in various jurisdictions has similarities to the debate.  It has a lot, and indeed we see similarities in technologies and stakeholders and other points that have been raised.  And then there is also a comment on the work in Moscow, some enforcement also intd grating police databases with (audio breaking up) ‑‑ personal data must be important in this case of course.
Do we have any remarks from the floor?  From attendees?  I'm going to remind you that if you do have any comment, you can share them either on the chat or raise your hand and you will have the possibility to speak.  I see the crowd today is still quite shy, so I think that is the moment for the panelists to provide clarifications or additional points that you would like to raise.  You had ‑‑ you were very good in respecting timing, so if you have any other point that you think is essential to raise to contribute to this debate, please this is the moment for you to speak, so just unmute yourself and go ahead.
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Well, actually, let me have a little clarification or question maybe on the presentation by Apar Gupta actually.  This is a really important issue of what he told about, but he felt that the issue is actually constitutional, but prior to placed into the national constitutions, this right actually, the Internet access, the net neutrality, it should be recognized in international law actually, and then this right should be recognized by the national governments because I think no national government should regulate Internet on their own will.  They should also cooperate with others and that's why these human rights should be universal.  And then in the national legislation or national constitution.  That's actually my position to just share according to this wonderful report.  Thank you very much.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I think the common theme was more about the need for also the discussion of this proposal put forward by the Internet Freedom Foundation about defining Internet access as a citizen right, but also to discuss this at an international level, and there have been discussions about this at levels, but I see Apar has clarifications.
   >> APAR GUPTA:  This context, I would envision my personal person experience has been rights and understanding sometimes develop co‑ extensively with international and domestic frameworks, constitutional, regulatory, and even in public law separate from constitutional law sometimes at the level and sometimes the international level, and there is a logic that sometimes doesn't make sense and one proceeding the other sometimes does promote a level of uniformity that flows top down from the international level, but practical experience being it quite often happens at a point in time where people are ready for it and that level of con sen suses in terms of what is a core governance agenda is reached, and I think we are proceeding to it if COVID has accelerated that understanding, and some elements of this are already present in the chat.  And I'm really that I think this is a significant issue once we integrate net neutrality, openness, and access to the Internet within the human right framework, it becomes strong ultimate beneficiaries.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Yes, and there was also, and I just in the chat there was also part of a question for directed to Andrey or Anna about the fact that Russia also has an initiative on Internet access ‑‑ on free Internet access for socially significant websites and services and so what is your opinion about this initiative created by the Russian Government to provide free access to socially significant websites and services?
   >> ANDREY SHCHERBOVISH:  Well, my answer actually, I suppose that this initiative is really important and this initiative could be even better, but it 14UD not be within the framework of the national, only the national web resources.  For example, I just answered this question, Zoom the platform where we are here now is also crucially important here in the time of COVID‑19 pandemic, but it's not a platform of Russian origin, but this is actually of net neutrality actually.  This is 100% the issue of net neutrality.  Resources from all over the countries should be ‑‑ being really important, being crucial during the pandemic should be declared free without regarding of the origin, without regarding ‑‑ that's my opinion.  In this initiative, it's my best understanding, in this initiative, this is only about the resources of Russian origin like something like that.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Anna has also taken to this and then I would like to continue as we're already running out of time.
   >> ANNA ORLOVA:  Yes, Luca.  Well, I don't really as Andrey already noted or mentioned that this is their access to only Russian resources and only to the vital resources where you can receive information about the pandemic or what to do, how to request help, and I agree that with Andrey that, I mean, it's a question of net neutrality and there are many other resources that could be also made available to Russian citizens, specifically due to the financial or economic limitations that people suffered during the pandemic, a and that this initiative could be extended but again this is also a debated on net neutrality aspects and it's not an easy issue to decide on.  Yeah.  I cannot hear.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  I was muted.  So I was just saying that there was also a comment by Anriette stating that in South Africa there was also massive zero‑rating of educational platforms during the pandemic and this is indeed a very good example of good uses of zero‑rating and I think those who are ‑‑ who have been taking a part of this debate over the past year, as in any kind of a restriction of discriminatory technique or practice, there is always a context to be provided and there is never a black and white solution, really.  It's doing something always good or always bad, but I think many of us have also been advocating for the fact that what is important is the context and maybe kind of exception to the nondiscriminatory treatment of Internet traffic, be it for technical or for commercial reasons may be allowed in specific conditions, of course, the zero‑rating case in South Africa is a very good example also of how zero‑rating could be beneficial to people that are obliged to access resources when they do not have a means to access them.  Another choice would also be to give them access to everything, and not hopefully only to a selection of resources, but probably would be an even better and more interesting option, of course this will be the debate for an entirely new section.
And as we are really running out of time, I would like to see if there is any final remark from panelists?  If you have any remark, please raise your hand.  Either with your real hand or with Zoom one.  IP I see, question, I see KS has a final remark and then this will be our final remark in the panel.  Please, KS, go ahead.
   >> KS PARK:  Oh, I'm very apprehensive of making final remark for the whole group but I just give my two cents.  There have been different aspects of openness of the Internet, but I think the issue of Internet access ‑‑ the issue of building the infrastructure for the Internet and the observance of the basic foundational rule of using that Internet, which is net neutrality, and Internet shutdown, which is happening all around the world, and in this group we talked about India, and sensors in the Internet are related and sometimes one is over the other, but I think it would be practical to discuss them separately and analyze them separately and try to come up with the responses separately.  Oh, but you know with ‑‑ with the of course, thought that they are connected politically.  That's my comment.
   >> LUCA BELLI:  Thank you very much for this, and thank you very much, everyone, for all these very interesting points you have shared with the panel.  If you want to take a group picture that was here with the IGF secretary has requested us, you can switch on your camera and smile.  This is the moment.  And it is done.  So we are done for today.  Thank you very much for your participation.  I will share the ‑‑ I'm going now to copy the chat because we have some very interesting points also raised in the chat and share it in the mailing list of the coalition so that everyone can also access to the chat and links that were raised and shared, and thank you very much again for your participation and please let's keep interacting on the mailing list and let's organize another fantastic session next year.  Bye‑bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-nri-access-and-digital-inclusion^^

 
>> JANE COFFIN: Thank you for joining us, we have an exciting panel, they are far more interesting than I am.  I'll just give you a quick overview of what to expect.  You can see the agenda on the homepage and this is about a very collaborative session from some of the wonderful national regional IGFs around the world and we're focusing on access and digital inclusion.  For those that know me, I'm Jane Coffin, I work at the Internet Society my whole life is dedicated pretty much to inclusion, connectivity and seeing the internet and connectivity grow.  This is a really near and dear to my heart, this access and digital inclusion part.
I'm not going to say much because my colleague is going to say a little bit more, Julian Casabuenas, later, and we will be remiss if we did not give a nod to Marilyn Cade who was just a good friend.
She helped create a lot of IGFs around the world and this is going to be a really great memorial to her as well.
I'm going to stop talking about that because it will make me sad.  She passed away on Tuesday, this is a memorial to us.  This is an important way to bring information to people, to talk about the importance of inclusion, internet growth, capacity development.  We are going to first have with us, very honored, to have in this session Mr. Cristian Tejada from Bolivia, the vice Minister for science and technology and we have the Gambia IGF and they'll talk a little bit more about what they're doing in their countries to promote the scientific, academic sectors.  So over to Cristian Tejada and Poncelet Ileliji and after that, we'll have the rest of our panelists speak. 
>> CRISTIAN TEJADA: Good morning.  Thank you.  I don't speak English very well.
Thank you for the invitation.  My name is Cristian Tejada.  I am Minister of Science and Technology in Bolivia.  In our country we have implemented several learning methods.  (Poor audio quality).
Bolivia has difficulty in the educational system and even so we have the possibility of (poor audio quality). 
>> MODERATOR: We appreciate you being here.  
Poncelet Ileliji, we're interested to hear from you on this side from Gambia. 
>> PONCELET ILELEJI: Thank you.  
In terms of what we have been watching the pandemic, inasmuch as possible, the broadband connectivity, it is very expensive, one gigabyte of data is $5 and if you check the level of our GDP, we have a lot of the population living below that and our people have to prioritize their needs.  (Poor audio quality)..
What is very important now, all stakeholders within the ministry have realized the need for all stakeholders in our local internet governance system to come to know we have to develop frameworks that will be low cost and it is not really about connecting, but it is about cost.  What do I pay to be online?  During our national and internet governance forum for young people in provincial areas, we have had to provide them with data for them to be able to go to school.  If we could not provide them with data, they could not take part.  We're now trying to use the model that a lot of the Telecom companies use to get to public school, also to be able to get to (poor audio quality).
That's what I'll say for now and then I'll come back.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: I'm talking to myself.  Sorry for that.
Thank you to all that are just joining us.  I wanted to say you have just heard from Poncelet Ileliji from Gambia and Cristian Tejada, a vice Minister from Bolivia, two diverse regions coming to talk to us about access diversity.
Up next, we have two speaker, one from South Sudan that will introduce herself and we have Sindy Obed, they'll talk to you more about the critical challenges for societies regarding access and digital inclusion.  These are small case studies from South Sudan and Haiti, again, I'll turn it over to our fabulous speakers.
You have 3 minutes each. 
>> NYADAK AJAWIN:  So excited for the IGF this year.
South Sudan IGF was started in 2019 so we had our first session around March of 2019.  It definitely has been a bit of a struggle because South Sudan as some of you may know, but maybe all of you know, we just gained independence in 2011.  It has been a bit of a journey to get through the issues that started at the beginning and fortunately we ended up in civil conflict, Civil War in 2019 and again in 2016, that's derailed a lot of the development and the infrastructure that we thought would be possible as we gained our independence.  With the start of the South Sudan IGF we have made a few achievements, and in 2019 when we had our first IGF one of the greatest achievements I would say is the Universal Access Fund which we presented on during that event, and we're glad to say that it was set up by the National Communication Authority and it is still not yet officially running but it has been set up and we're moving on from there.
In regards to access, we have two main communication giants in the country, the services are quite low, we have several areas that are still not connected, many blame the infrastructure, many blame the instability and it is definitely a mix of both, but we are working hard as the IGF and other in this case entities to ensure that we have at least a better solution or strategy and we'll ensure that these companies also come up to par so that more people are connected not just on the internet but communications in general.
We recently were able to connect ourselves to fiberoptic, which has helped increase internet access in the country.  We have new players that come in.  They're doing a great job in providing internet services, and at the same time as well we have to remember that affordability, it is key, and so we still have many people who are not able to afford the high rates that these new companies have come in with.  As we speak right now, unfortunately, we could not have our national IGF, the physical event this year, due to COVID, it was scheduled for March of this year, but then through that, we also have continued to focus with other in this case entities and the National Communication Authority who is the main telecommunication regulator in the country at the moment.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Sindy, over to you.  
>> SINDY OBED:  
Thank you hello, everyone.  Haiti is still considered as just 32% of the population using internet in 2018.  There are many, many challenges.  The fact that a good internet connection could cost around 80% of a user's monthly salary, so a major barrier in the country where 70% of the population is less than $2 a day, so that electricity coverage, it is ‑‑ we have only 15 in rural areas, so we have many, many challenges like we have the challenge of an economic problem, so the population, it is too low and the lack of internet infrastructure, it also is because of the internet connection and we spoke also about the speed, the low speed of the internet of various providers and so the poor quality of service provided, and this prevents them from taking advantage of the internet and we have, like I said below, most of the population, they do not have access and we have ‑‑ we can say that we have too little engagement also of a Civil Society and lack of competition, the absence of legal framework, we have many, many challenges, also lack of sector vision and so many don't care about the rural areas and where it comes to do business, to make some policies, so in one form, we have some recommendation like to establish resilience, infrastructure in all cities and with the internet connection it is more ‑‑ it ‑‑ we ‑‑ it is a small pocket, and we have to engage stakeholders to see how we have the companies and civil society with an aim ‑‑ with some NGO, we have last week good news on connectivity and we have the global ‑‑ we will have to invest to give ‑‑ to ‑‑ it is 60 million, 80 billion‑dollars for connectivity and this fund, it will be very useful to help within the local communities.  We have many, many challenge, like I said, so we hope this will be helpful for us and will increase access to broadband services and establish foundations of digital resilience to respond to health climate and economic shocks because like I said, the lack of affordable and available internet connectivity, it is not inclusive, so it is ‑‑ I hope that this is ‑‑
>> JANE COFFIN: Wonderful.  Merci!  You're doing a good job!.
It is good to hear from Haiti, a country grow, looking to make a better infrastructure.  Thank you.  You're right on time. 
We'll turn over now and come back to all of you later in the other panel, but we're going to turn over now and talk about COVID‑19 and how people need to have access to the internet to work, communicate, doing all that we need to do to stay in touch with these difficult times and what's the effects on societies.  This is an experience that will be shared by IGF U.S.A., our colleague from the Dominican Republic could not join us, we have Anna Higgins with us.  Over to you.
>> ANNA HIGGINS: Thank you for giving me the floor.  My name is Anna Higgins, I'm a project coordinator at the Internet Society and I worked on putting total the access panel at the IGF U.S.A. this past July.  We discussed how COVID‑19 brought to the forefront issues in the United States, rural, remote, indigenous communities have always had problems with getting access to infrastructure and many urban communities also face a lot of problems with affordability.  We discussed that this exacerbated these problems creating tougher barriers for those that had barriers in the first place.
For example, we discussed that there are already students that could not do homework at home because they didn't have connectivity and other students that may not be able to even participate in school due to a lack of connectivity or unconnected students may go to school in person which can be a health risk to themselves and to their communities.  Many people also face obstacles in applying to jobs, even before COVID because they didn't have internet access and now it is even more difficult because so many jobs are remote.  If you done have access, you can't do the work.
There is also a huge risk to the dissemination of public health information, we discussed that many Americans rely on the internet to find the latest information on the COVID spread, local restrictions and finally, during COVID it has been so important to have the internet just to connect with one another, the internet allows for digital social interaction which is important to well‑being and many of us have used the internet to communicate with loved one, friends since March and for Americans without the internet, if they want to be with other people, that's a public health risk to meet in person.
We have discussed that in the U.S. we're having to take many short‑term solutions and make them sustainable for long‑term and a major issue that we're face, many of the short‑term solutions quite frankly will not work forever.
I will give two examples of short‑term solutions that we discussed at the IGF U.S.A. and one is that on tribal lands, communities are building public wi‑fi stations and access points to education and these can be placed in libraries with public broadband access before COVID and this is not a perfect solution, students have to sit in cars, be spread out to properly social distance, but communities are working on developing long‑term solutions based on this infrastructure.
Second of all, we discussed that companies, non‑profits in schools are all working together to distribute wi‑fi hot spots for students to take home and on our panel we had a representative speak from a company called Comcast, internet essentials, and that's a company partnering with schools to get service at students' homes and to help subsidize service costs.
These are just a few of the short‑term solutions that communities are trying to figure out how to make last and how to make connectivity work moving forward.
That's all for me on that.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
For those just joining U this a great panel of the national regional IGFs from around the world.  We're talking about access and digital inclusion, we have been fortunate to hear from blister I can't, from Haiti, from South Sudan, from Gambia, from the U.S. and now we're over to Colombia where we will hear from a very fabulous colleague of ours that we work closely with, Julian Casabuenas and the topic that we'll look at, do we wait for others to bring up solutions or can we start ourselves and contribute to bridging the digital divide, the Colombia IGF will share good practices.
Over to you.  .
>> JULIAN CASASBUENAS: Thank you for the introduction, Jane.
I will speak on behalf of the Colombian IGF and we recognize the role that Marilyn Cade had in strengthening the country regional internet governance initiative, her work had a major influence to encourage the participation of the internet governance Colombia in the spaces of the global forum especially through collaborative sessions like we convene today and the main session of NRIs.  We will miss your presence, but we are sure that your enthusiasm will keep us active in this space of the global forum.
Thank you, Marilyn.
This participation gathered opinions from multiple stakeholders such a Civil Society, academia, private companies that are part of the Colombian internet governance forum.  In 2018 only 52% of Colombian households had an internet connection so that significant accessibility gap to online information and knowledge is evident.  Of these people with access, only 34% use it to access education and learning and 59% to obtain information which looks at the appropriation strategies for the better use.  For the first quarter of 2020, 14% were connected through fixed lines and 58% using mobile internet.  The demand for social isolation as a result of the pandemic and the virtualization of services that have accelerated in recent months has shown the great digital divide, and it is no longer about accessing knowledge and communication, but also the difficulties of inclusion and accessibility, the fundamental rights highlighting the need to attend to access to education, equal opportunities and due process.
High bodies of the justice branch in Colombia have recognized the situation in the wake of the pandemic, just as it has been recognized that internet access is a Human Rights and therefore worthy of protection as a public service that is for the advancements of human development, education, access to justice, technological process.  It has also recognized that the state cannot yet guarantee universal access, which is why mitigation actions must be directed to achieve the progressiveness of this right, and it is important to look at new alternatives not only those from the government guaranteeing internet access to the unconnected.  
In several countries different initiatives were developed from Civil Society to contribute to connecting the unconnected.  Communities manage their own connectivity through community networks, in Colombia, several community network projects have been developed that have demonstrated their technical viability and sustainability to bring connectivity especially to rural areas.  However, the number of this initiative is still very low, so the provision of benefits and sin actives for large companies to improve investment, it is not the only way to reduce the digital divide and the government should create programs to facilitate and empower communities with their own infrastructure solutions, eliminating legal barriers and avoiding costs to favor and promote solutions such as community networks.
The government must allocate as part of social abilities to support the deployment of the community networks in Colombia.  In Colombia, there is the communication funds, the function, it is to finance plans, program, projects to primary promote universal access to community in this case services in rural and urban areas, prioritizing the poor and vulnerable population.  It is also important to reform the regimes of obligations of the universal service, also regulation should be more flexible considering approach in the use of the Spectrum and deployment of a single open, shared network in rural areas to group the demand thus promoting deployment of a sustainable network managed by private companies.
Equally important to bring more investment in infrastructure must become a political priority of digital agendas and national regulation.  The government should address a multiple recommendations of international organizations such as ITU and CITEL and incorporate them into their connectivity and policy agendas to complement the strategies that in the short‑term will bring connectivity required by Colombian, especially rural areas.  We also consider that for there to be true inclusion, not only access is enough, but also it's the digital literacy necessary to facilitate an effective application of internet access as well as its use as it is not enough to provide connectivity but rather the way in which one interacts in the free access are aspects relating to inclusion and the exercise of rights.
Thank you. 
>> JANE COFFIN: Thank you very much, Julian.  We heard from Julian Casabuenas from Colombia and we're on the topic of accessing digital inclusion and working and talking to great colleagues from around the world who are helping sustain, support, driving the work of national, regional IGFs.  We have heard from colleagues from Colombia, Bolivia, Gambia, Haiti, South Sudan and the U.S. this morning.
We're now going to have a discussion where each of the panelists and I'll give you the order so that everyone can hear who will be speaking, one minute to give us your thoughts on the following topic, if we're going to achieve a universal connectivity and leave no one behind, what needs to be done in your country?  What do we need to do to achieve universal access and connectivity and leave no one behind?  Give us your thoughts with an action‑oriented concluding message.  We have about 20, 30 more minutes.  I would like to hear from you in that, and then we'll have a more robust discussion after that.
Also actually I ‑‑ I have this out of order.
So my apologies.  We now have time to talk to people that are with us on this session and then we'll have the 1‑minute concluding.  So warming you up early on to give you your 1‑minute message!.
Sorry, we'll have an open discussion now with our participants and some of the people here with us.  Are there any questions coming from the audience so that we can have an interactive discussion.
Not seeing anything in the chat from the participants..
I will ask some questions..
Let me start Bolivia.
In Bolivia, you're working, you're a landlocked country, you're working hard to provide connectivity to citizens, what was one of the things that was most important to you as the vice Minister in your country while you have been there to try to promote more access.
>> CRISTIAN TEJADA: Thank you very much.
We found we all had to face difficult tasks with the pandemic.  In our case, not only with academic community but people in Bolivia are still not connected to the internet.  (Poor audio quality).  It is much important that government in all regions need to take more concrete action to overcome the lack of inclusion.  In Bolivia, we have to look for creative ways to provide these insights for our local telecommunication, combining an earn service, and this way telecommunication companies will be able to have more access and more important they will be able to access service.
>> JANE COFFIN: Thank you very much for that.
That's great words coming from someone in your position to focus on the importance of access and creating change in your country.
Poncelet Ileliji, I will move over to you.  You're coming to us from Gambia, from a country that has a small coastline.  I know you have submarine cable coming in.  What's the local IGF doing to try and encourage more change for access in the country?
>> PONCELET ILELEJI: I will say one of the things we have been trying to promote, we have a small coastline as you rightly said, our submarine cable, it is only 8 years old, it is the African coast to Europe submarine cable, it was launched in December, 2012 when we had a dictator in power.  That's really been a main crux of the matter that's slowed down connectivity in the country and just by the fact that they're not a bandwidth coming in, a lot, but an example from between March to present day, since the start of the pandemic, present date, there have been four disruptions due to the submarine cable either somewhere in France, somewhere in the coast of Africa, you know, and if you have one submarine cable only coming in the country and it is caught in the high sea, we're just depending on Senegal, on backup, so we have to ‑‑ the back up from Senegal, it is what the internet providers who are shareholders on the African coast submarine cable on the Gambia side, they are able to afford to pay.  They can only afford to pay for 30meg and stuff like that, when there is maintenance and the cable, they only prioritize the main customer, you know.  We have that going on.  A way that we have in our community tried to do this, it is to encourage the governments to be more liberal to allow more cables and to give tax privileges to the internet service providers, especially and also the telcos, for rural connectivity, most people in rural areas, they are still digitally ‑‑ they're ‑‑ it is not bus they can't get access, but largely because of cost.  As I said earlier on, we have paid for 1 gigabyte of data, $5, it lasts for three days and you have to feed your family and stuff like that and the priorities, it is totally different.  That's what we're looking at during our last internet governance forum that was held online at the end of August, we're still advocating for that and we're still trying to ‑‑ trying to work with other stakeholders to use the model of the Internet Society to develop community networks because we feel that working within the municipal, the council, the ISPs, that's a way to bridge the divide.  There is no ‑‑ there is no two ways.  We need the submarine cable in the country.  We had Facebook infrastructure, they're sending a submarine cable to Senegal, Senegal already has more than 2%, it is coming to Senegal, why not Gambia?  We're more ‑‑ it is just one country, just one is French, one is English.  So we hope as the word gets around that we're more open to having more companies to bring submarine cables to the country and hopefully it will bring down cost.  What we have currently, it is usually based on ‑‑ we're servicing the loan on this, so all of the ISP, they're leveraged, you have to pay back the loan, it is not easy, we totally understand.
Thank you. 
>> JANE COFFIN: Thank you very much.  That's great to hear from the work you're doing in Gambia.  I'm going to carry over to Sindy in Haiti.  You are part of an island nation, an island that has two nations on it.  Sindy, what are you doing ‑‑ I will ask each of the remaining panelist, Sindy, other, we would like your thoughts in 2 minutes on what you're doing through your IGF or your community to support access or digital inclusion.
In Haiti, if you can tell news 2 minutes some of the work that you're doing on the ground there in capacity development or infrastructure development?  I know you have some things that you're working on u.
>> SINDY OBED: Thank you.
In Haiti, we have ‑‑ we work on developing capacity, so we need technical skills, as our colleague has said earlier.  We need the community networks.  The private sector, we ‑‑ we do not want to invest in access in community, internet access in rural areas because they need more of a return on investment.  We have to promote community networks to help with solid partnership with all stakeholders to underline together the leap on community networks, we're already on some professional networks and they are a businessman, they are an employee, they are employers, so they do not ‑‑ they do not understand before something about the community networks, and the community networks, the community networks, they do not ‑‑ we do not have many more money like a traditional antenna, so all of the efforts, that the company, in the private sector, they provide to citizens.  We have developed capacity building on access and inclusion and we have developed the sector on digital capacity, and we need ‑‑ we need a population, we would know about internet and its benefit from ‑‑ the benefit of ‑‑ the benefit opportunity like creating content for the benefit of the population.
Thank you. 
>> JANE COFFIN: Thank you very much.
It is great to hear how you're thinking about how you can help in Haiti.
Next up, I just want to make sure I'm keeping track, we have Nyadak up next.
>> NAYADAK AJAWIN:  We're just starting from scratch, it is different from other countries that have had the experience, establishing the IGF has been really great, it allows people to realize the policies we don't have and the ones we need.  As the IGF, we're able to bring the stakeholders together, it has been able ‑‑ creating a platform for us to understand each and every entity's problems and then also ensure that we have the local citizens to be able to take stage in ensuring that they also are pushing the policies that they need implemented.  As I said, earlier, we're directly engaged in the Ministry of Telecommunication, information and postal services, which, of course, also has the regional authorities and we're talking directly to them, saying that these are the issues that people have and these are our solutions that we have.
Like I said, in 2019 we brought up the Universal Access Fund which has been established, we have young people that have learned how to do it manually and we want to see how to increase the capacity to make those bigger and kind of national rise them and to also push ISPs to understand, you know, that we need telecommunications to reach as far as they can and the government is to put pressure on them and also to allow a space for other companies to come in.  When there is competition, that's when ‑‑ that's when several organizations are coming in order.
We are doing capacity building and we're going to continue to do advocacy, we have several meetings outside of the national IGFs so we just don't waiter wait for the conference, we bring different stakeholders together, we're ensuring that we are supporting digital in regards to the gender divide, that's a big challenge that we face, we have now organizations such as Go Girls, advocating for young girls to learn coding and basic knowledge for IT and IGT has played a large role in policy and advocacy and we're pushing for recent institution, that's something that we lack so that we would be able to keep track of the data of different things and now we're able to push up on that.
I think we're on a good track and we're hopeful that the ministry, all other entities will continue to collaborate with us.
Thank you.
>> JANE COFFIN: Thank you.  It is exciting to have you here from South Sudan.  I know you're a new country but it is great you have an IGF focus there and that you're working at the national level.
Julian Casabuenas, I'll change it up a little bit, I'll ask to you look at the question that's been put in the chat.  It is something that I know that your organization is working on in digital inclusion and it is a question about whether or not some of the ISPs are actively engaged in making sure that there is more of a digital presence, a digital being, digital literacy, it is important as we know for taking to the next level after you have connectivity.  Do you think, in your country, that the ISPs are addressing that digital literacy issue, is there a way to work through community networks and others and organizations like yours to promote more digital literacy?  Give us an idea of what you think about is going on in Colombia and what more could be done.
>> JULIAN CASASBUENAS: Thank you, Jane.
I think digital literacy has been implemented in Columbo I can't by the government from different strategies from online government and the Ministry of ICTs and also through the Ministry of Education.  Civil Society with projects like community networks have been also providing support to the communities, our focus is not only connectivity but connectivity for improving the quality of life, connectivity for improved opportunities, access to information and so on.
I believe there are good examples in Colombia of how we are responding to that issue.
ISPs, they're more focused in our case on connectivity itself.  It is not a matter that they are taking that role here in Colombia.  I would like to mention also that the pandemic created an environment of acceleration of the digitalization process, it should serve to make a better diagnosis of the disconnected, and of the very different forms of the disconnection that selves to make more target policies, especially for those who are in the last mile and will be more complicated to achieve minimum connection.  From Civil Society, we believe in Colombia the recognition of community networks is very important, like has been done in countries like Argentina, also coming from recommendations from international organizations like the ITU and CITEL, having that recognition will allow us to access, for instance, the in this case fund to support these models and technologies to help to reduce the digital divide.
Also, these recognitions, we believe it is also important to be accompanied by development of regulations for community networks that defines its community nature, non‑for profit, the contribution to the objectives of connectivity, to the exercise of fundamental rights through ICTs and contribution to the appropriation of ICT by the community.
Also looking to the answer, we believe that it is important that we don't focus only on connectivity but also in appropriation of ICTs.
The state must seek for the empowerment of the communities creating initiatives for them to identify needs and priorities in access to the technology and moreover reduce regulatory and legal barriers that prevent the processes from taking place because they are some barriers that doesn't allow to implement these kind of initiative, in the only in Colombia but in the region of Latin America to promote the implementation of these initiatives.
Also I would like to mention the access to infrastructure, to fiberoptic, for instance, in Colombia, we have the large fiber optic network deployed but it is in some area, in rural area, the cost per megabyte is around $32 per megabyte and in the city, we're paying like 25 cents per megabyte.  We have to change this.
Also to reduce the cost of taxes that currently are implemented for internet access and data and to exempt them from taxes, it also will contribute to facilitate the deployment of this kind of initiatives. 
>> JANE COFFIN: Just doing a time check.
>> I think you have 4 ‑‑ 6 more minutes.
>> JANE COFFIN: 6 more minutes.  Okay.  Do they cut us off at 10 of?  They're flexible, you can go over a few minutes.  Not more than 5 probably.
We have 6 wonderful panelist, we'll do one minute each speed round and I'll just ask you to wrap it in your final comments there, Anna, what would you say from the work you have been doing, what are your final concluding comments on achieving universal are connectivity and leaving no one behind in your country?  What's your action oriented concluding message for us.
We'll start with Anna and go to Cristian Tejada after Anna.
>> ANNA HIGGINS: Thank you.
So there are a few action items that we discussed at the IGF U.S.A. that would be beneficial to Americans as we continue to deal with COVID and continue to deal with this third wave, first of all, we discussed that it is important to make resources easier to access for communities, for example, before federal communication, tribes were trying to get rights over their land and we discuss the practices like this, they should be way more commonplace.
Second, we talked about how we should focus on capacity building and training communities to openly sustain networks to echo a lot of the points made today when communities have the necessary technical skills they can keep their own networks up and running.  Finally, we discussed that we need to push more funding, there should be resources on rural, tribal lands spent, for small, locally owned provider, echoing how important the community networks are here, and we need more stimulus and infrastructure funding, we had one stimulus bill in March, it has been several months since then and we need more funding from the federal government.
>> JANE COFFIN: Thank you.  
1 minute each.  Thank you for keeping to that.
Next up, just to make sure that I have my order here correct, Cristian Tejada, any final thoughts?  A minute left.
>> CRISTIAN TEJADA: Sorry, I have to move to a meeting now.  Roberto, over to you.  Give a one‑minute wrap up on what needs to be done. 
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much.  
We know that inclusion has several dimensions, but one common aspect discussed in the panel, most regions are covered with service, that have particularly mobile internet service, but the bad thing, it is that we're not reaching even half of the populations in our different regions and I think the main reason is because of the prices of this service.  There's a lot of effort to do in our countries, particularly in the government side.  As the vice Minister said before, the government, they need to provide very big incentives to all of the operators and I'm hoping through that kind of actions they'll be able to provide really, really affordable service for the citizens and hopefully that will help to reduce this big hole that we have.
Thank you very much.
>> JANE COFFIN: Perfect.  1 minute exactly.
Over to you.
>> PONCELET ILELEJI: Bringing down cost.  One way is to bring down costs.  We saw how the world changed with SIM cards, if we look at the countries now, there is times in Africa that the SIM card, it was 20, how do we get it down to 0?  We'll be able to bring down the costs of the internet, you cannot do it without ‑‑ without ‑‑ with our telco, because most ‑‑ most parts of the world, essentially in Sub‑Saharan Africa, the mobile telco, they have the data and we have to encourage our governments, we have to continuously massage them more to realize that in order to build the digital economy, they want to see, our leaders want to see, they want the cost to come down, the average month, they can afford it, look at it, as they look at transferring of the funds.
That's the last point.    thank you.
>> JULIAN CASASBUENAS: Over to you, Sindy, a minute for final thoughts.
>> SINDY OBED: Okay.  Thank you.
I will add that the community networks is for digital inclusion, so as someone said, digital inclusion, the access to the internet and the access to content, access to educational content, digital literacy, that content, so there are many challenges, all of the stakeholders on the table, we ‑‑ the solution, we cannot ‑‑ we need a sustainable slugs to achieve the digital connectivity.
Infrastructure, it is basic for digital connectivity.  Thank you so much. 
>> JANE COFFIN: Perfect.
Now, I think we're over to you, what's your wrap up?
>> NYADAK AJAWIN:  Government‑driven strategies are important, when they rally all of the action, people are going to follow-through and we also suggest for more national driven companies, more than on an international basis because then they're regulated locally and we're able to, you know, advertise or to be able to reach them on a national level.
Also just prioritization, telecommunication structure, the majority of the money, they need to invest in education, invest in telecommunication service, because they're the key.  COVID has shown people that we need technology, we condition run away from it, we really need the government intervention to come through.
>> JULIAN CASASBUENAS: You're brilliant!  Fast there!  Thank you very much!.
Coming to you from South Sudan!  Thank you!  All right, you'll wrap it up with us, your thoughts, and I'll do 30 seconds to close.  I have been typing some things in the chat.
The final concluding remarks. 
>> JULIAN CASASBUENAS: I have been mentioning a lot of recommendations from different stakeholders and I would highlight others, like the importance of opensource software, free and opensourced software and free and opensourced hardware that is reducing the costs and facilitates network maintenance, see specially by the community network initiatives.
Understanding that connected 50% is connected requires a collaborative environment, not competition where everyone condition tributes and works so that the communities are strengthened and empowered, achieving the autonomy in the installation and the maintenance of infrastructure, network development has been historically been a function that only operators have exercised, however there are initiatives in which other actors of the digital ecosystem are investing in this deployment and this is a good alternative to ensure a faster deployment, especially rural areas with only the capabilities of the large operators to take even longer.  The telecommunication sector has multiple obligations in terms of quality of service, however due to the geographies of rural areas it is difficult to meet these indicators due to the service or establishment times.  In that sense, the flexibility of the processes, they will facilitate more operators to have a presence in rural areas.
Thank you.
>> JANE COFFIN: Brilliant.  Thank you so much.
Thank you, everyone, for the comments, for the speed round, for being here today and thank you for what you're doing at the national, regional, local levels, the local IGFs are very, very important, whether it is a national, regional, even a community IGF, it is really great to see what you're doing to provide more access and inclusion and it is just exciting to see all of you participating here today because it gives us energy to keep doing what we're doing and to keep pressing on whether we're Civil Society, technical community, community network, working with government and others.  Thank you again for all of your efforts.  Thank you for your time, and thank you most of all for participating today and for your great thoughts and comments.
I think we're at time.  We want to just thank everybody for being so thoughtful.  It is really helpful and thank you for what you're doing.  Keep it up.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-nri-digital-rights-and-impact-on-democracy^^

 
 >> MODERATOR:  I'm Anja Gengo.  I work with so many of you for a couple of years now, it is a true pleasure to work with colleagues actively.  We have had last‑minute changes on who will moderate the session.  Usually I'm a backup to all of the NRI sessions, but you never know what will happen with technology and I'm very, very happy to be actively with the participants and the panelists here in this session.  I think it is one of the most important topics, probably the most broadest topic that the NRIs were addressing in this week, this is the seventh and the last NRIs collaborative session this week, we're having a main session next week and that will conclude our collective organized participation.
Before I come to the brief explanation of the process and who are our distinguished speakers today and what the topic is about, I would like to start this session with quite a shocking inside news for many of us in the NRIs community who were close colleagues and friends of Ms. Marilyn Cade, you know, unfortunately Marilyn has left us, there was a shocking news for all of us, she's not among us anymore and out of the respect for a great collaboration we had for so many year, great friendship, we have developed, I'm going to ask for a minute of silence in the honor of Marilyn in this session.  Thank you. 
With that, I would like to officially start this session, for the quick introduction, the NRIs collaborative sessions are a result of several months long process organizing the sessions by the NRIs, all of the topics were developed through an open consultive bottom‑up process through the network and we have had 7 other session, this particular one, it is addressing digital rights and how digital rights are impacting our democracies.  It is a broad topic but following the inputs that I have received from the speaker, I have no doubt that we're going to narrow down the focus on where we see the biggest impact on people related to this topic.  With that, if you allow me, I would like to quickly introduce our panelists that are with us today.  This session is being organized by four participating NRIs, Nigeria IGF, France IGF, Mauri ITU s IGF in access the Italian IGF and we have Mr. Gbenga Sesan from the Nigeria IGF, I hope that Mr. Gbenga Sesan will join us very soon ‑‑ you are here!  Welcome!  Excellent to have you!  In addition to Gbenga Sesan, we have Jennyfier Chretien, my French is very, very bad.
We have our dear colleague and a friend, Mahendranath Busgopaul, and we have Andrea Beccalli who has worked in his capacity at ICANN but on behalf of the Italian IGF this evening with us.  
I'm referring this evening, because here in Geneva it is close to 8:00 p.m. I think we are in a similar zone, all of us, at least the speakers, the attendees may be coming from different zones so it could be that for you it is maybe convenient work hour.  In any case, it is a nice topic to conclude this workday.
I would like to open the floor to our speakers relating to contemporary challenges for our societies facing it is a relates to digital rights, as the global internet penetration is growing as a digitalization process, they're more and more integrated in our life dynamics, we're seeing differences in how the public services are being delivered, nothing has better proven the purpose of the internet as the ongoing pandemic when all of the schools went digital, when our work went digital, when our social interactions went digital and all in different aspects of our life.  It is something definitely to address this evening and I would like to on this topic maybe to start from our very interesting part of the world, beautiful country, Mauritius, Mahendranath Busgopaul, can you give us reflections on the concept of digital rights and how digitalization has impacted the democracy and the democratic processes in your community?
>> MAHENDRANATH BUSGOPAUL: Thank you.  Hello, everybody.
As Anja introduced me, I'm Mahendranath Busgopaul today we'll look on the issues of the content challenges regarding digital rights and let me just start by saying we cannot halt progress, that would be like sit sitting on the beach thinking we can stop the tide, instead we must learn, adapt, and that's what we have learned from our IGF.  Globally the population, they're getting online, recent events accelerated this, but soon it will become a Human Rights.  The growth of global internet penetration as a digitalization of society intersects more intensively with delivery of public services, social interaction, business efficiency.
The advances in internet applications in these areas have changed the way we're receiving information and participating in public discourse.  It is time to ask what are the contemporary challenges and changes for our society regarding the digital inclusion and rights?  How should this new media appreciation ‑‑ applications be governed and regulated.  What's the Best Practice, how can it be enforced?  A 100% digitalized society with everyone included and online, which is an inevitable outcome and we must address the subject of digital rights, appropriate enforced, formal digital rights and the best practice essentially are the trajectory of this technology development and the good process and how it will allow us to enjoy new intellectual property on our digital assets because they would be covered with an ethical and practical legal boundaries.  
Here some legislations are already in place to safeguard the digitalization of citizens with regard to innovation and information.  However, numerous challenges prevail which do not motivate our citizens to fully embrace the innovation that we're seeing.  Citizens know their digital rights?  Probably not.  People have a right to own their data, but too often this can be hijacked by cooperations and governments alike, depriving citizens of choice, freedom and sometimes even free will, there should be a mechanism in police beyond consent of every citizen to reclaim his or her data and this is precisely what cooperations and governments have done with them and being able to reviews data or personal identity information to be stored.  Best Practices should be enforced so that the behaviors of big tech giants and governments are aligned with the needs of individuals in our society.  We have an intellectual property act in 2019 with a view of addressing issues related to intellectual property rights.  This act provides setting up of an intellectual property council, the role of which is mainly advisory and which is to ensure coordination among the public and private sectors in the formulation of intellectual property policies and enforcement of intellectual property rights.  The intellectual property office which is under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has the mission to assert an effective protection of industrial property rights, creates an environment for innovative and inventive activities here.  They are also required for an orderly exchange on goods and services in the marketplace in compliance with hybrid standards and treaties of the World Intellectual Property Organization..  Nevertheless, the structure of the PU has to be further consolidated to encourage our citizens, particularly the use to combat with innovative ideas and contribute to the emerging economy.  Furthermore, the associated course in securing patents to enjoy intellectual property are extremely high which is the emergence of the local inventions and the innovative products and the services, given the lack of such facilities with regard to patenting, the country experiences considerable difficulties to be protected globally.  The registration of software, hardware solutions is quite few in number.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.
I have to say, you surprise me.  Thank you for this.  Usually when I listen to these types of dialogues and information they start with the more traditional narrative of going into the field of Human Rights and freedom of expression and privacy.  I think this is a needed input for us and we'll definitely come back to the protection of Intellectual Property.  I would like to now move just quickly to the Italian IGF, the same question for you, just on understanding where is the biggest impact of digitalization on the delivery of public services in Italy, how do you see the concept of digital rights in general?  Is that something that has different views and different narratives across the communities?
>> ANDREA BECCALLI: Hello.  Thank you for the question.
Let me just express my condolences for the sad loss of Marilyn Cade.  I have been fortunate as many of us in this community to know her and it is a good example of cross utilization of longstanding, even before I existed community member in ICANN that kept being very active and promoting the multistakeholder approach under the same ethos of multistakeholder work and engaging new communities within the IGF.  It is indeed an example for many of us.  You may have liked it or not, but you have to recognize that she was an incredible worker, engager, mover, productive and if all of us did 1%, 5% of her drive, we would really accomplish something, see real change in these environments.
On this discussion, on digital rights, this is something that the Italian IGF this year given the consistency of being in the COVID crisis, being a country that firsts that Europe, we had a very severe lockdown, and suddenly it was a wake‑up call for everybody on the internet test, something that we all shared.  For how traumatic and dramatic it was, and it still is, it did bring back to the center of the policy public discourse the attention of internet, the economic, social impacts and other things connected with that.  That was very welcome in Italy within the framework of the IGF actually going back to the very first versions of the IGF promoting this idea of internet Bill of Rights, a sort of document that's a Bill of Rights that would frame those rights and make sure that these rights would be part of the national institution and part of our global recognition from all users of the internet.  We go back into really 2008, 2009 and then with ups and downs, this work, it had a boost in 2015 with the declaration of the internet rights, of the charter of the internet rights, it was 10%, it was actually drafted by multistakeholder experts team, Chaired by the speaker of the representatives and then the document that we're speaking about, in 2015.  Suddenly, or not suddenly, but, you know, evidently this document disappeared, the discussion disappeared from the landscape and unfortunately the governments that followed after, they didn't take this charter, they didn't try to implement it and everything changed during the IGF and probably as a side effect of the pandemic and suddenly basic issues, such as ensuring everybody has equal access when you put as a decree that everybody has to work at home and suddenly you figure out that there are huge differences in connectivity costs, in bridge, in literacy, and that became even more evident with remote learning, the schools, having and sharing the ‑‑ I remember the first weeks, we all remember the first weeks or days, you know, nobody thought how do we do that?  There was no plan to do remote learning and people started running around, trying to figure out if there were some recommendations and documents done and all of this, it wasn't there, but it did push again the awareness that the internet is no longer a leisure, it is no longer another means of communication, it is no longer cyberspace but a central part of our societies and our economy and of ensuring that our rights are fulfilled.
A whole session was approached during the Italian IGF, and the interesting part, it is that there was this exercise in bridging the Italian charter of rights with the UN high‑level panel recommendation on the digital cooperation and how the two documents are looking at the same aim in ensuring that internet, that it is taken seriously as part of the ‑‑ not as other Human Rights but as ‑‑ as ‑‑ you know, as an essential function of a society.  That was one of the main ‑‑ it was one of the main probably highlights of the discussion hopefully in Italy, the Italian IGF would push through, this will move forward back from 2015.
Another part of the other side of the internet and we see it and we have had discussion about this also at the Italian IGF, it is how at the same time the internet, the platforms, they have an impact on public discourse which by also they have an impact on basic rights and they have an impact on the legislative process, they have an impact even on in the case of a pandemic, of misleading, pushing for false information and health and safety.  This is something that also became quite prominent into the discussion. 
And I remember one session that I attended with the Italian IGF, it was mentioned today, still how many people were not sure a vaccine for the seasonal flu was needed and how much that was pushed through the internet and social media.  Of course, this is the other side of the discussion that we need to take into consideration because now, you know, we have more and more evidence on what a social media driven algorithm and attention to the economy can have as an impact on our rights and our societies.  Both these things were discussed in the Italian IGF and I want to stop here because I would continue with other questions.
If I may close, one of probably the most important resolutions to me for the Italian IGF, it was this idea of getting back, even the Prime Minister, one of his televised speech, one of the very first one announcing the restriction, he himself said I personally believe that the internet should be a democratic institution and I will work for this to happen.  You know, it suddenly reached this level of political attention and I hope that it will follow-through and that's ‑‑ you know, we'll have a good positive impact also on the work of the global IGF in achieving that.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for the excellent inputs.
I have quite a bit of notes from you.
Both you and Mahendranath Busgopaul had mentioned the legislation, how basically our laws and policies are being changed.  I would like us to continue in that spirit, maybe go now with the French IGF and maybe you can start by pronouncing your last name so I can see how close I was and to tell us, yes, in France, what do you see as a priority of the impact of digitalization processes on the overall democracy especially what's happening on a field of legislation, you're known as probably one of the leading countries that's actually changing laws and policies.
>> JENNYFER CHRETIEN: Thank you.  My last name, it is Jennyfier Chretien.
>> MODERATOR: I was not even close!  Thank you! 
>> JENNYFER CHRETIEN: I will speak with two hats on, both as representative of the IGF France and as representative of Renaissance Numerique.  To contribute to the discussion I would like to share two reflections: 
First, a general observation:  The Universal Fundamental Rights and Freedoms, it is being lost in digital globalization, there is no fundamental rights or freedom related to digital matters that escapes regionalization.  The internet that we wish open is being put in line with national and international regulations that are being developed and with growing concerns about consolidation of the internet economy.
Moreover, the contractualization takes presence dense over the universal, democratic consensus on digital regulation.  Digital regulations through standards and non‑state bodies such as the W3C has become the norm.  New transnational bodies, creators of standards like the global internet forum to counterterrorism or the Facebook, this membership issues in the context of multistakeholder participation.  Citizens are moving from private spaces to public spaces, it poses an issue.  A place where democratic issues are applied, it is shrinking, not only on the surface but in terms of time spent in such spaces.  We have observed with intensity in context of the COVID crisis.
Before democratic spaces have transformed in which we wish to take the refuge in order to regain our fundamental rights and freedom, it has become important to define what governs the private spaces which is also our civil space.  We have to have firms of governance to escape this current unbalanced relationship and have democratic components in the mode of operation of digital services beyond the terms and conditions.  You need to facilitate collaboration with diverse user, both at the company level and at the macro level.  My second point deals with our local context in Europe.  The European Union has developed a strong framework to protect citizens in the digital age, in particular with the general data protection regulation.  The European Commission published in June its first text which leaves room for maturing of improvement in terms of harmonization between Member States and better appropriation by citizens who are urging the rights to them and by organizations and businesses with regard to the implementation of the rights.  Beyond the protective framework, we have a progressive version the fundamental rights and freedoms, this version, it is a long‑term and has a lot of conjecture which in crisis, like the COVID pandemic, it grows in multitude.
Both France and the European Union are wondering how to balance these rights, in particular, between security and freedom issues, the COVID crisis, it has looked at the difficulty of achieving the balance once again.  In France, debates on technologies of the censorship by the Constitutional Council of the Law aimed at combating online hate speech have crystallized the discussions this year.
About this, the current Articles of the text and in particular the first Article on the obligation for platform on operators to remove the content within 24 hours and the freedom of expression and the communication in a manner that is unnecessary in inappropriate and disproportionate.  This suggestion is perfectly inline of the position of some members of IGF France in creating Renaissance Numerique, it is interesting to note that in the two cases social connection, content regulation, the framework putting the fundamental rights and freedoms already exists.  However, it suffers from an insufficient application and from attempts to weaken it.  In the context of the terrorist attacks in France, the security where this was discussed, it correlates to the general surveillance and it is calling into question a number of protective conditions.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I want to thank you for drawing the attention to the legal procedures if we see breaches of any rights or freedoms online through the digitalization means.  I think you brought an important factor in our discussion for this is subjective, what I'll say, I think we're always missing in our global discussions, which are the courts and the prosecutors, those are the ones that are at the end, they come up with decisions while we're still struggling to extend the normative side of the digital processes and the digital rights.  Thank you so much.
I would like to come back to that later.  Let's continue with our introduction remarks, I ask that you keep it concise, we have a bit more than half of an hour I think to conclude this session and I can tell from profiles of the colleague that are present with us today that they want to come in on the open discussion when we open the floor.  On that, the same question, I would like to give the floor to Mr. Gbenga Sesan for the perspective from Nigeria, do you see the digitalization processes and how they're impacting the democratic processes in your country?
>> GBENGA SESAN: Thank you.  The challenge of speaking last, it is that you're the one that gets the notice of the Chair that you have to keep the time.  I will do my best.
Of the Nigeria IGF, the theme, like many other things, it was influenced ‑‑ first of all, it was virtual and the theme for Digital Economic Development in a Post‑COVID‑19, and the focus was the digital economic development.  That's why I want to talk very quickly about four points and on the first, it is what I consider a major opportunity for Nigeria, something that we're not doing well with, but that obviously was discussed with IGF and is a major point for all of the countries that may have similar experiences and we know for a fact that kids who are out of school because of COVID‑19 or because they also cannot have access to the internet, which is basically the bottom 40%, not just in Nigeria, across the world, they have two challenges.  The first, they can't learn things others are learning and the second challenge, they have forgotten all of the things they learned before schools closed and this is research cutting and talked about over time.  I think if there was any time for us to talk a lot more about digital inclusion, making sure that broadband is not something just limited to companies and people of means that internet access is affordable and reliable, and it is now.  The consequences are more dire than they were before.  You know, people who are supposed to work remotely, study remotely, practice social distancing, you know, being able to buy things online, if they're not connected I have always say there are three categories, there are the unconnected, those not connected, there are the disconnected, who were connected but were cutoff either because of at times government over reach, you know, and those that are connected.  We need to pay attention to the unconnected and disconnected.  As I speak, we all know that we're dealing with different terms right now.  It is weird for a year like this.
The opportunity of the universal service funds that Nigeria, many other countries have, is with the fact that there is now an agreement between the governance forum which is made up of all of the states that are across Nigeria and, you know, the ministry in charge of infrastructure to reduce the right‑of‑way which basically is the cost it will take to bring this fiber cable into the innerland, it is just competition between states, if it stays in the southwest, for example, the states declared we're going to have this so cheap and another state, northwest, they decided guess what, it is not cheap, it is free and that's the kind of competition that allows Telecom companies to lay more fiber and to do more of that.  That's the first point.
Second point, in terms of the role that digital rights will play in the digital economy because the digital economy is the answer for many countries, including Nigeria, in terms of socioeconomic growth.
Everyone knows the numbers for Nigeria, 500 million eventually, poverty capital of the world, things like that, but a digital economy provides a huge opportunity for us to set people on the path towards opportunities and that I think can only happen if we promote the Rights of the citizens and that leads me to my fourth point, the legislative challenge we have, this is not a Nigerian debate alone but a global debate, we have a dichotomy between the security and the rights which by the way is not in reality, the reality is the fact that in many cases security has become an excuse to infringe on rights but I'm glad to see a lot of push back by citizens and conversations across the world, including in Nigeria, a practical example, a few weeks ago, last week actually there were more conversations by some government representatives about introducing social media bill that could clamp down on social media users and it is exciting to see the kind of reaction by young people on social media towards that.  Nigeria is now thankfully making the leap from just having a regulation to having a proper digital privacy and protection law.  That's commendable as well because in society, it was also included.  I will make a last point because I can see that Madam Chair is looking at me already.
The last point, it is a huge opportunity that Nigeria had for the last ‑‑ we came very close to having digital rights and freedom law in 2019 when the parliament passed the bill, digital rights and freedom bill which goes to the President's table but was not signed into law.  Thankfully, it is now back in parliament, in fact, it has enjoyed some form of fast tracking and this I'm happy to talk a bit more as we go into details.  I think that legislative environments that focus on innovation are not in focus on a climate of fear and punishment and that's what we need to promote digital rights and to make sure that right now and even post‑COVID we have a better digital economy.
I'll stop here for now.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I thank you for respecting the time.  You have said quite a lot.  We'll have opportunities later to it come in with expanding on this excellent point that you have shared.
Before we open the floor, I'm going to ask all of the participants to think about the questions that they would like to ask you or maybe from their own countries and communities would like to bring inputs.  Some, if not all of you mentioned the impact of the pandemic.  I remember we almost in April had a proposal completely ready while still thinking the IGF will happen on site and I do remember us, a couple of us, there was more of us involved in preparing this session, when we said that despite the unbelievable challenges, the harm that the COVID pandemic has done to the world, at least one good thing has come out of it, which is what some of you have said, it is really prompting some decision maker, leadership, experts to think about the importance of being meaningfully connected to the internet.  With that in mind, I wanted to ask all of our panelists what are the good practices, good actions that were prompted in yarns thanks to the pandemic and thanks to the enforce basely of the digitalization processes and so many aspects of our lives as I said from the beginning, schools, digital overnight, some of us being fortunate to work from our homes online, some unfortunately losing jobs but then forced to go to the digital market and to find new ones.  Were there any good actions?  In addition to that, speaking about the currently present issues on public digital policy in our communities were they may be exacerbated by the pandemic COVID‑19 or do you think that the growing use of people of the internet services did not impact the issues that are present in the countries.  Maybe with these questions to start from, I think on my list, it is maybe to go back to Jennyfier Chretien if Jennyfier Chretien, if you agree, just to give us an overview on this question.
>> JENNYFER CHRETIEN: This questions, there is uncertainties and we have to consider the internet as a common good and digital access as a Human Rights.  The crisis has shown all of the digital divides and without this access people can't imagine the digital society, we have to define what is the minimum acceptable level of digital access and this has to be universally shared.  Moreover, as I explained the pandemic has shown the difficulty of obtaining the balance between security and freedom principles in a period of crisis.  For example, in order to enforce confinement, forces to move to the movement of the populations in Paris, and the council of states in France, they judge that the deployment within that framework, it is an infringement to a right of privacy.
That's an example of the question.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for that.
Let's briefly move 1, 2 minutes to let me see, maybe to Andrea Beccalli, from the Italian IGF.
>> ANDREA BECCALLI: Yes.  Hello again.
This is an interesting question.  As I said, the worst is the general recognition and awakening on the impact of the internet on digital rights and it was multifaceted so for instance suddenly after months of GDPR being bombarded on everyone suddenly people are surprised in Italy that the contract tracing app wasn't being used, people were not loading it on their phones.  The general sentiment is that people were not sure about their data.  To someone that observes and studies and works in this environment it is kind of making you laugh because you think well, I'm sure that you have Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, YouTube, you never think about what happens with your data.  In this case, you know, probably because it was in an emergency situation, with the health crisis, there is this kind of science of threat of the personal space that already the virus is taking, that's something that is exacerbated and this awareness of your personal data and at the same time, on other fronts, the government is able to thanks to the emergency to push on the digital identity for instance, they used probably the oldest trick to take the digital identity, many of the countries in Europe, around the world, they do to follow worker, to get unemployment benefits, it has been online you're asked to register to get this information, so that way, a spike of, this is one side, it is more how do you interface with the public authority which is different discussion than your personal digital identity on the internet in general.  There is more general awareness actually.  I myself realize still how much the discussion that we had with the IGF, the Italian IGF, it is a small niche of people and I myself was surprised to see the number of participants from this year, the Italian IGF, we went to the thousands and some sessions, 15,000 participants, I wouldn't believe it myself, but it is this strange combination of everybody being at home, everybody suddenly being aware that, you know, the government is asking you to download this app for contact tracing, you have these feelings of, well, will they track me for something else, and then suddenly you have more awareness about your right to privacy that you never had before, even though you have been using the social media platforms for many years.  There are some interesting side effects on that.  Probably one that is not really related to the digital policy issues, but as part of that, it is the recognition that the next phase, hopefully there will be a next phase will have to be way more digital than it was so far.  That goes primarily on the economic level and getting back into a situation where most economies are in recession but also on the rights level.  Of course, it is easier to see the economy side of things, for instance, the next generation, E.U., the funds that the European Union will ‑‑ the countries within Europe agreed to put for the recovery, 20% of the 750 billion will have to be on digital and that has to be specified.  That's something that the Italian IGF, we were aware, we need to get ready for that, it will be resources come, we need to be sure that we'll not go back in this situation where suddenly you realize there are huge gaps in access, huge access in literacy, remote learning, it is a nightmare, and we have to deal with that.  This is something that prompts good action, one, from the government, okay, this time we have to put money, one from the general public that suddenly sees that the internet is something more than just another means of communication, that the rights on the internet are count an important element and even sometimes there is a realization that their own rights are part of the internet economy and people are asking, well, is that something they're continuing.  The fact that the discussion is happening, it is actual something very good and they didn't see that before at that level of participation.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
I have actually two keywords for you, one, trust, centralized trust and another one, it is that it helps in raising awareness.  I think that's something that we'll come in concluding remarks on just to tackle a little bit on the cause from that.  Before that, let me please go back to Mr. Mahendranath Busgopaul, the same question I have for you, I'm not aware of what was the situation with COVID‑19 and I know that the country was affected, how did it effect the internet related policies and practices in the country.
>> MAHENDRANATH BUSGOPAUL: Thank you.  The outbreak of COVID‑19 pandemic has witnessed dramatic economic downturn globally.  Here some businesses managed to survive thanks to the digital framework and strategies which have driven online trading activities during the confinement period.  We had the confinement period.  The pandemic has in fact created opportunities for leveraging our digital facilities to sustain and grow equal activities.  In so doing, new threats are also a reason and an appropriate measure has had to be implemented to circumvent the adverse effects.  For instance, to curtail fake news and misinformation, a dedicated website and mobile app known as be safe Maurice on COVID‑19, it has been launched, measures introduced have also restricted the extent to which internet users could post online contents on social media and other platforms.  Many believed it is able to spread misinformation.  In this spirit, some citizens considered the measures introduced as impacting negatively on the digital rights and freedoms while others welcome the controls and the initiatives.  Our physical rights and freedoms have deeply declined because of the necessity to limit the spread of the disease to protect citizens.  Sure, COVID‑19, it is a threat but not the plague, nor Ebola, social media has disinformation through polarizing opinions, this is in fact a way to reduce our rights and freedom.  We have to reclaim access to the knowledge and be willing to take our own risk with our deep understanding of the situation.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.
We'll come as well to the concept of the epidemic that emerged in the pandemic, the spread of inaccurate information through the means of social media and internet in general.  I think it is very important to be addressed as well and it is a good practice for you to learn about.  Thank you.
I would like for us to just give word to the Nigeria IGF, to Mr. Gbenga Sesan, same question for you.  You have touched upon quite a lot in your first remarks, so I'm going to ask you to just focus concretely on the impact of COVID‑19 pandemic on the digitalization processes and on people and on the internet users in Nigeria, have any issues emerged, whether it prompted any good actions.
>> GBENGA SESAN: I think it is two things.
One, it is the fact that it has put pressure on the bottom of the pyramid who didn't really have opportunities before, you know, somebody who was already in public school and you're now asking them to go learn online, that's tough call.  You know, it takes a lot to have a device that can do that and also to make sure that he has internet access and that is able to charge with enough battery power to be able to use it.  Good news is, you know, the pressure has always brought the issue of the importance of access to the fore, right now we know for a fact that many government processes that were physical are now virtual and so there were Claims by the government institutions or with authorities, this and that, that's good, that's signaling, when you begin to see a lot more government processes go online, then you can be sure that citizens will engage with that process.  Like I said earlier, I think if there is any lesson that Nigeria has learned for this period, it is the fact that if we get people connected, you know, to socioeconomic opportunities then we must also factor reliable and affordable internet access to the equation.  Fortunately for Nigeria, the revised, which is now the broadband plan from 2013, it was on to 2018, and a new broadband plan has now been introduced, you know, it is supposed to be implemented right now.  We're not exactly pleased with the implementation of the first plan, but Nigeria now has an opportunity to, you know, definitely make sure that implementation of the new version is much better and reality ‑‑ I have said it many times, Nigeria can never build enough schools, physical schools for the number of children that come through high school.  You have upwards of 1.8 billion people writing exit exams from secondary schools, high schools each year, colleges, universities, they can only admit about 800,000, it is roughly 48 to 50% of that.  It means that the rest of the kids have to wait until the next year but now that people are learning online, there is no limit to the size of the classroom because it is not physical and that's a huge opportunity for Nigeria and other countries.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  This is a positive note.  Excellent message to send on the point of schools, sometimes we don't think like that, that actually internet is such a good alternative for educating everyone in a meaningful way.  Thank you.
I think we have a request for the floor from Daphne Stevens, you have the floor.
>> Daphne Stevens:  Yes.  Thank you.  Thank you for giving me the floor.
I think I definitely agree with the points that were brought up by Andrea Beccalli with regard to the more awareness among the citizens.  I saw in the Netherlands where I live that a lot of people started thinking and realizing, hey, we have a right to privacy when the COVID app was introduced and people were scrutinizing and in the process, it even led to a more privacy friendly COVID app showing where citizens can have a big impact and now with regards to the epidemic of disinformation linked to it, I think that governments are playing big roles as well to create awareness that they never really had done before, before the pandemic took place because now they're saying, hey, how can you see this information, how can you check whether the information you see online is actually true or not?  I think that's not something that's only taking place in the Netherlands, but I think if you remember it properly, it took place in the U.K. and other countries.  That's a good step in the right direction.
I wanted to bring that to your attention as well.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: I truly appreciate you bringing that input and confirming what colleagues were saying as well.
I have to say, in completely agreeing with you, on the agenda of the NRIs across the world, that's what I have been see, that the main panels were organized on the matters of awareness raising, on trust, but also concepts of privacy and access as a right or a utility in Kenya.  It is definitely on the global agenda.  You are completely, right.  Thank you.  We have a couple more minutes.  I want to ask our participants if they would like to take the floor and to ask our participants any specific questions.
You can raise your hand or let me know in the chat.
In the meantime, there was one question in the Q&A regarding fake news and social media.  It seems to me one difficulty is the following, it is not always easy to draw the lines between expressing an opinion counter intuitive or as weird as it may seem and convey news, be it real or fake, for example vaccines against this is it fake news or opinion.  A very good question.
Much of the content, it is really about semantics as well, about the interpretation and I would defer, of course, if anyone from our speakers would like to respond to this one to do so.  I think it relates a lot to the standards that many of us were mentioning.
Anyone that would like to speak, you can come in.
>> GBENGA SESAN: I would like to speak to this.  It is an ongoing conversation in Nigeria.  
Like I mentioned earlier, you know, there was a protest led by young people and immediately ‑‑ it was coordinated on social media and immediately after government started to say that Nigeria needs a social media policy, the Minister said when in China, he was not able to do this and that and Nigeria needs to be able to switch off social media at will.  That's a terribly delivered speech, but we have now instead of having this conversation around a question, what is the speech, what is fake new, does fake news, is it opinion expressed but not appreciated by government?  Does it mean if I question something that's within my right to even express an opinion that could shock people, does that mean that it could be a claim of national security or national morality?  I think that we need to be careful with allowing governments to get away with getting behind security and public morals to use social media laws and codes to clamp down.  I say this because my organization initiative works across Africa and what you have seen, it is that many legislation, many laws that I have introduced in many countries, they're not primarily for the purposes mentioned, for example, Tanzania, Uganda introduced social media taxes in a bid to raise money for the economy, but the reality is, they didn't raise money for the economy, what they did was cutoff Uganda 3 to 5 million users over a short period of time.  It definitely defeats the economic argument that you're making.  I think it is important of an opportunity to educate users to ‑‑ so that people know not to share what it can't confirm.  You know, the idea that legislation is the answer to disinformation ordaining resilience speech, it is in itself a dangerous concept, especially vs where people cannot address, what I think we have to do a lot more, it is a multistakeholder opportunity like the IGF, where we can have conversations around the community norms such that the community itself begins to reject what is untrue, what is false, what is dangerous instead of, you know, clamping down, when we clamp down, what we do, we create a black market of information dissemination and it would be worse than some of the dangers we see now.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Thank you.  I think you centralized an important point which is digital literacy and education, development of critical thinking and not everything is on the side of those that are making final decisions, and a lot is on the side of us that are using primarily the internet and the digital technologies.  I see others are also quite grateful.  Thank you for that perspective from Uganda, Tanzania, this is actually excellent to hear.  I'm sorry we don't have colleagues sitting with us.  It is definitely something to reach out to them and maybe next year to prepare a session on it..
I don't see raised hands, or typed in the chat.  I have seen some excellent comments on the existing practices in some countries.
With that, if you then agree, I would like to us go to the concluding part of what's been a very interesting conversation and of course on a very broad topic but I think we did come down to three, four important points that I'll bring up later.  Now I would like to ask our speakers to speak about the ways to advance the concept of our digital rights with some concluding commitments or action‑oriented pledges or plans for the next queer or next year, how to advance practices that will serve all of us in ways suitable to look at our rights and freedom.
Let's start with Nigeria, if you don't mind. 
>> GBENGA SESAN: Very, very one key point, I think that Nigeria, other countries are going to have an opportunity of taking advantage of the moment that we're in with event, including local events in the U.S., elections, elections in African countries, Tanzania, Guinea, all of that, there is so much ‑‑ there is a lot of debate around what's happening on social media and all of that, reality is that much more people will get connected in many of our countries and I think as we get connected these issues we're talking will amplify.
Number one, in places where organizations, you have people starting to work on safe examples of digitalized and freedom law process, I think this is an opportunity for us to rally around that and ask the question what kind of impact.  Do we want to provide?  Is it a climate of fair or of innovation?  I would vote for the latter, I think this is an opportunity that we have.  Of course, the second opportunity is for us to realize that this is the moment of inclusion, the young men and women that we do not include right now will not like the choices we will make in the next few years.  It is in our interest to make sure that we get everyone connected and everyone on the path of opportunities so that we don't regret, you know, actions they may take out of ignorance or deliberate attempts to question us for not getting them connected.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.
From French IGF, are there any commitments or visions that you have for the coming time on this particular matter?
>> JENNYFER CHRETIEN: Thank you.  We have to make the framework protecting fundamental rights and freedoms more efficient in Europe but also in other regions, justice lacks resources.  For example, this weakens the regulators capacity to control the application of the general protection and we have to reinforce this which is largely insufficient and the second complimentary way, it will consist in using the capacity of the funds of regulation which has standardization to protect fundamental rights and freedoms.  In general, standards refer exclusively to technical material, for example, in the evolution of the evolution of technologies, but we could take into account legal dimensions in the definition.  When it comes for technologies, the ability for a system cannot be determined simply by its technical performance and we could regulate some system of practices.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Thank you very much.
Mr. Mahendranath Busgopaul.
>> MAHENDRANATH BUSGOPAUL: I would agree with my colleague from France.  There is a fine balance and we need to upload the right as described in the GDPR.  This is perhaps a first priority here.  We have to learn from Europe and other nations as well.
I would insist on saying that we should stop the flow of data by using tools without our knowledge.  People need to be educated and have the ability to block tracker, block beneficial cookies and allow individuals to decide what is actually done with our data.  We must have personal choice.  Education, I believe it is a starting point.    we can do it now.  Pulling citizens altogether with educational tools regarding the new polarizing technology is a public action‑oriented pledge from our IGF.  We need to have regulations as there are plenty of misuses of information.
By the way, it is true that we quickly go to regulation, so that we have the right to free speech, we protect it, in the same way our other rights should also be protected.
The right to access is fundamental, connectivity is very important for enhancing the uptake of online service, mobile and fiber coverage are key enablers to extend online services through the internet to a wider range of users.  It should be everyone's right to be connected.
I think that's all from me.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That's powerful message.  Thank you.
  Finally, I'm going to ask Andrea Beccalli for the Italian IGF to provide concluding remarks on the same question before we close the session.
>> ANDREA BECCALLI: For the commitment, I think what would be a viable commitment, and I'm going to back to the Italian IGF, we already discussed, it is to take this charter of internet rights back to the policy attention, we have already done that, and making sure that it actually goes into the legislative process and it is not only a recommendation, but it becomes a law.
What I would suggest, probably an idea, it could be that the network, it could be a way to further expand and update this document.  It would be great as I said, the document goes back to 2015, I think reading today, it still makes much sense, but we now learn many more things about the internet and the impacts on our rights and there are new issues coming up, artificial intelligence is one that is still revealing its powerful impact.  This would be a good exercise for the network.  In a moment as we see it, the attention of the issues, it is way more widespread on a warning we have seen in Europe and I think it is interesting for the IGF to also look, it is in Europe there is this price of the concept of digital sovereignty, something that just a few years ago, a couple of years ago would have been seen with a very negative element and it is a good approach now.
Many of the reasons behind this push for digital sovereignty, they're problems that we don't have time to discuss here, but problems with the internet and it is important on our societies that are known, but it can be a warning trend if everyone thinks about their own digital sovereignty, we then end up having no more one single internet but again, now all of a sudden, there is moves from the IGF fora to the highest levels and we have to make sure that we are not left out of the picture and it is often ‑‑ the economy, it is pushing a lot of policies and awareness on this and the digital sovereignty in my view, it is the case, while all sectors of the economy in Europe turned in an awful, classic auto manufacturing, oil, it is still big in Europe, everyone with money invested in the stock market, they saw everything just went below to the most awful ratings but not in the digital sector.
I think this is something that made a lot of people in the policymaking sphere open their eyes and suddenly you see this push for nurturing alternatives and the cloud service, an alternative to Amazon and Google, it is already moving forward in Europe and alternatives that are on the app, for instance, just recently, I think in Paris, the society that manages the Paris railway, they bought the third largest map providers in France and they want to be the alternative.  You know, there is as always some good side effects to that.
You know, you cannot lose sight of the risk, and in this case, the digital sovereignty one, it is the most worrisome one and this is another area where the IGF and the NRI have a lot of experience to share and a lot of things to say.
My other pledge would be to get the NRIs more involved in the national policymaking and we're very good in discussing, we're really good in the forecasted view and oftentimes we're left out when the legislation is discussed, when the decisions are taken and that's something that it is a real challenge and now that we have the attention on us, I think we're able to see some of that.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for the commitments and I think you gave an excellent conclusion on this session in the concept that you just shared.  I think ‑‑ we're over time.  I would like to thank all participating NRIs.  You spent a long period of time collaborating and working together.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-of12-equals-in-tech-awards-2020^^

 
>> LINDSEY NEFESCH-CLARKE:  Hello, everyone and welcome to the 2020 Equals in Tech Award.  My name is Lindsey Nefesch‑Clarke, and I'm the founder of W4.org, a proud member of the Equals Global Coalition.  We share the goal of the partnership to promote girls’ and women's Digital Inclusion, equality and leadership.  Doreen is the first woman to serve as one of ITU's top elected officials.
>> DOREEN BOGDAN:  Welcome, everyone to the 2020 Equals in Tech Awards.  Since 2013 when the awards were known as the GenTech Awards we have been celebrating initiatives and individuals who inspire us with their dedication to closing the gender digital divide.
This year in the midst of the COVID‑19 pandemic, this work is more critical than ever before.  Even before the pandemic we knew that women and girls did not have equal access to the Internet or digital in skills training or equal opportunities for jobs and leadership in the tech sector, but now as we stay apart to safeguard our health, women and girls are simply being left out, left out of online learning, remote working, telehealth and many other ways that the digital world is serving to keep the world connected.
This is why we rededicate ourselves daily to the work of closing the gender digital divide.  As members of the Equals global partnership, we all share the strongest conviction that it is not only possible but necessary and inevitable that we will bridge the divide and build a bright digital future for everyone.  As our flagship event, these awards recognize those initiatives that are connecting every woman online to services, training every girl to use software, and empowering every woman on tech startup to thrive.  And speaking of thriving, it is very exciting today to have with us our 2019 Equals in Tech Award winner as our keynote speaker.  Silvina Moschini is a leadership success story in many ways, not least of which she is the founder of the award-winning initiative She Works which matches women with potential employers.
You may also have heard the exciting news that Silvina is also the co‑owner of the first pink unicorn company, transparent business to overcome the gender bias in venture funding.  She is truly paving the way for women leaders in tech.  To Silvina and all of you here today working for gender digital equality, Equal stands behind you and champions your work every day, but especially in these extraordinarily difficult times.  
Your efforts give us hope that we will emerge from this pandemic with more digital equality than ever before.  I would also like to take this opportunity to thank our Equals partners for their work as part of the focus coalitions offering their best efforts, their talents, and their resources on the issues of access skills and leadership, and the research needed to refine and improve the work.
We have seen real results and we have challenging rewarding goals to pursue as we continue working together in the years to come.  In previous years, we have met in different cities to celebrate this together.  This is the first time we hold the awards virtually, and I believe this ceremony demonstrates both the difficulties and the new possibilities of digital connectivity.
While we can only see and hear one another through our screens, we can also welcome a much larger community including our friends joining from the IGF 2020, and we are also live streaming on YouTube and on Facebook.
That said, let's remember it is much easier for some to join this ceremony than others.  Connectivity is not a universal experience as everyone knows.
In fact, connectivity for all is one of the goals that unites our community.  The Equals in Tech Award finalist in the access category represent the work of getting everyone connected so that they can benefit from online services.  Finalists in the skills category support training programmes, coding camps, tech workshops and mentoring to make sure all girls and young women can use the technology that is increasingly necessary in our everyday lives.
Our two leadership categories, leadership in SME, and leadership in tech recognize initiatives that pave the way for a future when women are equally represented and equally supported in entrepreneurship, employment, and decision making roles in the tech sector.  And finally, in the Equals global partnership, we believe that actions should be evidence‑based and the finalists in the research category gather and analyze the information that we need in order to understand the gender digital divide, and to bridge it in the near future.
The award finalists and winners that you will meet today represent that future.  And I want to thank you very much again for joining us and thanks to all of the nominees, the winners and the finalists for showing the way forward to a brighter digital future for everyone.
>> LINDSEY NEFESCH-CLARKE:  Ladies and Gentlemen, we are privileged to have with us today another very special guest.  Her name is Silvina Moschini, the first woman to head a business with a valuation of over $1 billion to overcome the gender bias in venture capital financing.
In 2017 Silvina also founded She Works, a platform for connecting women to employers online and Silvina proceeded to win a 2019 Equals in Tech Award in leadership.  In addition to her excellent business accomplishments, Silvina is an expert in online trends.  Silvina, may I ask you to share your thoughts today on the importance and value of fostering women's increased participation in the technology sector.
>> SILVINA MOSCHINI: (Technical Difficulties) 
>> LINDSEY NEFESCH-CLARKE:  As always it was very difficult to choose the five winners.  We had a profoundly impressive group of finalists from all over the world.  There were over 340 nominees from 70 countries representing the private sector, civil society, Governments and academia.  The winners of this year's Equals in Tech Awards will be invited to attend an exciting flagship global event organized by the Equals partners including a stipend to cover travel, accommodation, food and other related costs.  So the moment we are waiting for.  Let's present the 2020 Equals in Tech Awards.
To mark this momentous occasion, I would first like to invite everyone to turn on your cameras and let's make the Equals sign that symbolizes our commitment for gender equality and our host will take the photos and share them on social media after the ceremony.
Wonderful.
We love the symbol.  So to start with the access category, it gives me great pleasure to become Mats Granryd to present the award.
>> MATS GRANRYD:  Thank you so much, Lindsey, and I start with a video to present this year's access category finalists.  So please roll the video.  
(Video.)
>> MATS GRANRYD:  As the cofounder of the Equals partnership, leader of the Equals Access Coalition and Chair of the Equals Steering Committee, we have been at the forefront of the global efforts to bridge the digital gender gap, and achieve Digital Inclusion for everyone.  It, therefore, gives me enormous pleasure to announce this year's winner.  This year's award goes to (Drum roll).  App Laudelina from Brazil.  Congratulations.
>> DENISE DORA:  Thank you.  It's really with a great honour and joy.  We are really moved.  This is a celebration of all domestic workers in the world who represent today around 6 to 7 million people, most of them women working under very severe conditions.  App Laudelina is an app that shares information on rights and connects domestic workers throughout Brazil.  It's sour contribution to improve work conditions, reduce the digital gap for women, particularly the most vulnerable ones.  
We would like very much to thank the Brazilian National Federation of Domestic Workers who has been an incredible partner since the first day for their resilience and courage.  And also thank you the ITU, UN Women, GSMA, The International Trade Centre and the United Nations University for this amazing moment.  Thank you very much.
I speak here on behalf of all of our organisation, but also all domestic workers from Brazil who are sharing this award today and this image.  Thank you very much.
>> LINDSEY NEFESCH-CLARKE:  Thank you so much, Denise, and congratulations again to App Laudelina.  It is so well deserved.  It is now my honour to invite Mr. Houlin Zhao, Secretary‑General for the International Telecommunication Union this time in the category of skills.
>> HOULIN ZHAO:  Very good.  Thank you very much.  I think that this kind of celebration and awards is more important at this moment when everything including our efforts and progress on women's empowerment for years could be lost to the pandemic.  Of course, I don't believe we are lost to the pandemic, but anyhow, this is a moment we get together to celebrate achievement of women's empowerment.  The finalist in video, I invite you to show the video.
(Video).S.
>> HOULIN ZHAO:  The winner is the first women's coding group, the Sisters of Code of Cambodia.  Sisters of Code of Cambodia, this is the first women's coding club.  Congratulations.
>> NATALJA RODIONOVA:  Thank you so much, it's a great honour for me to represent Cambodia tonight and receive this award, and I would like to thank my team and all Sisters of Code who have been working so hard to create the code lab and maybe it accessible to as many girls as possible.
I would like to thank our partners who have encouraged us and helped us a lot to grow and especially to the Minister of Education of Cambodia who has been very supportive.  I would like to thank IT academy who has created the educational program that really works so well, and we have achieved amazing results, and I would like to say that Sisters of Code just started its journey.  We are very young, but with your encouragement and your support coming from all around the world it's very important and we feel we can get better, and hopefully we are led to share our experience and bring this program to anyone who is interested in teaching coding skills to girls because we believe with those skills, girls can become stronger, can become active members of digital economy.  They can learn program solving skills and discover more for themselves.  Thank you so much for giving me this chance to present Sisters of Code tonight.  And speak today from Cambodia.
>> LINDSEY NEFESCH-CLARKE:  Wonderful.  Thank you, congratulations to Sisters of Code.  I love the passion.  May I now invite Dr. David Malone, Director of the Niece University to present the Equals in Tech Award in the category of research.
>> DAVID MALONE:  Thank you so very much.  It's a great honour to be here and also a great pleasure to see friends and colleagues from Equals, all of us on this digital platform.
It's even more exciting to see those who been nominated appearing with us.  So this is great.  Twenty years ago, I was working in a research NGO myself in civil society.  I'm a great believer in their importance.  And in this sense it's a category that matters to me not more than the others, but in a very personal way as well.
So let's hear who the finalists are, please.  This year's award for outstanding research that has made a positive contribution to closing the digital divide goes to.
(Drum roll).
>> GUZELIYA IMAEVA:  Greetings everyone, it is a great honour and pleasure to receive this award here today.  Our research proves that one of the main reasons for gender digital divide is the deeply rooted stereotypes about the role of the women, about the opportunities and even about their abilities.  And we believe we can address this problem by understanding it and by measuring it, and we are happy to announce that our research findings already have impacted local, national and international levels and have also taken into account in case of policy making process by Government and businesses.  So we are ready to join efforts with teams from other countries to share our vision, methodology and to achieve our common goals of achieving gender digital divide.  Thank you very much for Equals in Tech Award.  Thank you.
>> LINDSEY NEFESCH-CLARKE:  Thank you, Guzeliya Imaeva, congratulations again.
Now, before we move onto the leadership awards, let's see if we can bring in our keynote speaker, Silvina.  The floor is yours we are looking forward to hearing from you about, as I said earlier, the value and importance of promoting women's participation in the technology sector.  Thank you.
>> SILVIA ELALUF-CALDERWOOD:  Thank you to much Lindsey, and thanks everyone at Equals in tech for the opportunity.  I am deeply honored and humbled to have the opportunity to be here again.  Last year I was the winner of the leadership award which She Works with the work we are doing at She Works academy and today I want to share a story that marked my life and it has so much to do with everything that we are working for and that we are sharing with all of these amazing leaders that we are celebrating.
When I was a little child, my dad, a very savvy man taught me something that changed my life forever.  He told me that I could be anything that I wanted to be.  And if I wanted to be a Princess, I needed to be a prince.  Ever since then I decided that I wanted to be an entrepreneur, but I didn't want it to be any kind of entrepreneur.  I wanted to be a social impact entrepreneur because I wanted to make the world better because when you are a Chile, when you are a girl, especially, up until five years old, you believe you can do anything.  You believe you can be an astronaut, you believe you can be an engineer.  You believe you can be a CEO of the company, but suddenly when you turn seven, your belief about your capabilities and what you can achieve gets completely damaged, broken.
And this is what society suddenly does for us.  This is what we are very, very happy today to celebrate that we are making an enormous effort to change this narrative and change the reality for girls.  Women have been left behind.  We are paid less, almost 30% less than men, we have been behind in the workforce.  51% of moms abandoned their work because of lack of flexibility.
And when it comes to leading enterprises, only 5% of women are CEOs of Fortune 500 companies.  But this reality has changed and I think that technology is the catalyst for all of this fantastic change.  I'm a technology entrepreneur and a founder of an ecosystem of companies and I'm glad to share that today that a couple of weeks ago, I became the first founder to break a glass ceiling in terms of funding, changing the narrative and changing the repat hopefully for many more women that today we will be encouraged to build big companies, to have big impact.  And we did it by appealing to the people.
I know that accessing to capital for women entrepreneurs is a huge challenge.  It was a challenge for me.  It was a challenge for me every time that I wanted to raise capital and they told me that they saw my enthusiasm, they saw my energy, they saw my passion, they saw my talent also, but it was not enough to give me the money to build a big company.  So I appealed to people and I did a global private offering and invited investors from all over the world to bet on my project to support women to access jobs that could be done from anywhere.
And I build transparent business and which She Works with the support that turned my company into the first pink unicorn.  And this is what they call a company that is valued at a billion dollars.  This is not important because of the money or the technology.  The technology is certainly what makes the world much better because technology as we saw in this pandemic not only saves lives, but it enables us to learn, it enables us to access job opportunities, and when we are able to provide the opportunity to connect the dots between the amazing women that are living all over the world with job opportunities that sometimes exceeds in certain places, we are changing our life.  We are changing our realities.
And as my dad told me then when I was a little child, we become independently economically.  And through independence, it starts with the world, with the ability to make financial decisions.  So I'm here celebrating the winners and the finalists of the Equals in Tech Awards, because these are people that are changing the reality, and are changing the world for many of us.  And as my dad told me once, I could be a Princess, but I needed to be a Princess that builds her own castles, and I believe that the girls that we have inside ourselves and the girls that will be women of tomorrow can do anything they can change the world.  We just need to dream big, and we need to build our tribe because our tribe is what makes us extremely powerful.
And if we do this together, we can accomplish anything.  Thank you very, very much.
>> LINDSEY NEFESCH-CLARKE:  Thank you, Silvina, for the very powerful message and for being a role model and for the crucial role you are doing to close the digital gender divide.  Moving onto the two categories of the leadership awards, the first recognizes entrepreneurial leadership in women‑led business and the second recognizes leadership achievements in the tech sector.  I would like to invite Pamela Coke‑Hamilton, Executive Director of the International Trade Centre to confer the award for leadership in small and medium‑sized enterprises.
>> PAMELA COKE‑HAMILTON:  Thank you so much, Lindsey.  I do appreciate it.  I'm so honored to you here, and I think it's a wonderful opportunity to join you on this occasion and to recognize and celebrate exceptional winners from around the world.  Let's go to know the finalists under this category.  I am delighted to present the Equals in tech 20 award for leadership in SMEs to an organisation doing great work in building economic opportunities for girls and young women through ICTs.  This year's award goes to.
(Drum roll).
African ChangeMakers initiative, Nigeria.  Congratulations!
>> OLUTOPE OLATILEWA EGBETOKUN:  Thank you so much, it is a privilege to be here and an honour to have you.  I think my video is off.  If they can help me turn it on.  Okay.  I can see it now.  Thank you so much, it is a privilege to be here, and I'm so happy, I'm so honored for this opportunity.  I want to say a big thank you to Equal, to United Women, to ITU, to UN University, GSM, thank you for this opportunity.  It's an opportunity that I will not take for granted.
I also want to take the opportunity to thank all African ChangeMakers, the members and those who are supporting us with their skill and their time and with their talent.  Without them, there would be no African ChangeMakers.  We are young, question started 2017 to empower women in terms of entrepreneurship, leadership, we have a fellowship program, we also have a mentoring program, but this award is going to go a long way to motivate us as a team in Nigeria and Africa.  It's going to motivate the African countries and it's also going to open the door for a lot of opportunity to come through.  Thank you for this award.  We will not take it for granted and it's going to take us beyond where we want to.  So thank you so much for the privilege.  Thank you.
>> LINDSEY NEFESCH-CLARKE:  Thank you so much, and congratulations again.  And I love the message to all African ChangeMakers.  So we have reached the fifth and final equals in tech award for 2020 and it's now the leadership in tech category, and it's my pleasure to invite Anita, Deputy Executive Director resource management, UN system coordination, sustainability and partnerships of UN Women.
>> ANITA BHATIA:  Thank you, Lindsey.  It is a pleasure to hear these inspiring story.  I am truly motivated and inspired about all of the things we have heard up until this point.  And I'm sure we will be inspired by the stories we will hear now.  Before we announce the winner, let us meet the inspiring finalists that are leading the way for women in technology.
>> LINDSEY NEFESCH-CLARKE:  Thank you, Anita.  Please go ahead.
>> ANITA BHATIA:  It gives me great pleasure to announce the winner of this category the winner is of the women's empowerment program from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  I would like to congratulate the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology because investing and empowering women at the communications and information technology sector by qualifying women talent in the field of digital transformation and ensuring the active participation in the labor market is actually one of the most effective ways to comprehensively and holistically drive progress on gender equality and relatedly on poverty eradication and inclusive economic growth.
We hope that Saudi Arabia will carry this message throughout the G20 presidency and we want to invite all of the winners to join the women's empowerment principles community and align with the trends of sustainable businesses of the future.  I'm really looking forward to hearing from the winner, UN Women wishes you a delightful celebration.  Thank you and over.
>> WADHA BIN ZARAH:  Thank you so much, Anita.  You have already mentioned what I was intending to mention during my speech.  Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, we are honored to receive this prestigious award MCIT Women Empowerment Program two years ago where we received tens of thousands of ladies benefiting from it, with great partnership with related Government entities, private sectors and NGOs, we extend our appreciation to our visionary leadership for their tremendous support.  We also thank the ministry team for their dedication, the volunteers for their great contribution, and the program partners from private, public and nonprofit sector for their valuable contribution.
  It is not a luxury anymore.  We are proud to partner with ITU and work with the international communities to harness the benefit of technology and solve mobile challenges related to the UNSDGs.
Last but not least, thank you.
>> LINDSEY NEFESCH-CLARKE:  Thank you so much, and congratulations again.  Well, Brazil, Cambodia, Russia, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, we have traveled around the world today and let's congratulate all of our 2020 winners.  Let's give everyone the winners and the finalists a warm round of virtual applause.
May I invite you all to turn on your camera once more and let's make the sign that symbolizes our commitment for gender equality and take another photo.  Let's reiterate it!  Wonderful!  Thank you.
So we wish this celebration didn't have to draw to a close, but we can continue the celebrations and learn more about our award winners.  You are all kindly invited to join the networking platform where you will have the opportunity to interact with the finalists and winners and make new friends and contacts in this virtual space.  So you will find the link to the networking platform in the chat, and we do hope you will join us there to continue the celebrations and to learn more about our winners.
On behalf of Equals, I would also like to invite you to save the date for the Equals in tech winners panel, a must‑see on November 11th.  You will receive all of the information about this event via the networking platform.  If you haven't registered yet, please be sure to do so now.  Well, I think we can all agree that this has been an uplifting event.  Thank you for joining today's celebration.  Let it galvanize us all to continue our collective efforts through Equals to promote girls and women's Digital Inclusion, equality, and leadership.  So thank you very much, again, for joining.  And I hope to see you on the networking platform and I wish everyone a good afternoon and evening.  Thank you.
  Thank you, everyone. Congratulations to the winners.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-of29-global-encryption-coalition^^

 
   >> SHEETAL KUMAR: Thanks to everyone who has joined. We begin at 10 past the hour, but thanks for coming already. 
    
   >> Hello, everyone. Welcome here. I just wanted to remind participants that the session is recorded and hosted under the IGF Code of Conduct and rules and regulations. 
    So the moderators can now take the floor, please. 
    Thank you. 
   >> SHEETAL KUMAR: Thank you so much to the IGF support team and to everyone who has made this IGF possible. 
    Welcome to you all. Thanks for joining us today. It's great to see so many people at this open forum on the Global Encryption Coalition. The Global Encryption Coalition was set up to defend where it is under threat. We'll tell you more about that in a minute. 
    I will be your emcee for the event. My name is Sheetal Kumar, and I'm a senior program lead at GPD. GPD is part of the Steering Committee of the Global Encryption Coalition which is also composed of the Internet Society and the CDT. I'm joined by colleagues from both of those organizations as well, as well as many members from the coalition. It's great to see you here as well. Thank you so much. 
    We'll be able to hear from them as well during this session. We're looking forward to that. 
    To the Global Encryption Coalition has more than (?)75 members, almost 100 from all over the world. It's a broad‑based coalition made up of academics, companies, and civil society groups as well. 
    Just so you know what to expect, before I hand over to my colleagues we're going to start with some opening remarks from Greg Nojeim from CDT who is going to provide a background for the coalition. 
    We're happy others are here to speak. We'll turn to them for the main part of the session, which Ryan Polk from the Internet Society will be moderating. 
    Finally, we'll end with Natalie Campbell from the Internet Society who will share with you about membership. I do hope that you will join us. 
    Do feel free to use the chat and Q‑and‑A functions, but the Q‑and‑A functions preferably to ask questions. 
    Include your name and organization. In fact, please introduce yourself either way because other attendees can't see you. 
    So, with no further ado, I'm going to hand over to Greg. 
    Greg, are you able to access your mic? 
   >> GREG NOJEIM: Let's see. Can you hear me? 
   >> SHEETAL KUMAR: I can. 
   >> GREG NOJEIM: I'm sorry to be a disembodied voice. I haven't figured out how to show up as a speaker. 
    I'm Greg Nojeim, Senior Counsel and Director, Freedom, Security and Technology Project, Center For Democracy and Technology. As Sheetal mentioned, we're one of the members of the Steering Committee of the Global Encryption Coalition. 
      (Captioner has no audio) 
   >> SHEETAL KUMAR: I think we lost Greg. Can anyone else hear him? Courtney, that makes me feel that's the case for everyone. 
    Greg, are you here? 
   >> GREG NOJEIM: I'm starting the video. 
    So we formed the coalition because we're seeing threats to encryption around the world. It's popping up in hot spots like India, Brazil, Australia, the UK, the EU, and perennially in the United States where I am in Washington, D.C. 
    The threats come in different forms. Sometimes it's traceability requirements. Sometimes it's other requirements, and the goal of governments, which is a worthy one, is to deal with terrorism, child sexual abuse material, and other objectionable information on the Internet. 
    We all want to deal with those problems, but the members of this coalition believe that compelling companies to build back doors to facilitate ‑‑ back doors to encryption to facilitate law enforcement access is not the way to deal with those problems because it creates other security problems, and it creates them for everyone. 
    So we're looking for solutions that don't have that consequence, and we're looking for members that agree with that approach and want to join the coalition. 
    Some of the things that we've done so far ‑‑ I'm going to summarize them real quickly. 
    We held a series of launched events ‑‑ virtual launched events in five encryption hotspots ranging from Brazil and India to the EU, Canada, and Australia. 
    We brokered a meeting among UK‑based coalition members in the UK home and foreign offices on encryption issues in the UK, and we've got some new ones coming there possibly in an online harm's bill ‑‑ a proposal that's going to come out any day now. 
    We helped Edry (phonetic) draft a letter that responded to an expert's report on CSAM (phonetic) in the world of end‑to‑end encryption. We've organized a sign‑on letter and the U.S. Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to which technical subscribed. We released a Steering Committee released what was picked up and India and Japan joined statement. 
    Now, we're going to continue to do this work in the coming year and years, and the way we like to operate is to rely on our members to flag issues to us and to help us engage on those issues. In other words, this is not a coalition of people who come in and big‑foot local efforts. We get the people who can help us address it best. 
    The resources we deliver include technical expertise, experience from other countries, and highlighting issues in our newsletters which goes to our membership and beyond. 
    That's what I want to say to introduce the coalition to everyone. I will turn it back to Sheetal. 
   >> SHEETAL KUMAR: Thank you, Greg for giving us the overview and examples of the coalition's work so far. I don't know if you mentioned, but we launched officially back in May this year, which seems like a very long time ago because this year has been a particular ‑‑ peculiar one, but it was a virtual, and it was a series of webinars that allowed us to explore the way the issue of encryption is playing out in different regions and some of those hotspots that you mentioned in the world, and all of that is available on our website. We'll share the links for the recordings for that and everything, for those of you who were not able to make it back in May. 
    But we now have about 40 minutes for the discussion part of our agenda, which Ryan is moderating. So I will hand it over to you, Ryan. 
    And we also have members of the coalition here to be members of the discussion. 
    Over to you, Ryan. Thanks. 
   >> RYAN POLK: Thanks, Sheetal. 
    Hi, everyone. I'm Ryan Polk. I'm with the Internet Society. We're one (?) Members for the Steering Committee. 
    I'm excited for this panel because it points to the broad base of our coalition and how diverse the coalition is in its membership, which I think is really one of the strengths. Because if we're going win in the encryption debate and get more people using encryption, we're going to need help from all across the world and from every single sector, which it's civil society academia or business. 
    So I'm joined here on this panel by three members of the Global Encryption Coalition. The first person I'm going to introduce is Mishi Choudry. 
    What I really want to do with this conversation is to get a sense of what are the encryption threats that you see around the world? What is the importance of encryption to your constituencies, businesses, or people in your regions, and then why you joined the Global Encryption Coalition and what you see as really needed for encryption advocates to make a difference and to win the global encryption debate. 
    I think I will begins by asking the question to Mishi. 
    Why does encryption matter to SFLC India? 
   >> MISHI CHOUDRY: Thank you. Can you all hear me fine? That's the norm to ask for any video conference these days. Thank you for having me here. If I had started to approach and address all of you in a language from my country, which has 18 recognized languages, it would have been a sign of my cultural self‑determination but also a way to address only the people who do understand that language. 
    This is how we understand speaking encryption or pretty good privacy or whichever method you're using, which is we can all use encryption to communicate freely and also express ourselves. 
    Why encryption is important to better my work in the United States where I, as a lawyer, have Represented several of the free and open‑source projects that are making the building blocks of encryption possible, like open SSL or other layers or (?) Loss India, which works to protect digital freedoms for a very, very simple reason. 
    One of the most important learnings is that encryption works. That, from a country where WhatsApp is our biggest market in India, and WhatsApp Pay continues to be on a growth path in order to acquire a major portion of India's 520 million Internet users. 
    In November of 2019, we learned that around 114 activists, lawyers, et cetera, were targeted with spyware delivered to missed video calls in WhatsApp, a messaging service that is also used (?) That obviously told us (?) At its best in freedom, the net can abolish ignorance and free the power of human creativity, but data used at its worst under forms of this control, that publish officials are calling for around the world to eradicate the possibility of that human freedom. What happens will depend entirely on what the citizens of the democracies like India and several of the members of this coalition will demand is what our future looks like. 
    Whether it's the draft (?) Or petition in India that requires WhatsApp messages should be traceable to the originator. All of these try to tell us that it can work differently for the good guys and bad guys. 
    The way we secure privacy in the Internet, at least for now and a tool that's available to all users is encryption, which is to employ a mathematical transformations to data that constitute our emails, voice conversations, video streams, and monetary transfers so they can be understood only by our intended recipients. 
    So when governments demand that schemes be deliberately compromised to facilitate government listening, it means weaknesses are created that can be exploited by hostile governments as well as terrorists. Government controls designed to fight these things which we all believe in, which is terrorism, crime, and international aggression, it would change nothing other than that (?) Will be extent. 
    We believe in of law makes tyranny difficult to achieve. Even a state ruled by an unaccountable military can be forced to acknowledge the power of people as well as judiciary. That's why we believe in encryption. And that's why we think it's the very act of self‑preservation, free speech, and expression and all democratic governments as well as societies stand for must learn. So citizens of every free society must just clearly learn the opposite lesson, that even if we approve of the present government, we must not give it control of the net because somewhere in the future, a bad government will use the net to destroy the freedom in our society. 
   >> RYAN POLK: Thanks, Mishi. I couldn't agree more. I think the point you make by both if you can trust the government you have now, if you create a method that could be used by the government in the future that you don't trust, I find that very powerful and similar to just an encryption back door in general. Because if you make an encryption back door, for one, it's a back door for all. 
    I think I'm going to ask the same question to Courtney. I think you have many of the same points about freedom of expression, given your role, but, Courtney, for the Committee to protect journalists, what does encryption mean for your constituency and the people you represent. 
   >> Courtney Radsch: Thanks for letting me follow Mishi. 
    Maybe what I will do is talk about a couple of stories that illustrate the point that not only are there abstract values at play here display there's a case in Syria where a reporter had a laptop with unencrypted communications on it, and Syrian authorities got ahold of it and were able to track down his sources, who he had talked to, videos that he had, and several of those sources had to flee the country or they were arrested. 
    In another case, ISIS, at a checkpoint, got ahold of a citizen journalist and found a logo of (?) Being slaughtered silently, a citizen journalist outfit there, and beheaded him two weeks later. 
    We're talking about bad governments here. We know in Ethiopia, there have been serious issues with arresting journalists, using surveillance on journalists there. 
    A journalist was held because he had encrypted files on his computer. 
    This is happening all over the world. 
    Here in the United States, under the Trump Administration, for example, there was a state of leaks that was unparalleled from previous eras. 
    We have seen that President Trump has demanded access to those information and sought to crack down on those would‑be leakers and highlight the journalists and their sources and take away their right to communicate about issues of public interest. 
    In the UK, we know that the intelligence service, GCHQ, has intercepted and saved communications between reporters and editors at some of the largest news outlets in the world. 
    The need journalists have for encryption is equal opportunity whether you live in a so‑called democracy or not. 
    The efforts to weaken encryption around the world provides a normative justification, of course, when they're done by the so‑called democracies or whatever. 
    I think we're in a situation where we need to get away from the idea that ‑‑ it's been suggested that there are some reasonable ways to get around encryption. The need for journalists to have access to secure communications is actually about the public interest. Journalists are not out there reporting on things themselves. They're enabling functioning democracies, they're enabling people to hold people accountable. 
    Whenever a journalist communicates with a source, their privacy depends on encryption. The strong encryption, by default, protects journalists, bloggers, et cetera because a journalist's smartphone or laptop holds a work in progress, their Rolodex of contacts, all manner of in‑progress messages, this gives detail into a reporter's work in which they would do jail time to protect. There have been many cases of journalists trying to protect that. 
    Encryption mitigates the threat of ease dropping. It can be a defense against sophisticated agencies. 
    It's not a panacea. There's still the issue of metadata and very sophisticated surveillance that, in some cases, appears to render encryption relatively useless. 
    I think the key take away is that, you know, as you pointed out earlier, you cannot create a back door that is only used for one type of actor and not others. 
    So if we agree that journalism is very important to society, to politics, to holding those in power account, if we value press freedom, both of the press and of those who speak with the press, then we have to value encryption. We have to value that as fundamentally as we value privacy and freedom of expression because they go hand in hand. 
    And, you know, we really are getting into an era where it's increasingly difficult for journalists to even guarantee or say their sources that they can guarantee their anonymity because that's becoming so hard. We shouldn't take away some of the few tools that still exist for doing so. 
    If you think about all the stories ‑‑ even over the past couple of years that we know about ‑‑ because someone dared to go around their boss to talk to a journalist or break the silence of sexual assault abusers, for example, to talk to journalists, to reveal, you know, corruption, embezzlement of funds. 
    The Panama Papers, the Paradise Papers, the global collaborative efforts at journalism that have been unparalleled in the history of the world and revealed massive malfeasance and helped restore billions of dollars, we have to recognize that encryption was fundamental to enabling this to take part. That is why we see encryption as critical to furthering journalism, and that is why we have joined the coalition, because it really is fundamental to the practice of journalism. 
   >> RYAN POLK: Thank you, Courtney. You make points about the practicalities for journalists and the fact that it's really a matter of personal safety for both journalists and their sources around the world, for them to have access to strong encryption. 
    I'm going ask Michele for a different aspect on this. As the owner and CEO of a tech company, how do you see encryption as being integral for your business and your business sector? 
   >> MICHELE NEYLON: I think the perspective I bring is quite different. The way we would use encryption is much more fundamental. We use it from the network up. So we validate roots. What that means is in order for Internet traffic to go from one point to another, in order for my users to be able to go to a website to send an email, you know, traffic has to go from point A to point B. In order for all of that to happen, you have switchers or routers, or as you Americans call them, routers. You have all that technical infrastructure. Encryption is used in that. Once you get above the network, it's ultimately how people do business. It's how people live their daily lives. 
    For every time that you log into your bank, every time you buy a stupid widget, you know, you buy that silly postcard ‑‑ I just spent a fortune on Christmas cards. The only way I could do that was online. 
    For some of us, this is something that we've all been doing for years. Now even more so. We're living online. The only way we can do that safely is with encryption. We have to have a safe connection. You have to be able to be confident that when you're going to a website that, you're able to give over your details safely, that you're able to do that bit of transaction that, business, be it buying a bunch of flowers or buying a tractor for your business, for your farm, whatever it is. It's all online. 
    And for us, it's for ourselves, for our staff, for our clients, for our users. You know, encryption is throughout all of that. In some cases, people done want to use encryption, but they need to have the ability to turn it on when they want it. And I think that's why the threats we've seen to encryption, they're not new. We've seen them growing, and there's ebbs and flows around this for years. Every time those arguments they struck out are about these edge cases. 
    Now, don't get me wrong. We don't want to facilitate crime. We don't want to facilitate child abuse. We do not want to facilitate terrorism on our platform, but if I've got 100,000 clients, why should 99,999 of them be forced to have an insecure, unsafe experience because one of them could be a criminal of some kind? 
    That doesn't work. 
    I mean, if you were buying insurance for your house ‑‑ I don't know how it works in other countries, but here, if you want to get insurance for your house, you have to tell the insurance company what kind of locks you have on your doors and your windows. If you don't have proper doors and locks on your windows, you cannot get insurance coverage. 
    It wouldn't be surprising for me to see insurance companies asking these kind of questions about if you're using ‑‑ if you want to get coverage for device X, make sure it has a proper password, that encryption is in use. 
    My day‑to‑day life is this these days. It's this. It's this disembodied reality in a Zoom call. In order to be able to do that, I need encryption. The problem with a back door or a hole or anything like that, it will be exploited. It might not ‑‑ it could be exploited by government. It could be exploited by law enforcement. It could be exploited by a criminal, but it will be exploited by somebody. It will weaken us. 
    The strength of the armor is always going to be as strong as the weakest link in that armor. As soon as you start weakening the armor, it becomes absolutely useless. 
    So I think, from our perspective, the thing about encryption is it's fundamental and crucial for us and our clients to be able to do business. Without it, game over. There's nothing left. ECommerce ceases to work, and when we're back to using faxes and printouts ‑‑ I've got nothing against faxes, apart from the fact that I can't work them, but we would be pushing ourselves backwards, essentially. 
   >> RYAN POLK: Thank you. And just the thought about having to buy a fax machine for all of the home offices out there in the world frightens me. 
    Although, if there's someone out there at a fax machine company, you're really excited. 
   >> Courtney Radsch: And then we would all have to get landlines installed. That's a big barrier. 
   >> MICHELE NEYLON: I would sell it to you happily. Remember, I'm the capitalist on this call. 
   >> RYAN POLK: I'm happy the capitalist is supportive of encryption. 
    One of the things you've touched on but I wanted to get more comments on is talk about the trends and the threats you've seen popping up around the world or specific to your consistencies or regions when it comes to encryption, and, really, what are those threats you see as the most dangerous, or the trends you see as the most dangerous, that we need to push back against. 
   >> GREG NOJEIM: You mean besides (?)? 
   >> Courtney Radsch: I can talk about a couple of things we're seeing with respect to ‑‑ I talked about journalists on their personal devices and communications. That's an ongoing threat. We're seeing surveillance capabilities get more and more sophisticated and challenging. But we're also seeing it's not just about your personal device, right? It's also about your Internet connection, wanting to use what sort of browser you're using, what sort of connection. So, for example, https, using that by default to get what you want ‑‑ 
      (Dog whining) 
   >> Courtney Radsch: I have a dog here. I hope you can't hear the whining. 
    But child sexual abuse material as well as child trafficking, terrorism, this is all very important, but what is missing is the fact that so much of what we know about terrorism and child trafficking and so many of these issues comes from journalists who have dug into them, who have gotten sources, who have built up the connections in those networks to reveal them. 
    Like Lydia Cacho (phonetic) in Mexico. 
    So they need to have access to those secure communications so if they're communicating with someone who is revealing sensitive information about, say, a sex trafficking ring, a child pedophilia ring, again like Lydia Cacho in Mexico, they need to do that securely. 
    I think this is a more complicated issue. Between the increasing sophistication of the surveillance and malware being used we tend to think about encryption only being needed in these kind of debates around communication and personal devices. A lot of us are at home and doing sensitive work these days. We need to have secure and encrypted communication traffic so whether it's a neighbor or law enforcement sitting out there sniffing our traffic. 
    I think we're seeing a wider range of potential threats and recognition by journalists of all stripes that there's a fundamental need for secure communications, and the encryption is fundamental to that. 
   >> RYAN POLK: Thanks, Courtney. That's a really good point about the case in Mexico as well. 
    Sorry, Mishi? 
   >> MISHI CHOUDRY: So one trend, which is apparent, everybody likes to make the debates still binary, and it's amazing that for such a long time we've been discussing this, and it's always these scenarios of security versus private when it is only a security‑security question and whether it is looking at ‑‑ as Michele was earlier saying ‑‑ for example, the core initiative that was started. All the major companies came together and said because open‑source software is so important and we have to ensure there aren't any vulnerabilities, we're all going to work together. They're secured about security because that's the underlying way anything on the networks. 
    However, when we see the entire trend in the government, it's always presented like, Oh my god! If you have encryption, you're going to have entire brackets of terrorists. 
    This continues to be privacy versus security. You can have one or the other. We've had this for a long time, whether it is export control questions or how security works, we're already on the security‑security part. 
    The other thing, the great thing about the coalition is several of the governments have different kinds of concerns. Like I can see that, at least in India, one of the things which had happened was because there is WhatsApp resistance about some of the lynchings ‑‑ actual lynchings being caused because of some misinformation which was passing through their channels and in failing to make the arrests and ensure public order, the Indian government chose to ascribe blame to WhatsApp's end‑to‑end encryption. That seems like an easy copout to say if your policing doesn't work on the ground, to say it's because, We couldn't get enough data. 
    That's not entirely true, but that's (?). 
    The also thing we're seeing is data localization, which is coming from financial institutions and even the Federal Reserve or the Reserve Bank of India, which is the equivalent. There's insistence that the data should be stored in the nation itself and somehow that also plays out in how they view encryption. 
    Now, the other thing I would say is the nations are also talking about how significant amount of control over information systems is concentrated in the United States with little accountability to other governments. 
    Why am I mentioning all of these? All of this is so closely intertwined, a tendency governments love to try to put them all on our door front instead of saying one issue needs to be handled at one time. 
    The issue about how crimes are resolved, that question is slowly being addressed by cloud form. But as soon as you talk about security, they clump together and say, This is the problem. 
    The traceability part of the originator, this has been litigated. This has been tried out in legislations, et cetera, in various parts of the world. Of the courts were not specialists about it. Love to say, Oh, there has to be some way out. You can't have a technology and not find a solution to only get us to catch the criminals. 
    I am at least observing those kinds of trends which are about Safe Harbor and reliability issues when you require traceability and make the platforms responsible to get us traceability of the originator, that also requires you to (?) The entire issue about actual crime solution and data localization efforts and this desire the control data after those nations people there. 
    All of these get together to present this really ‑‑ from the authority's point of view, a very complicated problem, which is not working in the benefit of the country but only for some outside. 
    That's the kind of spectrum we what. 
    That's why the earlier question of why it matters and why a global coalition matters, there are certain axioms. There are signs. You need to get a lot of people together to say, Well, your claims really don't work because here are all the people around the world who are facing the same problems and are trying to find solutions which are not the solutions which you are recommending, which is to say, Oh, because of some cases, we should make everybody insecure and vulnerable. 
    That's why we've all come together to tell you that this kind of binary that you present to us or it can only be one way, that's not the right solution. If you're really serious about addressing issues, whether it's about terrorism or crimes against children, then you need to find a different solution. You can't just wish it all away. 
   >> Courtney Radsch: Can I also add something. I think you point out something a critical point, Mishi, which is there's this assumption that if, somehow, there was better data, there would be better law enforcement. I don't think we see that. If you think about the Snowden revelations and all the data that has been covered up by the United States government, I don't think we've seen any proof that that has translated into decline in global terrorism. We saw the rise of ISIS in the wake of that. There's false logic behind the rationalization of breaking encryption and the necessity of gaining access to that data. 
   >> RYAN POLK: Those are really good points. I like the point you make, Mishi, of governments and people who are trying to ‑‑ some are trying to weaken encryption, tying in so many different angles into one package to try and weaken encryption. 
    That especially makes it hard for encryption advocates who may actually disagree on other aspects of policy, for instance, on data lake (?) But, at the end of the day, if it still weakens encryption, it weakens encryption, and it's a bad policy to come out of whatever country it's being introduced. 
    Michele, is there anything from your side in Europe that you would like to highlight? 
   >> MICHELE NEYLON: I think, first off, when we're talking about any of this, I don't think we can take an overly simplistic geographical stance because the reality is that from a kind of policy legal perspective, governments talk to each other, and they watch what they're doing. 
    So if a government in one part of the world succeeds in passing a range of laws, either good or bad, other governments will look to that and follow their example. So if you look at, say, privacy, we have GDPR in Europe. Now you're seeing other parts of the world and countries following aspects of that. That's a very simple example. 
    With some of the nastier nets, ones with nefarious laws that encroach on people's freedoms and rights, if they get away with it in one place, they will try to get away with it illness where. 
    Open technology that we rely on such as open SSL or RTKI or any of these different things. There's not a version of open SSL for Europe. There's not a version of open SSL for the Americas. 
    If it's weakened in one place, it's going to be weakened everywhere. If you look at what happens with Apple or Microsoft or Google, any of them, it's going to have ramifications across the globe. 
    I think that's just something trying to look at ‑‑ trying to look at it in terms of slicing it up regionally, while that makes a lot of sense in other aspects of it, I think you have to be careful because if Apple or another hardware provider leaves a back door physically in a device, then it's going to be in all the devices everywhere. Even if it's not, we're not going to know which ones have the problem and which ones don't. 
    I think in Europe, there's been a lot of discussions over the last few years around, you know, reviewing various things. I mean, we've got ‑‑ we've had a lot of different issues. Certain countries within the European Union are more concerned around threats around terrorism than others. I think every single one of them will come up to that thing where they're saying, Can we do ‑‑ insert crazy thing here. 
    I remember not so long ago, a very large telco was approached by Irish law enforcement and being asked, Hey, do you mind if we just siphon off a bit of data there from the mainstream, you know, just to see what happens? There might be something interesting in there. 
    I think it goes to the data collection, the access to larger amounts of data doesn't necessarily lead to anything. It just means you have larger amounts of data. I think the only people who win when it's related to data is those making hard drives. 
    Shares in hard drive manufacturers, maybe that's the way to win in all of this. Buying shares ‑‑ 
    Trying to get through the hyperbole, we often speak geek. They're speaking law enforcement. Some of us are speaking privacy. They're speaking child abuse. We need to communicate better. 
    I think that's why people like yourselves who are more in the policy‑legal side of things, you can help of those us just trying to run a business. 
   >> RYAN POLK: Thank you. I think you also make a really interesting point about how governments are talking to each other. There was a point that, if you look at the Q&A, Greg makes as well that we're seeing powerful and well‑funded governments coordinating with each other on policy now. There's a big threat that has emerged in the last few years and emerged stronger than it has before. 
    So to finish off this section of the call, I wanted to ask the panelists to make a quick minute or two‑minute intervention on what they see the community needing to do to help make the biggest difference on encryption. What can we do to protect encryption going forward? And what can the attendees on this call do to make a difference? 
   >> GREG NOJEIM: I will go first. May I? I think the most important thing is to probably work together and learn from each other. As was pointed out in the chat, sometimes challenges to encryption are similar across different countries. 
   >> Courtney Radsch: I would like to see more conversations that include people from different communities where we're all ‑‑ everyone who is working to protect children, to, you know, legitimately fight terrorism, you know, against criminal activity to support the function of businesses online, to protect human rights of (?) And journalists, we're all coming from a good perspective. We need to come together across thematic areas and figure out how we address very real concerns while ensuring that all of those communities have, as we see, very rightly put it, the security that they need to have. It's not this either/or private or security, encryption or terrorism and child abuse, that we get away from this binary and work across the communities to figure out a common solution. And I think that's the promising nature of this coalition. 
   >> MISHI CHOUDRY: I've been involving a lot of government authorities, whether it's the spies or actual law enforcement, in these conversations. It really does move the needle towards having a more constructive conversation, which may not always be public. There is a reason that these statements that come from whether it's the five eyes or India or Japan, these statements, they say one thing, but we see the conversation get a little bit more sophisticated, even from the U.S. intelligence agencies, regarding what is possible and what is not. 
    And something very simple, also, it's not that they're all right here to say, We don't care about terrorism or we don't care about crime. 
    It's the breaking everything to enable enforcement of laws. So involving them more in those conversations, even though they may be one‑on‑one conversations and they may take more time and get more confrontational, that is an effort we're seeing, at least, at the local level, bearing some kind of fruit. 
    Having said that, but the messaging about how important it is for the underlying infrastructure of the net, and you can't just get the benefits and also only have whatever you desire. That statement needs to be pushed again and again. 
    It's like when the lie has been repeated so many times, it looks like the truth. This truth needs to be repeated over and over again no matter how much we think we've already said it so many times. If that were true, we wouldn't be relitigating these things starting with the Clinton Administration or other (?) Matters in history. 
    I think getting them involved and spreading out who our allies are, and those allies may not be digital defense ‑‑ they may be parents looking after children or who do work on grass roots organizations. How are they communicating? People that stand for the right to protest and other constitutional or fundamental human rights, I think the larger (?) And the bigger our tent is important. 
    It's also important to explain in everyday usage why this matters. Everybody may not be encrypting their emails like you and I may be doing or using signal, but that doesn't mean we look down on people who don't understand this. It's incumbent. We need to be learning from each other and explaining what we know from what their requirements are. 
   >> RYAN POLK: Michele? 
   >> MICHELE NEYLON: I think the fundamental thing is we need to move away from those binary view where it's like you get certain people who are privacy advocates. I love them to death. They're lovely people, but they take this extreme view. And that's the same with the child protection people who take this extreme view. The reality is encryption is what powers a lot of everyday, normal, day‑to‑day stuff, day‑to‑day stuff like banking, online transactions, all of that. Yes, when you move it up a layer, it's covering a whole load of other things. It's just this binary thing. Encryption needs to be ‑‑ we need to break that it's a bad thing. It's not. It's a good thing. In many respects, we need more of those. We need more security. We need better security. We need, I think, also, more accessible security. I think that's another aspect as well. 
    I think part of it is just improving that dialogue and that conversation and just trying ‑‑ I think the point about having to repeat the same thing over and over and over again ‑‑ I will take it further. Maybe you don't need to repeat it. Maybe rephrase it. It's not just repeating it. 
   >> RYAN POLK: Thank you. 
    And thank you to the panelists for that. 
    I completely agree that we need a broader base of allies and especially folks from outside of this space because often those groups are ones that have strong political pull or they have the ability to get lots of people to go out and to actually do things to make a difference, but they don't know yet that encryption is so important. 
    I really liked the point about inclusive conversations even with our enemies, quote/unquote. Because we need to make sure those folks in law enforcement understand where we're coming from and what the technical reality is, which is that encryption is an engine for so much in the world and that we really need more of it. 
    I think we'll end this section of the panel. Thank you so much to the panelists. 
    We'll move on to Natalie for final thoughts about the coalition. 
   >> NATALIE CAMPBELL: Thanks for that, Ryan. 
    I can't thank everyone enough for joining this session. 
    And, you know, as I've been reflecting lately on everything that is 2020, I think there's one thing we can all agree on, and it's just how important the Internet is. 
    I mean, 2020 has been daunting at times, but the Internet reminds us of all the amazing things we can accomplish when we decide to work together towards a common good. It's a lifeline enabling so many of us to keep working and learning and socializing and accessing health care and doing business and countless of daily tasks while trying the stay safe during a global pandemic. 
    That, to me, is what makes the importance of being able to rely on the secure Internet at an all‑time high. This is what makes a Global Encryption Coalition's mission so crucial. Our members from around the world have come together because we believe encryption is a solution. It is our strongest digital security tool, and it is so critical to the personal security of billions and nations around the world. 
    You know, we've heard from a lot of great speakers today about how this is so critical, especially with journalists, women, those of vulnerable populations and so many more where this is an actual lifeline. 
    And, you know, this is why we need everyone's help. We need everybody to get on board. There are threats to encryption, but we can all play a role to help keep people safe online. 
    You know, we are very much inclusive. Like many of my fellow members have said, we're so inclusive, and the coalition, we welcome organizations, businesses, industry associations who share a mission to consider joining the coalition because we are stronger together, and our coalition is a way to unite our advocacy efforts and promote and protect strong encryption policies and protections around the world. 
    And we also work with businesses to know how products can keep everyone safe online. 
    There's another unique purpose that we serve. This speaks to the point that some of my fellow members have said about having conversations. Personal and national security are super important matters. We understand there is a lot of noise in the encryption debate, and it can be hard for people to separate fact from fiction. 
    Governments have a really important duty to protect their citizens, yet, at the same time, we're concerned about the proposals that could undermine the security, and they might not even know it. 
    So, you know, many of my fellow Global Encryption Coalition members agree. A threat to one country is a threat to us all. 
    So I put this out there, that not only do we have some of the world's leading tech experts among us, we also have a global membership with a wide range of perspectives with practical (?) On encryption. We can be valuable to governments and businesses worldwide who want to understand the technical and practical impacts of policies regarding encryption. We can help people understand why it's so important to some in our communities and what are the consequences of undermining this protection. 
    We've heard many of these today. 
    So I will leave everyone with two suggestions. 
    So for those that are interested, I highly encourage you to join the coalition. You don't have to go at this alone. We're all in this together. We all want to see people safer online. 
    For those that are here just to learn more about encryption and perhaps how governments could make sure their decisions don't compromise the safety and security of people, let's talk. 
    We've already sparked relationships with governments in several countries, and we welcome even more of these conversations because, at the end of the day, we can all agree there's one thing that unites us all in this discussion, and it's that we have the safety and security of people at heart. 
    By keeping this in mind, we can have more productive conversations about how we can all work to keep ourselves, our businesses, our loved ones, and nations everywhere safer online. 
    And if you would like to join the coalition, there's a handy link at www.globalencryption.org. 
   >> SHEETAL KUMAR: Thank you to my panelists and the Steering Committee members and the attendees. We have to wrap up. Thank you for joining us for this past hour. We've heard so much. It's very difficult to summarize, but I will say we've heard why the coalition exists, why it's more important than ever, what the coalition has to offer. Please reach out and join us. I will end by staying safe online and off. 
    Thanks so much for your time. See you around soon. Have a great IGF. 
   >> GREG NOJEIM: Bye, everyone. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-of33-wsis-action-lines-achieving-the-sdgs-wsis-forum-2021-ocp-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> The world summit on the information society forum, the Wiz's action lines for accessing sustainable development.  The forum was held in a virtual format which started on the 22nd of June onwards culminating in June.  This is transformation in global partnerships.  The access lines for achieving goals.  The forum has had great balance of participation with over 800 panelists.  The final week of the forum was inaugurated with participation from partner UN agencies.  The 18 Wayneers were awarded for achievements on WSIS outcomes.  Interesting high level dialogues brought together a wide array of leaders to discuss pivotal issues with ICTs with a critical driver for achieving goals.  This year is special.  This is since the creation of the world summit.  This period has seen a remark automobile growth on the use of technologies and transforming people's lives.  2020 was also an opportunity for partnerships to be forged and valuable tools and initiatives to be launched.  The full list of official WSIS form reports are available in the WSIS form 2020 website.  There have been 11 high level policy sessions with over 100 panelists including ministers, deputy ministers, seen officials, heads of UN, as well as private and academia heads.  Regional support from the WSIS UN in regional commission, the form was also shown in their activities and implementing the WSIS action lines for the sustainable goals.  It had 80 delegates and ministers who bridged the divide.  The WSIS action line has been successful.  Conducted by the united nags action lines.  Then 10 having the WSIS action lines and strengthen the implementation process.  The open consummation process for the WSIS form 2021 was officially launched.  We look forward to receiving your submissions.  We would like to deeply thank our sponsors and partners who made this possible.  We thank the strong support for the entire WSIS community for their active engagement for the process.  We look forward to your contributions.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you.  It is now time for us to start our first virtual meeting of the WSIS forum 2021 open consol taughtive process.  As you just saw, we launched the process during the WSIS forum 2020 final week in September.  Since then, we have been receiving inputs from all of you.  Basically as you all know, we will be believe name on the program and the format of the WSIS format ever year through this open consolidated process by engaging with all the stakeholders.  And, of course, you know, for the format, we can do so many things in this new virtual way that we have to conduct our meetings.  So please don't participate actively.  Today you will hear from the core organizers.  ITU UNESCO and I would like to invite the chief of SPM.  YUSHI, please, if you can welcome all participants.
>> YUSHI:  Good afternoon, good evening and good morning and I would like to thank our co‑host for having this meeting together.
As you know, this forum is multi‑stakeholder approach and we have been organizing this forum a long time since.  Last year, we separated this 15 years since the second face of the WSIS forum.  I thank the team and co‑hosts and this record breaking success.  We wish to continue our efforts.  We have announced a date for 2021.  We are still in a difficult situation, but this WSIS, the information society breaks this situation.  I hope we'll have even better and even farther improve the WSIS forum next year with all efforts.  We still simply welcome our co‑hosts and looking forward to the fast open consultation.  It's integration process for this year.  Thank you.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much, Yushi.  We'll hear more about the plans from Catalin.  Please the floor is yours.
>> CATALIN:  Thank you very much.  It's a great pleasure to welcome all of you to the first virtual meeting of the WSIS forum 2021.  Let me begin by thanking our co‑organizer and more than 30 UNin agencies facilitating this action lines for their support and collaboration.  This sets a good example of fostering digital transformation and global partnership for SDG achievements.  We have successfully organized the form with impactful and productive collaboration.  The WSIS form proves to be a successful platform for discussion and showing of best practices in the use of ICPs as a means their STGs.  The merit will of this form lies in its truly inclusive and multi‑stakeholders with unique open consultation process.  The agenda in the program of the WSIS forum is crowd sourcing with active engagement of all stakeholders.  This process is a tremendous opportunity for everyone to make their voice heard.  The growth and success of the WSIS forum are made possible thanks to the contribution of your valuable inputs to the open consultation process.  This year, this WSIS forum was held in a completely different format and got a lot of interest worldwide with cumulative attendance of over 15,000 attendees from around 150 countries who took part in more than 160 repo segs with 840 different speakers.  The next forum that will be held on 17 to 21st of May 2021 will be continuing to bring more dynamic and interactive session.  We have also taken into consideration all your suggests that were submitted to us during this forum 2020 for the automatic aspects that might be included in this business forum 2021.
We are also inviting you to take up the 5050 challenge to insure gender, neutral participation of the business form 2021.  This year, forum was a great experience as we had a well balance participation in terms of gender, regions and type of stakeholder.  Our discussion today will check the part towards the successful voices forum 2021.  We count on your active participation in this meeting and looking forward to your contributions.  The success of this forum is also dependent on the contributions to the business funding trust.  So we look forward to your generous contributions that will (inaudible) you of the victory that partnership (inaudible).  Thank you for strengthening the multi‑stakeholder and (inaudible) spirit of the business forum by participating and engaging in this open consultation process.  I wish you all a very productive year.  Thank you.  Over to you.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much, Catalin.  Just to let everybody know this workshop is being broadcasts through YouTube.  There are people following us through YouTube as well and we have over 50 participants with us right now.
It's my great pleasure to invite co‑organizers as well.  So Mr. Joe who is the vocal point of UNESCO.  The floor is yours.
>> JOE:  Good morning and good afternoon.  Thank you for everyone out there.  But it's clear that something interesting is happening.  At times we will tell you we saw a record number of participants.  Next year, you may be exchanging your ideas with us far broader reach than before.  And the impact and opportunities to particularly grade in terms of potential new crab it ‑‑ collaborative and that might not normally be able to do.  For instance, get visas and come to a hosted session.  And the value of a virtual host holds true as well for reaching persons with disabilities indigenous and other minorities.  In a fair and representative and ultimately very enriching way.  We have seen participation this year.  Among them, I believe 7,000 women participants from so many countries in 2020 meaning not just the ones where equality seemed closest and being achieved, the program and agenda was 100% crowd source.  And all we need to point to is equality of the outcomes and the seconds to both see and to demonstrate further for our partners and how enriching this process is.  Of course we would like to see that moment carried first to organizing and carrying next year with or without COVID.  Of course at UNESCO, we welcome your voice in each of our actions.  I won't go through them all.  But they're important and developing for the specific times.  We're very pleased to work with you and your ideas that you raise them with us.  Remember that UNESCO and the UN are a secretariat, we are secretaries to serve.  Of course if you are able to choose as well as new (inaudible) to multi‑stakeholder frameworks and praise this opportunity and make it a reality.  I can adjust to the great value in Geneva and also to the colleague at every working (inaudible) so few, but so committed.  So I joined them.  It's a privilege as co‑organizers thank you for your attendance and your spirit going forward.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much, Joe.  UNESCO is a very crucial process.  Thank you very much to you and all your colleagues who collaborate so well with all the different agencies.  We all work together as a UN family to implement the action line.  So thank you very much.
We will now move to to scarlet.  Good morning, scar letter and (inaudible) is also the chair of the group this year.  Please go ahead, scarlet.  The floor is yours.
>> SCARLET:  First of all, welcome to all that have joined us from all over the world.  This type of coldness of this new meetings is planning the opportunity for more team to join us from different geographies which was not possible in the past.  So thank you for taking time of your busy days to join us today.
Again, as always it's very honored to be sharing co‑organizing roles with the other co‑organizers.  So of WSIS forum.  This year has been special for us not only because we have been hit with this completely unprecedented situation of the pandemic, which has actually forced us to go more online than we had in the past, but also because it has highlighted a lot of the urgency in terms of the agenda that we have to ‑‑ we have been tasked with pushing toward in terms of developing the digital economy and leveraging opportunities of digitalization for development and in particular this year to help countries develop resilience to shocks such as what has been experienced with the pandemic.
As you know, it has a mandate to work on trade and economic issues in terms of the WSIS process, we are in particular working with promoting e‑Commerce and digital economy and we are very grateful to be sharing co‑facilitator duties with the universal postal union and with international trace center E‑business of the WSIS process C7.  So I would just like to recognize them now because this year and especially the universal postal union have been very, very active in trying to push forward the increasingly important role of eBusiness in development in this year.  As you know again, not only are we working with process within our own working program.  We have fairly new intergovernmental group of experts on e‑Commerce and the digital economy which has met again this year virtually.  And again, it just ‑‑ it was attended in an unprecedented manner by so many people and so many geographies and from different areas.  It was true multi‑stakeholder participation in the image of this WSIS forum.  Just highlighting that the challenges we've facing in order to bring out the been fits of digitalization for all requires the participation of all.  We also manage to push forward our agenda in other ways despite the physical shut down of facilities in Geneva where we're based.  You might remember, that is also acting as secretariat for the commission of science and technology for development, which is following up on WSIS implementation.  We were able to meet virtually in June and this has science technology and innovation are increasingly important in these times.  We need to make sure that we really harness those efforts in science technology and innovation to address the crisis we're facing with COVID‑19.  And I would invite you.  I will share a link later on the chat to read the policy brief that (inaudible) put out referring to these issues discussed by the commission on science and technology for development.  You might also know that early during the face of the pandemic this year in April, we had e‑Commerce week virtually.  That also highlighted all these issues and followed the multi‑stakeholder model.  And so many rich discussions were held.  I will also share the link to all the online resources that have ‑‑ that are available still now for everyone to look at.  I would also like to say in terms of our ‑‑ of the work on e‑Commerce, despite the slow down and despite the challenges from all countries and stakeholders, we still have managed to publish for E*Trade for all readiness assessments which only highlights how important ‑‑ the importance that especially developing countries are trying to become better ready to harness digitalization and to develop their readiness for e‑Commerce in the digital economy because they realize this has been a lifeline for many sectors, many struggling sectors this past few months.
As mentioned, (inaudible) has been selected as chair of the UN group on the information society starting this April.  We'll be fulfilling those duties at least until April next year when the next WSIS forum takes place.  And during this time and looking at the circumstances, we have tried to animate an online dialogue on how digitalization is not only helping us address the issues raised by the pandemic, but also how it can help us accelerate process towards the achievement of the SDGs.  As you know, this has been a decade of faction and we're far from our stated objectives in development.  And this year has only served to press the need to accelerate progress in this regard.  So the heads of United Nations agencies that form Ungus have provided some thoughts in terms of how we can leverage digitalization to accelerate progress in the decade of action and face the consequences, the impact of COVID‑19.  The dialogue is being hosted right now in the website and I will also share the link to that.  It has benefit from 22 contributions from different parts of the UN system and the pieces have been published from June to October and hopefully stakeholders will find separation on some of the ideas that have been put forward by these thought leaders and bring them to the next WSIS forum for discussion and to continue the dialogue also with stakeholders.
Finally, I would like to say that on tad is a very active member of the partnership on measuring ICT for development which has contributed every year to the WSIS forum in terms of bringing forward the issues of data for measuring ICT for SEGs.  We have presented recently the ICT indicators that could be served to help compliment the measurement of progress towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.  But also this year, partners have been faced with increasing requests and evident needs of countries that have been ‑‑ have grown because of the impact of COVID and national statistical offices are the usual producers of official statistics on ICT are faced with many, many obstacles in terms of data collection and production.  Yet, this sort of information is now crucial to be able to measure not only progress, but also the effectiveness of whatever policies we put in place now to try and alleviate the impact of COVID‑19.  So I would just like to point out that we would welcome your contributions in terms of advancing the issue of needing better data, better statistics on ICT for development.
And finally, I would just like to close my remarks saying that if something has come out the past few months, it's the evidence that the multi‑lateral and the multi‑stakeholder model is essential to tackle the situation and the challenges we're facing.  So I invite you to help make this multi‑stakeholder and multi‑lateral model alive and even fill it with more purpose and more meaning and give all your contributions because we are all ears here.  Thank you very much.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much, scarlet and thank you for a strong collaboration on the WSIS process.  We are working together on several aspects including the partnership when measuring ICTs for development.  So thank you very much.  Colleagues, UNDP could not join us today because it's very early for our new colleagues.  So but they have expressed their full collaboration and support as organizers to the WSIS process.
So we have a very sharp presentation to update you about a few ‑‑  about a few things that have been planned for the WSIS forum.  And we will take you through this presentation very quickly and then we will open the floor for your commands.  Please raise your hands as if when you have a question and we will take it from there.
So the WSIS forum, is in collaboration with the several UN agencies more than 30 actually who work with us hand in hand to implement the WSIS action lines and align them with the Sustainable Development Goals.  So since 2015, we have been making sure that the WSIS process has an impact on the sustainable development goals and that we are contributing towards their achievement.  As you all know, the dates for the WSIS forum 2021, 17 to 21st of May and basically the dates are decided based on the reservations we have made out here in Geneva for the spaces which are very difficult to get.  But right now, looking at the COVID situation, we are tracking it very closely.  We are exploring different formats on how we would do the WSIS forum.  Definitely you all appreciated the virtual format that we adapted to this year.  So we will be looking forward to more inputs from you on how we could improve, but right now, we will plan ‑‑ we will start with our planning of the WSIS forum through the open consolidated process which is online.  This is we launched it on the 9th of September.  This is our full virtual meeting we do with IGF every year.  Last year we there in Germany and Berlin to inform you about the process.  And the second physical virtual meeting is planned around January.  So the date could change.  We'll have to look at the way things evolve.  And, of course, a very important deadline for you is the deadline for submissions which is 8th of march.
As all of you know, we have a submission form and the agenda and program of the WSIS program is built on the BASIS of this form.  So request to fill out the form as soon as possible because what we may do is probably also have it in phases the WSIS forum.  If we cannot accommodate everything in a week like we did in 2020.  So please do submit your submission forms even today even though you do not know who your speakers are, but submit your forms with the request of workshops and exhibition spaces as soon as possible.  Please do not wait for the 8th of March.  Do submit it as soon as you have an idea of what you want to do at the WSIS forum.  Of course, we will also plan the high level track.  We will wait on the different inputs we receive for the formats.  So we'll have the high level policy sessions.  The ministerial round table which was successful and the high level dialogues.
As you all know the high level track facilitators play a very important role basically moderating and conducting the different high level tracks that we have at the WSIS forum.  And these are nominated by you.  So please do send in the nominations as soon as possible so that we can work closely with them and we can implement this as soon as possible.
So Vladimir, I invite to you please present this topic in prizes.
>> VLADIMIR:  Good morning and good evening to all participants.  For those new to the process, I would like to inform you that the taking process has been coordinated by ITU and it's a very important process of the implementation of the WSIS action lines.  Since 2004, we have been collecting the group ICT practices and initiatives that have further development around the world and so far we have received more than 13,000 entries to this very important international repository.
Another important highlight is that since 2015, we have fully aligned the WSIS talk taking with the United Nations sustainable development agenda and we're following how these examples from the ground using ICTs are also achieving Sustainable Development Goals.  There are more than 350,000 registered stakeholders at the platform and this year only, we have received more than 800 submissions.  In addition to this, I would like to invite all of you to continue following the process, the new call for the WSIS talk report in 2021 is launched.  And I will share in chat the link to it.  In 2020, the WSIS publications that we have launch as you can see on this slide have covered not only the general report of the 2020 submissions, but also included in the success stories which comes as a compilation of the WSIS prizes which is the integral part of the welcome sis talk taking.  Besides the two annual reports this year, we had launched some new reports including the COVID‑19 case repository which compiles and collects the responses to Corona virus and the use of ICTs.  More than 300 were submitted so far.  This is an ongoing call and I do invite all of you to first explore this opportunity and share your good work on addressing this issue.  Every two years, we are also issuing regional reports.  Of course with the aspect of compilation of all these two years submissions on original angle.  In the next slide, you will see an additional I was referring to has been as I mentioned quite a success.  It's very timely and we invite a will ‑‑ all of to you share.
Another taking repository that we do is the WSIS forum contest.  This was launched three years ago and we have received photos depicting how ICTs are helping development.  This year we have referred more than 200 submissions some of the finalists and champions for listed this is for a contest website.  The deadline for the 2021 is 8th of march.  Now the prises as I mentioned is an integral part of the want talk taking.  It was launched in 2012.  So far more than close to 4,000 projects were submitted for this global contest and in this year, more than 800 were submitted.  354 were nominated and the 90 champions were celebrated.  18 winners were announced and I do invite all of to you go to the prizes 2020 website to learn who they and are promote their success.  The new call is launched and I will share the link to how you can submit your ICT projects, but also other entities projects that deserve to be globally promoted.  The deadline for submission to the WSIS prizes is 25th of January next year.  Please let us know.  Contact us if you have any additional questions to these mentioned repositories.  Thank you very much. 
>> GITANJALI SAH:  We look forward to receiving your submissions.  The photo contest and we have received a lot of suggestions from stakeholders to expand the photo contest also to a video contest.  Videos contest.  So we will be working with all of you on that.  We will be shooting videos maybe say less than 30 seconds.  So we will be soon launching that with your collaboration and hopefully they will all be very useful for everyone.
So just some of the special tracks that were appreciated in 2020 and we've been asked to sort of further explore these.  ICT and youth, ICT and accessibility.  As my colleagues already shared with you, this year we had great success.  We had 50/50 participation of men and women in the beginning in June and July, it went down.  In mid of July and August and then it went up high again in September.  So we had extremely good statistics which are all online.  And in fact, in Latin America from the Latin American region, we had more women than men participating.  Extended reality for CDs, but this would also look at virtual reality and augmented reality for development.  ICT and older persons, we appreciated that this year.  It was really appreciated.  There were many things highlighted including the lack of standards for ICTs and older persons.  So we will be doing many more things in 2021 and collaboration with our partner.  No recollection on aging and rageond morel who will be working closely from CSB and (inaudible) as well.
We will have to explore it has been well appreciated but we definitely need new dimensions into this activity.  And there was also a request to do a track on cybersecurity.
So WSIS forum, (inaudible) and CATALIN mentioned, we are in a budget activity.  Please contribute to the packages that soon be available online.  And as we learn in 2020, the visibility can be enhanced in so many ways through the virtual forum.  So we were able to come up with very innovative ideas and videos, good social media messages and very concentrated visibility for our partners through the virtual format.  So please do contribute to our finding and we look forward to traditional partners also joining us in 2021.  So please do join us in our social media channels for all the updates, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and (inaudible) flash, which is a monthly meeting set up.  Remind for open calls, WSIS prizes is 25th of January.  And provide input on the format and themes, deadlines 8 March, but please do not wait till 8 of March.  Send your submission so that we can phase out the planning and with your permission, maybe we could also have two deadlines so that we can have some requests collected by January, the end of January and we could, you know, start implementing those aspects as well.  Looking at this new virtual concept, we cannot concentrate everything in the week so that everybody from different time zones can follow us.  The photo contest 8th of March will know expanded into a video contest and high level facilitators which is 8 of March.  So thank you very much.  This was a briefing from our side.  Colleagues now the floor is open.  So please raise your hand and we'll allow you to speak.  We will unmute you and allow you to speak.  So please do raise your hand.  I do see many of our active stakeholders online.  Maybe ‑‑ maybe I could invite Mr. Peter.  Peter, if you can please raise your hand and I could unmute you.  Okay.  So I'm not sure what happened.  Yes?  I will not being able to unmute.  Would Shelby or Carolyna know able to help us?
>> Let me assign you to be host and then you can do that.  So okay.  So now you can unmute.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Okay.  So colleagues, you will be able to inmight.  Shelby, I'm still not able to do that.  Maybe you can post your commands on the chat in the meanwhile.
>> Make me back the host.  If the person speaks, I can just unmute the person.  So we assign the host back to me and I can make ‑‑ I can unmute people who want to speak.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  All right.  So Shelby, I have made you the host.
>> SELBY:  Okay.  So ‑‑
>> GITANJALI SAH:  If you can please unmute Mr. Peter Major.
>> SELBY:  Run that name again, please.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  PETER, Major.
>> SELBY:  I have asked them to unmute.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Colleagues, we have not been able to unmute you, but please do submit your questions in the Q&A.  We do have one.  And so what is the UN ‑‑
>> Mr. Major was moved as a panelist and probably can now be unmuted.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  So.  We will just move on to Peter.  So I'm just reading out Mr. Amir's question.  He's saying what can the UN family and (inaudible) do to address the issue of COVID‑19.  We did speak about this and we also shared the repository and also shared some of their activities.  Please do go on to our home parents where we have dedicated pages for COVID‑19 and what our institutions are doing.
So if you could unmute Peter now, it would be nice to hear from him.
>> Okay.  So I have implemented Peter unless ‑‑ he tries to speak up because I have asked him to unmute, but it's from his end.  He has to check from his side.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  All right.  So there is some problem there, I guess.  Please do type in your questions.  I'm sure there are many questions you will have or inputs and raise your hand if you want to take the floor.  Shelby, please let us know if the raise your hand function is available.
>> Yes, please.  It is available.  So I have allowed everyone to talk.  So if you want to talk, you did unmute your mic and then you speak.  So now everyone can unmute their mic and speak, if you raise your hand and they give you the floor.  You can unmute your mic.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Okay, colleagues.  As you heard from the IGF secretariat, we have the host who would like to speak.  Selby, could you please allow him to speak?
>> Hello.  Good morning.  As some of you know, I'm personally involved in the kind of information management of the voices process.  And I'm looking forward for having another (inaudible) exciting session next year.  And for us, I see a problem that we have to foster having really management principles which go into details to cover the whole processes and not just project oriented or single aspect.  There is a governance of information management.  It's very complicated, of course.  But we have to compare and go back to the text of the United Nations instruments that are collected there.  I myself am mainly involved also in UNDRR.  And I observed that not all the details written in the text of such instrument are clearly addressed nationally and internationally.  This is what I (inaudible) noises.  I think it's a matter of addressing the information societiality large by doing information processing in this aspect.  We've supporting active and informed citizenry by that way and we are operationalizing our responsibility for health, safe and security and people and planet not only for current, but also for future generations.  So also the young generation should be interested of having reliable and trustworthy and quality information in all those details.  Yes, it is complicated, but together with the full society gives a very good plenary for addressing these issues.  Thank you for all your effort and let's cooperate income year.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much.  We look forward to your collaboration and we will be in touch with you.  Please do remember to fill up the OCP format as soon as possible.  I can see that there are many prizemen who also want to talk.  Mr. Lee from Singapore, maybe we can unmute you and you can speak.  You have already been upgraded as a panelist.  The floor is yours, Mr. Lee.
>> I think Peter has unmute the mic.  He can speak now.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Major, the floor is yours.
>> Peter Major:  I am happy to participate in the consummation.  First of all, let me congratulate and you all the partner UN agencies for organizing this meeting.  And the previous ones as well.  I really appreciate it because I know how difficult it is to compete with other events and to maintain the quality with what you have maintained.  Very shortly CSC around the share of the CSC is mandated to review the business process on an annual BASIS and I'm really happy to see the commitment being full fitted.  So I look forward to the next addition of the business forum and I hope to be able to participate eventually physically rather than virtually.  So once again, thank you again for the opportunity to talk.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much, Peter, and thank you also for your constant support.  Also good collaboration with the CSTV.  So colleagues, please note that once you are upgrade as a speaker, you can also switch on your camera and it would be really nice to see you.  Though we are not there face to face, but at least it brings a smile to our face to see you.  Mr. Lee from Singapore, the floor is yours.  You have been upgraded as a panelist and you can speak.  I think Mr. Lee is having some problems.  But Gacomo, the floor is yours.
>> Gacomo:  Thank you.  Yes.  In the WSS process this year, there were two major issues that work for me particularly important.  One is ‑‑ has been already mentioned about disasters and for me the question ‑‑ emergency communication.  So I will like to know what will remain after the panel that we have on this topic and what will be in the road map for the next steps of the WSAs.  And the second, of course, is the one about the formation, the reliability of information we have seen that is crucial in any process.  Disaster relief and communication and all filled.  What remains on these two experiences during the WSAs for the road map.  Thank you.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much, Gacomo.  All the topics you have mentioned have been very important in the process also through the action lines of access environment and so on.  And you have been very active in this area.  We also had a high level dial up this year.  We would encourage you and your paster ins to start planning for 2021 because as you know and you also said you are the secretariat to facilitate your work and insure that there is collaboration. collaboration.  So we look forward to receiving your inputs.  I'm very sorry about this noise.  Sorry about that.
>> GACOMO:  We can include ideas for the next steps.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Submit it through the form, the OCP submission form.  So we officially have a submission from you and your partners and it becomes an integral part in the program.  This is what we would like to request all of you to do to submit through the tomorrow submission form as soon as possible so that we can start planning all the agenda, get an input from you guys on what the ‑‑ what are the important topics, what are the different formats we could use.  For example, we heard from one of you that you attended a Knowledge Café, which was very interesting in our virtual format and we would like to try that for the business forum.  Our partners from the global coalition on aging already submitted to us they would like to have cross generational virtual copies and discuss the issue of ICTs and to have some sort of interaction with young people.  So we are going to plan all of this as well as part of the ICTs and all the persons track.  So basically we are at your hands.  Please submit to us any inputs that you may have.  So colleagues, we still have some time left.  So I can see we have many colleagues who wanted to talk, Brenda Escobar.  Brenda, if you would like to talk, please raise your hand.  We also have Mr. Lee from Malaysia.  Sorry.  My mistake.  So Mr. Lee, if you would like to speak, you need to raise your hand and we unmute you.  We also have Mr. Alfredo ranchy who has been a part of the process.  Circumstance ELBY, if you can allow him to speak.
>> He's allowed now and high can speak now.
>> Hello, everyone.  Thank you (inaudible).
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Sir, we cannot hear you clearly.  Can you please go closer to your mic.
>> Hello, everyone.  Is this clear now?
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Yes, yes.
>> Hello everyone, especially distinguished panelists.  I would like to thank you for your work for (inaudible) decision.  (inaudible) community.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  We cannot hear you.  We cannot hear you, sir.  Okay.  We will try to bring him back.  In the mean time, do we have any other input?  We also see our colleagues from (inaudible) constant.  Would you like to take the floor?  We can just unmute you.
>> VLADIMIR:  There is a question in chat.  If you want, I can read it now.  It's from Maria (inaudible) excusing herself for using her chat.  She's having issues with the microphone.  So Maria is saying congratulations on holding such a great event which gathered so many participants, experts and high level representatives this year.  Thanks to the organizers of the session to discuss future forumad key platform for accessing intermediate results of a complicated process of building and developing global information society.  Is there a representative, I would like to express our sin veer support and underline the critical importance of the work sis forums considering a strong link between the process and the 2030 agenda especially in unprecedented circumstances of COVID‑19 pandemic.  The process should be extended to 2030 and they should know assessed within close relays of the 2030 agenda implementation.  I would also like to know one of the possible ways of holding this forum 2021 is to hold in a mixed format the general segment events in remote participation and high level segment to be holding face to face format.  The colleague that was just joining us from Iran, also asked a question in chat.  He was referring his question related to the digital sanctions and this would also be a shared linked for submissions.  Please go to this forum 2021 website.  Also prizes 2021 website for more information related to the submission online submission forms.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much.  We really appreciate all the input we received from our friend from Russia.  We will be in touch with you.  Please also do submit through the OCP because that on the BASIS of that form, we will (inaudible) the agenda.  It will be important for you to submit your official ‑‑ basically like all of us said, the co‑organizers said we're just secretariat and we implement your ideas and your activities and we make sure that we are able to serve you in the best possible way.  So please do submit through the open consultative process and we will be in touch with you as soon as we receive your submission.
We do not see ‑‑ (Multiple speakers at once) that is from Mr. Lee.  Mr. Lee from Malaysia also a prized winner.  Go ahead, Mr. Lee.
>> Mr. Lee:  Hi (inaudible) and the team.  Anyway, I think the process is great.  Okay?  In think it I'm looking at the dash 1 special (inaudible) for the cybersecurity.  And I do hope that in will year 2021, we will have some methods, some way to get some of this project to be implemented.  So (inaudible) is what we are looking forward again and we would like to work more closely together with the team over here.  Yeah?  Okay.  Thank you.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much, Mr. Lee, and thank you for your collaboration.  We saw you were very active through the WSIS forum 2020.  We will put you in touch with the different inputs we receive on cybersecurity for the cybersecurity crack.  You all can work together also to avoid the overlaps because we would like to avoid any sort of overlaps on topics and encourage collaboration.  So thank you very much for all your input and congratulations for winning the prize.  Colleagues, we have two more minutes.  Anyone else who would like to talk, I was informed that Brenda would like to talk, but I don't see her here any more.  Alfredo, would you like to take the floor?  You need to raise your hands.
>> I think Mr. Hussein is back.  So maybe he can continue.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Sure.  Mr. Hussein, we can hear you now.
>> Mr. Hussein:  Yes.  Can you hear me?
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Yes.  We can hear you, sir.
>> Mr. Hussein:  (inaudible) technical issue (inaudible).
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Excuse me, sir.  Could you please go closer to your mic?
>> Mr. Hussein:  Yes.  It's better right now?
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Yes, yes.
>> Mr. Hussein:  Hello, everyone.  Especially distinguished panelists and dear colleagues, I would like to thank (inaudible) in the (inaudible).  I would like to thank you for convening at this time this session.  I'm (inaudible) community.  I would like to raise a vital issue here.  As you all know, the unilateral digital sanks on some nations has become intensive and more destructive especially during COVID‑19 pandemic and other (inaudible).  This digital sanctions in (inaudible) the digital resources and (inaudible) are key barriers in achieving national development goals using ICTs and I think consider human life foundations in cyberspace.  My question is:  What's the UN family role and officially WSIS role and what is the WSIS can and should do to address this vital issue?  It would be appreciated if any panelists can elaborate on this description.  Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  Thank you very much.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you, sir, for your question.  The objective of this meeting is to basically encourage all stakeholders to contribute to the consolidated process.  So we look at all the suggests and ideas and please encourage to you submit it to the open consultative process.  If you think you would like to discuss a certain issue, if you would like to contribute something to the stop taking process, so please we look forward to receiving your submission as well on the form that has been shared on the chat.  So please submit your contribution there.  We are now abouty to ‑‑
>> (inaudible) thank you for your guidance.  Thank you.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you, sir.  Thank you very much.  We are now running out of time, but we do see we have many of our colleagues present here, our colleagues from Poland, Czech, and selfprizewinners like Brenda and our work TO colleague Ms. Lee, (inaudible).  So colleagues thank you very upon for joining us and for your continuous support.  We will make sure that we follow your ideas and inputs and make the WSIS forum 2021 a very successful event as well.  So thank you very much.
>> There is a raised hand from Brenda and also Alfredo if you still have time to allow them.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Um, okay.  Brenda, very quickly if you would like to take the floor.
>> Thank you very much.  Good morning, everybody.  Just first comment.  I am not sure about the criteria that they ‑‑  that you're going to fake for next year, but it is a difficult year for everybody.  Here in Mexico city, the government of Mexico city is very challenged.  We have short time for our projects.  We have less or minimal resources for our projects.  So I'm not sure about the criteria that you will take for the next year, I mean in the kind of project that you will evaluate.  I know about the categories, but maybe they kind of project will be ditch for the next year.  This is just my comment.  Thank you very much for your efforts and for this transition during the year.  Thank you very much.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you, Brenda.  Congratulations on winning your prize.  Basically the prize contest is open and inclusive.  So anything you're doing in the area of action, there is no restriction.  Any activity in the area of ICTs for development, the action line for development, please do submit it and it will be accepted.  So there are no criterias.  The only criteria is to fill up your form correctly and to answer we rest selfforms with just blank spaces and then we are called saying why was this not accepted.  So please do submit your information correctly.  It doesn't matter if the English is not perfect.  We will work with you.  Call us if you need any help to submit the form.  We are always there.  But please submit your form correctly and there is no other criteria.  So we look forward to receiving all the different mominations for next year.  So colleagues, I see ‑‑ okay.  If we can very quickly get Alfredo (inaudible) and we will close.  Alfredo, you have never missed any open consultative process meeting.  So the floor is yours.
>> Okay.  Hello, hi, everyone.  Good morning.  Good afternoon, good evening.  I don't know exactly what your time zone is at the moment.  Due to the short time just to remind that I will fill out the form and submit some request for the next open consultation.  We'll keep in touch with (inaudible) since you have some common ideas and interest.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  We will ‑‑ I hope to see all of you in 2021 in a physical meeting if possible for any way you will keep in touch.  Thanks.  Thanks to all the IT staff.  Thanks.  Bye.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much, Alfredo.  Alfredo has never been any more consultative meeting since 2009.  He has been present in every meeting.  Thank you, Alfredo and maybe before we leave, if all of you could switch on your camera, all of you are able to if you can please switch on your camera for a photograph as many as possible, please.  If you could allow that in some way, Selby, if all participants can switch on their cameras.  Vladimir, if you can take the lead and (inaudible) some pictures.
>> VLADIMIR:  If I can ask everyone to look at their camera for next 3 seconds and smile, please.  Thank you very much.  You look beautiful.  Thanks for joining this session.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much.
>> VLADIMIR:  We hope to be working with you soon.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you very much and look forward to hearing from all of you very soon.  Thank you.  Bye‑bye.
>> Bye.
>> Thanks.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you.
>> Bye‑bye.
>> GITANJALI SAH:  Thank you to Selby and Carolyna as well.  Thank you for your great work. 
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-of40-multitude-of-initiatives-single-objective-stability-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> WIKTOR:  Thank you very much and for all of those of you that are invisible and make the panel possible.  Warm welcome to all the participants that are ‑‑ will be probably joining us along the session and the panel.  And it's my great pleasure to welcome all the panelists today.  That's great to join us in this open EU Open Forum on market of initiatives, but single objectives, ability of cyberspace.  This is a second event of this type that we are doing.  We have had similar discussions on the IGF in 2019 under quite different circumstances where we could physically meet in Berlin, but I think that doing that virtually this year it makes it even more linked directly linked with topics of discussions with IGF and of this form.
So I have today with me a number of fantastic panelists.  So with no known unnecessary order of importance, I will start as well with introducing them to you.  First let me introduce Ambassador (inaudible) who serving for cyber and foreign ministry of affairs.  He has held a number of different positions including Asia‑Pacific department, director of export policy department and director of ministry.  As well as holding ‑‑ he held several positions both in Republic of Korea but as well China and Mongolia.  Entirely in the spirit of multi‑stakeholder, his government experience, he also has been working as academic teacher and research and visiting professor.  So let me move then to Mr. ALATALU.  The European union.  Prior to that, he has had head of international relations corporate cyber defense central.  Excellent and has been in cyber defense in the study of ministry of defense and he served as the diplomat in the Ustoneian delegation.  She has been involved in worker team very actively during the EU presidency of Estonia in 2017 as a vice chair of the council working party on cyber issues.
Then I have Martin who is a board member and the former chairman of the form of incident response and security teams first, which is a non‑profit organization association of 530 security teams in 96 countries.  Covering quite a bit chunk of the globe.  He is also a chief information security officer and (inaudible).  He has a long career in managing security organizations which includes building the cybersecurity intelligence team and work on the security teams at Google and Microsoft.  Now let me move.
She graduated from the school of international studiesbi as well technological university.  As a part of that, she was involved in a crafting various dialogues, but also vitalization.  She has been writing to a number of journals and newspapers both internationally and regionally such as new straight times, the nation, China, daily, south China morning post to name a few.
And then last but not least, we have (inaudible) and nicolie.  The team has won the first prize in the apps for digital piece competition which the first addition has been held to organize this year by the cybersecurity technical and United Nations of disarmament first.  Microsoft EU's office in Brussels.  So warm welcome to all the panelists.  Let me start maybe with just setting the frame for the discussion today and I'll invite you to give a little bit of a pitch of where you come from and what are the ‑‑ what are the ‑‑ in your view, a role of various stakeholders that in advancing security and submitting cyberspace.  Of course, considering the respective capacities.  So as many participants would be fully aware of, you know, currently there are several ongoing discussions on the multi‑lateral and international level that's linked with the disability and security in cyberspace.  To name a few, we have the open ended working group on the issues as well as governmental experts.  But cyber stability is a (inaudible) and in many other form.  From the perspective of European union, we have been a promoter and will continue to be a (inaudible) promoter of what do we call a strategic framework for prevention, stability and cooperation in cyberspace.  But we also recognize and have been supporting for a long time this multi‑stakeholder approach, which is a key in the domain that we are talking about today.  Different actors have different responsibilities and capables in cyberspace as I said.  We need engagement of Civil Society.  We need an engagement of business and we need an engagement as well of academia in this discussions moving forward.  So with that introduction, I will move and invite ambassador (inaudible) to maybe start and break the ice with a few minutes.
>> Good morning, good afternoon and good evening, everyone.  Times are challenging, but the spirit is strong when it comes to the cyberspace, cyberspace showed us our ugly face even more during the COVID pandemic, but it also got all of us to work together using the cyberspace even if we cannot travel.  So thank you for inviting me to this panel.  I will try to serve few observations from the perspective of the government representatives of a member state of the union.  As Viktor mentioned, there is whole rage of the processes going on different levels which involved the government to push forward the questions or challenges of cyber stability and cybersecurity.  Victor has already named those most important in the United Nations framework.  I'll be back to that.  But just to give you the little bit of background ongoing to processes in cyberspace on the level of governments are taking place also in the ECE which is focusing on countries building measures.  There is a number of those confidence knowledge about measures agreed upon within the OAC framework and with a number of countries participating in specifics to enhance our corporation in cyberspace aimed at building confidence.  As we speak now in fact, I am on another computer participating an exercise which has been called yesterday by room an ‑‑ Romania and it provided answers of what would we do if we well a cyber attack on the energy system and us in particular on the wind farms.  So this is just an example of how many projects are going on in different frameworks of international forum.  Then we have also our internal processes which add the security in the cyberspace.  Internal within the organizations of which we are the members.  Poland in particular, it would be European union orinateo.  It was on the EU I think we have made a big progress on the governmental level in introducing the cyber diplomacy tools, the restrictive tools for the first time this year to speak normal language to introduce cyber sanctions for the first time in the history of the European union on July of this year.  And the second package just days ago.  The cyber sanctions is the response of the government to the attacks against the EU member states or (inaudible) of the European union as such or international organizations which are considered important as it was the case in the first package where the attacks OPCW were taken into account.  So this is again the government organizations government organization activities to provide cybersecurity some cyberspace.  I will come back for a moment to the u N and it was in the UN, you again have a number of processes going on.  You have activities in Geneva.  You have cyber crime fighting activities based in Vienna or future cyber crime activities which is to be decided whether they will be based in Vienna or New York.  This is a new initial taking place and we have two most important for cyber stability processes which are taking place in the first comedy of the United Nations namely the governmental ‑‑ the group of governmental experts and open ended working group.  Most of the groups mandate should be concluded early next year and we are working on concluding this work, but what is important and I shortly want to touch upon when we come back in discussions to that, there is certain level of disappointment with the results of that work.  Namely we ‑‑ many countries including all EU countries would like to see more tangible results of what we're doing within the United Nations.  There's a lot of discussions on the question of applicability of the existing international law and existing international norms as agreed earlier to the cyberspace.  And the questions raised by some countries whether it is applicable direct, new instruments, universal instruments that we worked out or not.  These are fundamental questions for the government.  If the group of countries to which we represent in the European union or the family, we all not neglect the importance of the questions of the applicability of the law to international cyber international cyberspace.  We would like to move forward with specific tangible results which would help the whole range of the countries to increase the capabilities in the cybersecurity and providing safety of cyberspace and increase the confidence building measures.  The last initiative that was announced during the last session in September officially was announced in September during the last informal session of open ended working group is so called program of action.  It has been delivered by EG and France.  All EU members endorse it as a (inaudible) and the problem of ‑‑ program of action is maybe the new way out of this deliberations within the United Nations contacts because we not neglect the importance of continues process, but we would like to create a framework for more practical results oriented activities.  Results that will increase specifically capabilities of the member of the United Nations and will build the confidence among them.
We must remember that all EU countries have relatively well developed cyberspace systems in place.  But this is not necessarily the case for the majority of the (inaudible) in the United Nations.  So from that perspective, we would like to share our best practices.  We would like to share mechanisms that we have developed in our countries with the other members of the family and the UN family and we think that we should agree on ending the dual truck, which we have now between the group of governmental experts and open ended working group and come up with a single truck which will be maybe hopefully based on the program of action and focus on more tangible results.  To some of that, I would like to say this is what we do on the level of the governments.  It's needless to say that implementation of whatever we do as the government may not take place without not only understanding, but full fledged cooperation from the other shareholders of the cyberspace.  And the other shareholders is everyone and everybody.  It's the research communities.  These are NGOs which have a different set of values.  These are developers of new programs, new applications as we have today.  These are the companies which are actually providing the tools for every user and there are individual users at the end.  Because I say even with the best systems technical systems of cybersecurity, the education of individual people is very important because eventually a lot of people put themselves in problems with malissues software for example.  The crime activities.  I'm not talking about state to state activities, but crime activities result in single persons fly because they clicked something, which they should not click.  So the education on what to click, not to click, education on what are the sources of this information and why this information is dangerous for society is not just for the government is also important part and stakeholders in the cyber education are also important.  So to sum up, the job of government is to create the frameworks.  And this frameworks are being created on the various international levels, the global level at united nags or expanded regional level like OECE or the European level, et cetera, et cetera.  They report being created on the internal national level set up by the government and our internal legislations which provide a framework.  But the actors within this framework must work together.  So we can't do anything because the government other than set up the framework.  The substance of the activities must come from the minds, (inaudible), and sometimes heart and the resours of the other stakeholders representing enterprises, businesses, research community, NGOs, education community and so on.  I probably spoke longer than I was supposed to.  That sometimes is happening with diplomat, but I will stop here and I'm looking forward to (inaudible) during government discussions.
>> WIKTOR:  I picked up a lot of very interesting (inaudible) that I would like to come back in our discussion Barts ‑‑ parts about tangible results and individual users.  I think that's very important as well element about at the end of the day cyber.  It touched us as human beings as much as anythinget.  Capacity building and as well how to translate the forms of the frameworks that we established in a more concrete way and also through technical standards and technical work.
Before we go there, I would love to hear from you a little bit about your perspective.  From our experience ofak, we have very close engagement with think tank and academic community which adds very important voice into what us as practitioners very often do because first help us to think outside of the box.  And also delve deep into some of the issues.  But also if you can, you know, at certain point, maybe Q&As reflect a little bit on the regional aspect that you come from the Asian region, which is very active and very advancing quickly on cyber issues.  So Farlena, over to you. 
>> Farlena:  I do have a long answer I think with this question.  So I'm a little unsure whether I should get into it now or should I should get into it later.  Maybe I should just deliver my talking points first and we can converse on it in Q&A.  Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I wish to convey my gratitude to EES and Internet Governance forum.  I am most thankful for the opportunity to share some of our experiences particularly Isis and for the opportunity to learn from participants and panelists.
My presentation aims to fulfill from a perspective of an organization stranding somewhere between academia and policy making.  So I will now doubt be in the company of this and that is the contribution for later discussions after.  If Imis anything, please feel free to prod me during Q&A.  Per perfect ‑‑
But first leased discuss some of the contests.  Some of the efforts can be characterized by how cyber disabilities is viewed.  If we sigh it as a goal to be upheld by few factors namely political, technical, it incubates and contectualizes the ideas also as conversations and even when it can be relevant.  The first is stability related to draw political tensions played out in cyber where impacts and infrastructure for cyber operations would be considered‑‑ would be required states to be good and responsible behavior.  There are few mechanisms for deterrents in this case which is to uphold for good state behavior.  Would that be ‑‑ is that my ‑‑ sorry.  There is a comment.  There was a note that my speaker of the not working.  I thought oh, dear, I was worried that I was babbling to myself.
Second is in regards to the definition for technical factors when it comes to cyber stability.  We're looking at open secured table accessible and peaceful cyberspace that would require technical assurance and cooperation.  These can meet certain ends for corporation to handle cyber crime.  To this end, the academy can play a valuable role as a space to haven't the multi‑stakeholder structure and dialog that needs to occur.  The perspectives of cybers structure challenges typical arrangements on jurisdiction and responsibility, when we hold discussions on Private Sector engagement and ICP usage, this was held (inaudible) some of the reflection impact how private organizations actually viewed their own mechanisms for them to handle some of the threats for some of the rising threats in this region, in this realm.  Meanwhile, other perspectives that we have actually observed when it comes to some of the platforms that we have held is in regards to the (inaudible) perception that is impacted ‑‑ during the time, the concept of cyber war fare was quite (inaudible) and what the debate moved forward to date, during the days ‑‑ it is still being articulated for appropriate policy and responses.  Academia is serve this incubator of ideas and platform for dialogue.  The exchanges occurred to forum such as council for security corporation and Asia‑Pacific.  But particularly the study group on international law and cyberspace conducted with C scat provide insights to point of congregation and governments in the region, which is most helpful and tries to move the conversations forward.  NGG report.  So this type of training programs sought to engage the stakeholders.  The governmental stakeholders and also the academia research community to converse on some of the concepts underpinning cyber stability issues.  Programs run on cyber direction as well have actually had bridged the gap and encourage (inaudible) to share knowledge for discussions on cyber stability to be inclusive.  Academia can reflect and grow in silos.  The learning from information already (inaudible) are beenficial and would insure and realization of enough supporting cyber stability faster.  However, the challenges that academia may be the same as those reflected on other platforms.  It is established between the academic community and between other academic communities and are even communities that Civil Society.  These can affect the clarity and transparency that would impact pragmatic and appropriate policy solutions to be introduced.  Sometimes solutions and other parts of world will not work here and this is where academia plays a strong role that tries to contextualize some of the conversations held in other parts of the wonder.  Access can be also impacted by resources where the student to attend certain meetings can be limited by the availability of resources.  Platforms held in the space is also acceptable and (inaudible) in more track 1 held organized platforms.  Which means in dialogue, sometimes finding the right angle, but it would take a certain type of trial and error and would mean holding the same type of conversations every other ‑‑ every few years so that different agencies can take part in what you would open would bring a different outcome.  In seeking punishment, different platforms offer different lessons building greater cyber stability.  I would have provided some type of insight of how academia actually contributes to cyber stability processes in the space.  If anything, address address it in the Q&A I would look forward to speaking more of it after.
>> WIKTOR:  I will definitely come back to that.  SIIM, I can have you next coming?  I think that you also will offer us a very interesting perspective probably drawing a little bit more on the capacity building elements as well.
>> SIIM:  Yes, indeed.  Thank you very much, WIKTOR.  It's a pleasure to be here.  I have to say I have been very busy taking notes from fellow speakers.
I would like to share some slides to highlight what I will be speaking about in the coming minutes.  So let's try to get those to work.  Perfect.  So very quickly.  I will go to the first slight right away.  Previous speakers have highlighted different initiatives and the different topics which are very helpful on our area.  Focusing on this panel.  I would start off by recapping how I as a former academic or form are researcher see that.  There are trends on a national level and international.  There are a lot of national efforts in the area developing straight gees, implementing new structures, coming up with new standards, attribute already highlighted which basically all comes down to cross corporations.  Nation and stakeholders working closely and ever more closely together to solve issues related to cybersecurity at large.  And at the same time, there's a lot more national effort.  Just to Mens the UN.  And there is a lot more shared approaches to the issue of cyber capacitying  about you see it has been announced a priority of course in the EU level.  And EU strategy and most recently ‑‑ it's a priority expressed all the time for the EU.  But it is also a priority on the other side of the Atlantic, for instance, in the U.S.  They say working with (inaudible) is a priority building capacity elsewhere.  It's a priority.  And these are just two examples, but there are a lot more.  So if you think what is cyber capacity building and how it relates?  Here is the mapping.  You see that at least the different levels that a stakeholder is emerging.  So it can be anyone from an individual way to let's say the government parliament (inaudible) energy.  So everybody has a (inaudible) and everybody can be a stakeholder.  Why it matters is that everybody can also be say targeted.  And the severity of a cyber incident can range from mapping and services.  So anybody looking after your activity or anybody trying to sneak into your (inaudible) all the way to service option.  So again, anyone can be a stakeholder and anyone can also be a target.  Representing my agency in the information systems authority.  We call it rya.  It is an Achronim.  I guess it is theedest way.  It is multi‑‑ it has many years experience in part of the countries that contribute on funded projects.  What we have taken away from these projects and lessons from the international partners as I have labeled here, they're truthful.  First you need to have a sort wide approach and the second you need towards a target what you train and where you provide your education.  So coming to the first, the society approach, if you want to build cyber society, there is one size that doesn't fit all, but if you want to be a successful cyber capacity builder, if you want to achieve results and say provide sustainable development in cybersecurity, you need to speak to a critical structure.  But you need to speak to a private sector in general and you need to speak to Civil Society organization because they're off in the drivers when it comes to responsible approach by the citizens to a given issue.  And then the other area, you need to target your training and education.  So there is again one size doesn't fit all.  You need to speak to (inaudible).  One hand, they are the future, but you need to speak to them about cyber hygiene.  I say in my personal life, quite often the school student who bring in the new apps and then you need to basically educate ourselves as to what are the risks associated and then you need to teach your kids.  But you also need to be on top of the development and quite often children are the way to do that.
Then the young adults, you need to enhance their understanding of cybersecurity and such.  They are often the next generation decision makers what they deal with.  They build the economy as we say.  So they are the ones responsible for making the country work to make the society work.  And cybersecurity is just part of what is going on.  So you need to educate your people off especially young adults.  In acetonia, we have a campaign (inaudible) inner cities.  You cannot leave anyone behind on that as well.  You need to speak to management because this is when the resource decisions are made.  I would include cyber projects and how to communicate cybersecurity and so on.  So these are the lessons learned.
You might ask what is the purpose of cyber net in this?  It is an EU funded project which is to bring together first the action that the EU is going outside the EU in their capacity building.  So to strengthen the coordination coherence of all the good work that EU is funding and experts are engaged in other countries and building cyber capacity.  We also Rhode Island enforce.  That is to provide this technical system.  It means bring together the capacity that EU has.
Very quickly.  We have ‑‑ the project is run by the Rio, the information system of Estonia.  And security ‑‑ cybersecurity agency.  And, ah, our ambition is quite high.  We don't have any geographical limitations.  This is a map of the EU Delegations.  In the comes year ago, we should be reaching out and helping to build cyber capacity world wide.  Of course, we need to adhere to the standing principles of the EU when it comes to cyber capacity building as such, but also the more broad principles.  So they all relate to what the EU is promoting when it comes to stability of cyberspace.  They assist in international law, protection of fundal rights and freedoms, who can access Internet forum and so forth.  Colleagues highlighted some of them in good question tail.  If I may conclude with a recommendation, if you Google operation guidance, that should bring you to a report that was started two years ago by the European union institute of security studies.  And that is a very useful (inaudible).  I just copied one graph from the menu which highlights the VIP checklist.  And from (inaudible) to interest to principles, so these I think are a good BASIS to carry on discussion.  Thank you for your attention and look forward to any questions you might have.  Thank you very much.  It is really a pleasure to be here.
>> WIKTOR:  Thank you very much.  Let's move on to Martin.  What I would love to hear and what we can bring to the attention as well is you come from the world where very often you are told what are the notes in the frameworks.  You have to concretely operate within that which is a struggle.  I think what we need more as well is to have a better dialogue between those who are on a daily BASIS have to implement that and those who imagine things.  So over to you, Martin.
>> Maarten:  Thank you very much, Victor.  So my name is Maarten van Horenbeak.  We're an ocean about 500 security teams that is really ranked from government, Private Sector and academia.  And what makes our members special is that they are oft know referring to as the fire brigade of the Internet because they're the first ones to step in.  We have three different ways of doing that.  The very first one is focus on global coordination.  One of our goals is make sure there's a well and competent teams ready to respond to incidence.  We want to build a community where they can easily find each other and find other incident responder that have very specific skills.  Or they might be much closer to a network that is conducting (inaudible).  And we name to do that by expanding membership days and we do that by drawing members per se or immediately, but we also have fellowship program, which is focused on members in potentially states that may not have the funding to join an organization first.  Second, we focus on creating global language.  What we mean with that is that every (inaudible) has a common set of tools such as technological and used to be effective.  And finally, we educate third party stakeholders such as policymakers on the work of or member teams and how they can help us address our ongoing needs and challenges.  And really practically what we do is bring all of these into the response teams from around the world for training, information exchanges, conferences or in working groups where they can work together to build standards.  And we do this across organizational boundaries.  So we have members and then our very levels of funding and capability.  And one of the interesting things about first is that we bring people together when sometimes they might not have the mechanisms in place to come together.  So what we often see at our conference is that we see the national (inaudible) of a country participate and it would be one of the places where they meet a lot of constituents because some of the large corporations are universities.  They also be participating in that same meeting.  And as this network, this we painted in a number of different mechanisms to contribute our experience from dealing with actual security.  I wanted to highlight three different challenges we often run into when we bring together the groups.  And quite often, there's perceiveddability that they can deal with an insdidn't by themselves in investmently.  And the (inaudible) really worksas a network because we need skills both from the government, but also from the network operator and from the failure that builds the software that's been affected.  We see that we're most effective when incident response team and especially the national ones invest in multi‑stakeholder corporations of a really vibrancy served community.
The second challenge that we have seen and this is especially in receipt years has been about the inclusiveness of the defensive cybersecurity community really is effective when relationships between states worsen.  And that can have relatively minor backs, but it can have relatively major ones when a particular country is under some type of sanctions.  And the challenge with the restrictions is they make it difficult for incident responders.  Not just because they might prohibit conversation but because of the concept of derisking quite often they avoid risk because it is kind of part of their job.  As a result, they try to stay away from things that might not be willing or completely what is their government endorses.  And third, we see developing trust as a very core prerequisite for stability.  It isn't something that gets (inaudible) or legal document, but by work together, achieve something old things and building larger corporation on top of that.  And one initiative that I would like to highlight specifically from our community is some people call ethicking first which launched on local ethics day this year just two or three weeks ago.  It helps guide the ethical public of members.  So the didn't beauty that a team member has, coordinated exposure, respect of human rights, responsible collection, those types of things that we think if incident response team and responder live up to these specific ethical guidelines, they're going to be a lot more successful building trust, both with their peers and constituents.
To summarize, to us they're just concomponent of the big network of stakeholders that is needed to insure stability and cyberspace.  We think that multi‑stakeholderism and development of trust are some of the key elements that are really important to get us there and make that happen.  As a forum, we have painted in a number of different initiatives including the open ended working group.  We provided input to the stability of cyberspace.  One thing we have particularly focusd on in the last few years is training.  So where we provide a training to technical incident responders, today we expanded and also provided training to all over the government and all the diplomats working that space.  Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak.
>> WIKTOR:  Thank you very much.  It was very interesting and many notions.  But I think one that particular strikes me is also that there is a need for multi‑stakeholderism not only at macrolevel, but micro level anyway.  And, you know, what I would like to explore a lit bit more later on is how also your actions can be compared to the our confidence building measures you are practically implementing.
Now onward to you.  I think you have a very interesting story to tell as well from the perspective and I hope you will bring us as well very close to the human individuals and human beings with your opening remarks.
>> Jerome:  WIKTOR, thank you.  Very excited and they have considered to invite young people to these matters and I think it's a very good statement for the future of service security as well.  It's the first time that they take part in such a panel.  It is emnightd by the wealth of the panel, but I have been taking good notes of everything that you said and I think not agree more on many, many points including the fact we have to focus on users.  So I'm Jerome and I present a team of five people that are actually all based in the U.S.  We took them from Europe.  In India and the U.S.  One recently flagship new competition that the UN and the (inaudible) court has organized for the first time.  We wanted very recently and so we all train right now to build on the pitch we made to the UN.  It was to propose that we tried to build the service that would bring free cyber threat into the (inaudible) to users that don't have a lot of cyber knowledge.  So this is this kind of vision that we pitched and tried to sell to the competition.  We won a prize for it and with the resources and connections we made as part of the competition, we are trying to build it.  To the participants that are here today of any age and of any background, I would recommend that if you want to kick start your thinking about cybersecurity, you think about this competition.  We feel that it was very well done that we were really fortunate to receive advice along the way and that at the end of the day, it is through this kind of competition organized by businesses, but also big organizations like the UN that we can try to bring in some fresh ideas.  So I highly recommend this as well.  We believe that opportunity is high to try to target the user.  The user that don't understand very well cyber threats and to bring in websites and services that are going to help them.  We already are taking this problem of cybersecurity from this micro point and it's fantastic today.  But we can see with the Ambassador the macropoint and then trickling down towards me more and more micro.  I think for us, multi‑stakeholder means this.  It means that we have been fueled in our thinking by this competition.  Without this competition, we would maybe have been sitting together and speaking about these things, but we already put our hands on the deck.  This is embodiment of what we would consider this model to be.  So also today now, we are trying to build on the momentum of the prize.  It's like ‑‑ we have one engineer on the team, but the rest of us including me are policy people.  So we've also very humble to try to understand better the technical issues, but our engineer is good.  And we welcome to the any partnership we are in contact with NGOs, with cybersecurity specialist and any kind much inputs or connects that we can make through the evens will be extremely useful.  We have a (inaudible) that we share with WIKTOR.  We can share as well.  So yes.  Even this background, I will speak this point of view today.  Thank you very much for inviting us and I'm very, very glad for your stay points.
>> WIKTOR:  I am thankfully aware of the time.  So let's also make sure that we can engage with participants of this panel.  I asked my questions.  In anyicate, I will leaf it.  But I wanted to check with all attendees in there is a brave person who wants to break the ice and start with a question.  And as I said to you, there can be also questions going to be potd in a chat.  So I think as long as you are preparing your questions, then I'll be the first to launch.  I think all describe many interesting elements of this big puzzle that we are sort of focusing on.  I wanted to check with you.  What opportunities or frameworks should be explored win the multi‑stakeholder community to move discussions on sponge informative behavior and cyberspace ahead.  Any volunteer who wants to start first with that?  Do you see anything on the horizon either existing or do we need something new to advance that discussion?
>> Right, Woktor.  When it comes to responsible norms of behay yo, it has to be worked outa all levels.  I already mentioned the discussions we have on how the existing international law and existing norms apply to cyberspace and in various opinions.  I'm sorry, but for us, it does apply.  Cyberspace is the same as any other space.  That behavior must not be happening in (inaudible) space including cyberspace.  But to carry on that message, it needs to go to all stakeholders.  For example, it's not only state to state beheyior, but there is huge multi‑national companies.  So they need to be also involved in discussion.  They are.  Especially by the union they are to create the sponge behavior in the cyberspace.
Then the developers, and I don't mean just software developers.  If you develop a tool and you have technology tour or new technology or new software, I think it's important to keep in mind what could be the rules of using that tool in cyberspace?  So even on the designing level, it's not just the joy of being the best professional and doing something creative, but I think we should think about what were the results on that.  You have seen it.  This is what happened, right?  And just for example, so eventually again it's going back to the long‑term process, which is not bringing quick results.  This is the education of people.  And through the education of the citizens starting from schools, you have to put a lot more effort on teaching kids and young people.  But even the rulers, the political clocks.  Wharf you do, it has much more strength than it used to be in the past.  So watching TV, everything single we do now from social media or programming or whatever has a result for whole societies in countries and the developers.  We can't avoid it.  It is underestimate the element.  And also if I can (inaudible) a little bit more.  It is important to have instant reaction.  We talked about it today like cyber sanctions or critical incidents response teams in place and also here we need to come up with that.  Even what we heard from our panelists today is clear picture.  Nobody can provide cyber stability and cyberspace individually.  It must be a joint effort, and there are different ways.  There is one element which came and is not bring results today.  We need results today.  That's what we're doing in different ways, but we need the rules in the future.  We need to increase capabilities of state, societies, et cetera.  Here what comes to my mind is the new visual of the European union is the UPN cybersecurity technologyo damage.  As we speak, this is in the process of creation.  Today is the deadline, if applying for the hosting of this institution.  One of those that want to endorse it in Poland, we hope we can win that.  But the important element of that on the level of the European union, we tried to create a center where we provide instrument to support the industrial technology and the research work providing for cybersecurity.  So this is a giant at the EU level.  This is ‑‑ I hope it will be Janed and oriented towards multi‑stakeholders.  The idea of this center is provide through resource, but also ‑‑ this (inaudible) stakeholders in cyber first to help work them together.  When we were at rotating polish condits, we also bring talk to what is important with individual countries.  That is the partnership between difference stakeholders.  We have in Poland ‑‑ that's the part of the multi‑EU side initiative.  So we play them.  On the national level, we have at least two major partnership programs.  One is the government and industry, which involves a number of companies.  They're coming up with new solutions and just think what will be eyeful to help stability.  This is the program of corporation in cybersecurity.  They have another partnership program with 68 partners from different scopes from city, but also from research, academia, et cetera, working to increase this stack in space ‑‑ stability in stays.  But we'll have a number of government started programs which provide resources to small companies.  So, in GOs which are also strong here and also to the research community to work together to the same goal of increase cybersecurity.  We're 6 to eat programs.  In laland.  On the national level, I see the center cyberspace.  And new machine it would ‑‑ and then we have to go Goldman Sachs bane to the government early.  But in the UN and this is my final remark here, on the UN as we discussed the program of action which I introduced at the very beginning in my intervention, the important one is we're going ‑‑ and in this discussion, we also will put a (inaudible) on how to include none on ‑‑ we want them to paid in this present bring their expert ease and bring perspective.  Be the global international level of the united fashions.  Be the original UPN union level.  This must ‑‑ keeping must take place.
>> we are running it and pick our time.  Therefore, you know, it's reflecting bad on me that I was not able to ‑‑ I want to give you a shot of 15 or 30 seconds last pitch that you would like to make to all of us as the multi‑stakeholder community before we close.  Masten, can I start with you?
>> Maarten:  Sure.  Thank you, Woh, KTOR.  I think what Jerome mentioned about tutting the user first is really, really important.  A lot of what I said was all related to trust.  We bring in everyone and give everyone a voice.  So I think I'd like to close on that.  Let's focus on building trust and corporation and then I think we can get the stack.
>> Thank you. 
>> FARLENA:  He spoke about security by design, but there's Moe things to be shared on the region.  These types of platform because region meaning that if we're looking at south east Asia and developing worlds, these are places where they're developing some of the platforms and reggual ass and endorsement when it comes to areas in security and design.  If the effort she does get to be developd and she has seven times of inabilities, was they can be a concern.  Second might be when it comes to asna and how wee do we engage it best on the platforms been set up.  We do have to be at the table as well and these are also some of the moving parts when it diagrams to cyber stack.  The third part is to build and Maarten's point.  Sudden things are on when we are talking about say how do we regards cyber attacks or cyber attacks at level of (inaudible).  That's one ended in a discussion.  You are looking at this information or you're looking at something that is Asin to how data is bug eased.  Those can actually concern users and use useefs.  I think this concerns how cyber stability is actually defined and contextualized.  As mentioned, there is a concern about geo political issues when it comes to cyberspace.  Those can have a lot of content that can be tapped into government agencies.  If you are looking at something like this information, that ‑‑ (inaudible) immediate landscape and that impacts how that comes in.  And also because this actually ‑‑ the types of sponge that governments have to approach some of these issues, I should divide it in ministries.  You can have ministry A and ministry B.  This can create a difference and how open some of the agencies can be.
>> WIKTOR:  Thanks, Farlena.
>> Yes.  Thank you very much.  I wanted to reassist that is very important.  That was one question, but we won't to cover it.  Food for thought for later.  I am wondering how we can make better the link between the gig government to provide frameworks and the grass would level and highway we can stream line this better in the future.  I think this is one key to the public.
>> I think ‑‑ I think that feeling of the being remote certain discussions do not touch me or they're so remote and accessible can create the such engine and engagementment from the forms we are trying to add everybody to allow.  But last but not least, over to you.
>> Just to reflect on good thoughts.  Going back to the education, I think I could agree with what you said cyberspace ability starts with underneath to educate the people and educate them wise.  But also bring in the education on the signer lists.  So I'm doing it the way realize on ‑‑ so thank you very much for this opportunity.
>> WIKTOR:  I would like to thank all of and you also in the audience for this fan of the discussion.  I must admit.  I could go on.  There are so many strands and discussions.  IB looked hungry, but this is probably a good sign that we need to continue this process.  Personally as well like to carry over this message about thinking user first and thinking about the human centric approach.  Not forgetting human centric element in all the approaches we have discussed.  So thank you and thank you as well for the organizers IGF for this tanistic and for allowing us to stretch the time allowed for that.  Have a lovely rest of the IGF and I hope to see you in the near future.  Bye. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-of43-fostering-ict-to-mitigate-the-aftermath-of-human-tragedy^^

 
>> VAGNER DINIZ: Hello, everyone. Thanks to the IGF community for the opportunity to share with you all our experience in dealing with the Fostering ICT to Mitigate the Aftermath of Human Tragedy. 
    Today, we are going to have three people in this open forum. I will give a brief context of our experience, and we're going to have an introduction by the Minister of Science and Technology and Innovation, the representative. He will give introduction to the theme. 
    Finally, we're going to present some cases how technology can mitigate the aftermath of human tragedy in general. 
    On January 25th, last year, valley mining companies (?) Collapsed in Brazil. In this tragedy, my daughter, Camilla, turned three years old. My son, Luis, 31 years old. And my daughter, Ferdinand, 30 years old, who was five months pregnant with my grandson were killed. 
    In addition to them, another 268 people were killed. The collapse of the dam released about 12 million cubic meters tailings. The leakings of tailings affected 75% of 2.7 million square meters of native vegetation along 300 kilometers of the river basing. 
    In addition, small farmers were affected by the loss of cattle and poultry and also the destruction of a good culture areas. The rupture of the Valley Company Dam was not an unexpected disaster. It followed three other previous disasters in Brazil with human losses and serious environment damage. 
    I like to use this citation of researcher in Argentina who has already pointed out that the history of mining in Latin America is based on the myth of progress with the (?) Mineral extraction to obtain maximum profit, keeping the surrounded population hostage to promises, trapped in a dream of wealth that never comes through. 
    This maximum profit at any costs mining company's strategy is at the heart of the ecological destruction caused by mining companies. 
    It should not be a surprise that the annual debt last may, new research revealed that just two of 10 largest mining companies are aligning with sustainable development goals. 
    How does the dam burst impact people's lives. 
    Several authorities have reported that fishing in the (?) River has been affected due to the possible presence of pollutants in the river and, consequently, in the species found there. It's spread out in the region. Water supply depends on water trucks in 60 communities where the dam collapsed. This is because direct capture of water on the stretch of the river most polluted by mining wastes remains prohibited. 
    The water quality of the river has been monitored by environment government agencies. Since the tragedy, reports from the agencies have revealed that levels of lead and Mercury, for example, have risen even though they were not part of the composition. 
    So what to do in this tragic situation? It's clear that the tasks to overcome this social, economic, and environment damage is huge and needs many actors working together. 
    What we are going to present to you today is just a small seed we are spreading in the soil because we believe that technology can help to mitigate some of the problems that have risen due to the dam's rupture. 
    Last year, the Internet Steering Committee in Brazil approved the execution of projects, or the implementation of projects, that were able to use what technologies to solve real problems of real people and, at the same time, foster the culture of entrepreneurship. 
    The center (?) Joining for to form (?). Today, we will present you all project proposals to address specific problems. 
    Now I invite Marcos. Thanks for joining us. You have the floor. 
   >> Marcos: Thank you very much. It's been a very powerful introduction. I'm really sorry for your loss, and, clearly, what happened was a tragedy, but we, as the government, of course, we have not only the role to prevent future tragedies as such, but we also have to give an appropriate response to the survivors and to the community that has faced such a hard challenge. 
    Obviously, we hear from the Minister of Science and Technology and Innovation. As such, we believe that innovation can be a key driver for economic and human developments. 
    Actually, when we think about the current global health crisis, it's quite clear how important it is for the governments to foster innovation as a way to face the hardest challenges of society. Obviously, a natural disaster is, in this case an accident, that has a huge environmental impact is a disaster. 
    So the Ministry of Science, Technology, Innovations, and Communications (?) We do believe that in a city that has been ravaged by a series of accidents, we needed to create alternatives, paths for the community to recover. 
    That's what this is about. With the support of the Steering Committee, we've been able to harness the power and reach of the Internet to select proposals from all over the country to face a critical local challenge, which it is recovery from the accident. 
    These different projects which were chosen, they use a variety of technologies such as Big Data, blockchain, and others to help the city of (?) To recover from this horrible tragedy. 
    This initiative is very important, but it's not the only one. So we have, at the moment, a very strong effort from the government to push for digital solutions, not only for disaster recovery but to improve the quality of the population as a whole and to (?). So that was a very brief introduction. Now I think Jefferson will continue with further details about the project. 
    Again, thank you very much for the opportunity. 
    I give the floor to you. 
    Thank you. 
   >> JEFFERSON DE OLIVEIRA SILVA: Okay. Thank you for the words. 
    Can you hear me? 
   >> Marcos: Yes. 
   >> JEFFERSON DE OLIVEIRA SILVA: Okay. I would like to start introducing myself. My name is Jefferson de Oliveira Silva. I'm a researcher and the program leader. It's been an honor to conduct this program, and I would like to start by saying what do we expect by the end of this meeting. By the end of the talk, what we really would like to have is to get your opinions and perceptions and experiences that can strengthen the program because that's all what it's about. 
    It's not a program that was designed by just one hand or a head or a few heads. In every way possible, we try to get the most of the opinions and perceptions because we believe that is going to strengthen the program, not only this program but every other future versions of the programs. 
    So thank you, Mr. Marcos, for the cooperation and the Ministry of Science and Technology and Innovation. (?) Has agreed to help from the culture projects and every other aspect of the program. 
    I would like to thank the federal University of (?) For the support for the meetings and with the city inhabitants as well. 
    There's another key partner, which is Softex (phonetic), choose the agency for the trainings for entrepreneurship and the rehabilitation partner sharing experience and know‑how. 
    Also, the secretary For the Development Of (?) For reviewing proposals and other aspects as well. 
    So after that brief introduction that was given by Vagner, when we got approval for the project in nic.br, we started with a meeting with the city inhabitants. That's because we wanted to make a program that was really ‑‑ that came from the real needs of those people and that was the most effective program that we could design. So we started with this meeting. 
    The idea with this meeting was to try to identify the needs that those people had and not in the short term but in the mid‑ and long‑term. We predicted those people would have a lower support from the society in the mid‑ and long‑term because they were having a lot of support for just after the tragedy happened. 
    So the meeting happened in August 2019. It was a majority meeting. It was conducted by Carol Bruli (phonetic). She's on her maternity leave. 
    We started listening to the inhabitants and other affected people about that awful experience that Vagner told about his experience on that, the loss of their beloved ones, their pain, and how they were affected economically and socially. 
    So what happens is that everyone written down their needs according to their own perception, what they thought that we could do to help them. In a group, we started to analyze collective needs. When we realized that figures emerged and popped out. They're represented in these figures. You can see the Post‑Its that are glued to the walls, attached to the walls. These Post‑Its represent every need for citizens. 
    After that, we started prioritizing because we had a lot of ideas. Everyone would try to contribute. We had, I don't know, maybe 30 or 40 people in this meeting. 
    After that, there was some kind of a vote. And the votes and ideas were these orange dots that they had to go there and vote. 
    So after that, they converged very clearly into things. And these things, they became our program goals. So our overall goal was to mitigate economic and social problems of the city, but we would like to do that in two specific different ways. We would like to promote entrepreneurship among college students. This part the specialty of the Ministry of Technology and Innovative. That's covered in what I just introduced to you. 
    We would like to stimulate students to undertake projects using technologies. Those chosen have a reason for being chosen, progressive web apps and Internet of Things. They stimulate things that include the environment as well. 
    After that, these goals, they kind of represent how we would like to contribute. 
    So we've got what we have that is strong in us, which is the knowledge and know‑hour with entrepreneurship and the knowledge of building Internet applications. We put that together and released with these things here. 
    We would like programs that foster women's social networks. So this was one of the things that emerged. 
    I will show you this. Otherwise I can't see. 
    Those projects, they need to address environmental monitoring by community, and they also need to create sustainability economic environmental metrics. 
    These things did not come out of our heads. They came out of those configuries they were specifically chosen for us. 
    So after that, we had a review process of these submitted proposals. We got 26 project proposals that were submitted in our culture projects, and we counted with 10 reviewers from all different places. There were people from nic.br, from universities, from the Ministry of Science and Technologies. We did that to get as many points of views. 
    After everyone had reviewed the project proposals, we had a final reviewer meeting where we could discuss and deal with specific cases, and every had a chance to express how they felt about those proposals, and we came to the conclusion that we would accept five projects that I present to you right now. 
    I think it's important to say these projects are presented ‑‑ I'm going to choose the word "raw" for lack of a better term. When I saw raw, these projects are as‑is. So, of course, these projects, these students are going to pass through a training, and in this training, they are expected to learn a lot about how to view the problem, how to validate the problem, and how to develop an application that is really an answer to that problem. 
    I'm going to present to you what they presented to us. 
    As they said to you, we expect these proposals evolve over time. It's natural that they evolve over time. Hopefully, with your suggestions and opinions as well. 
    So the first project that I would like to present is random. It does not present classification or things like that. We have Brumadinho Open Data Lake & Analytics. The student's motivation for that is they are promised that ‑‑ a lot of tools they try to generate data for visualization and the generate data for understanding of the problem, but few tools really work to simplify and to work to handle this data in some way. 
    So what I'm trying to say here is that they tried to really understand ‑‑ they have a solution to understand the problem that they have there. They have a solution in which they can provide some visualization that helps people to understand what's going on. 
    It's not only about collecting data about a specific phenomenon but how to visualize the data of this phenomenon in some way. 
    This is a very clever solution because it really became an endpoint for all the other projects, as you're all going to see, hopefully. They connected to the other projects. The idea of the components, with this tool, they can work in the decision‑making and evidence‑based policymaking. Without this, that is undermined. 
    So they have identified a new data sources that are spread out and not easily accessed and easily understandable. They used, as an example, the Brazil institute of (?) Which they do not offer data or API. And what they are trying to achieve is that it should offer a tool in which the data represented there along with other tools, it can be better visualized and explored. 
I'm not sure if I mentioned that this is a project of the Federal University of Minas Gerais. 
    They can aid in the decision making, so they needed a framework that gathers data from different sources. With that, they can centralize data that is scattered and subsidized evidence‑based policymaking and strengthen environmental monitoring as well. 
    Just for you to have a glimpse of the technology they are going to use, they are working based on a previous solution that they have. It's called LEMONADE, which stands for Live Exploration and Mining of Non‑trivial Amount of Data From Everywhere. 
    They can create an easier process for data scientists that can be beneficial because many people there are just starting with technology, and it would allow them to work with data science tools early on and in the process. They can work to understand their own environment. This tool is what allows this visual for computing, and they're based on technology like (?) And sparks and microservices. 
    I'm sorry for getting so technical. Some people like me like to understand things in technical terms. 
    And the other project they are going to present is from Federal University ‑‑ Federal Fluminense. It's the BrumadinhoCoin, an environmental coin on solidarity. The city puts eggshells mostly in a single basket. 
    Projects have been mitigated and the economical impact for local inhabitants. So they tried to create an alternative form to create income for the locals. And this is kind of a virtual ecosystem. What they try to do is monitor the acts of preservation and with that, incentivize preservation of forests and watersheds. The idea is they rear going create an ecosystem that makes use of the virtual coin they're going to create. They named it BCoin. It's going to be used for the payment of the environmental services. 
    Let's imagine that someone finds something, trash, garbage disposed on the river, and this person has the opportunity to go there and improve the environment. So they're going to use ‑‑ they're going to employ some effort to clean the river, and by that, they are going to be awarded in BCoins. So there's a very combination of this ecosystem I'm talking about. 
    The user, they register using the web app that they're going to create. They can perform a service that they can get BCoins. 
    This is converted into blockchain transactions. If those blockchain transactions are approved, they can go there. First off, a smart contract is generated automatically between a company ‑‑ I'm sorry. Just let me put one step back here. Is to the user, the web application converts that data into blockchain transactions, and this data is generated an ID that can be sponsored by a company. 
    So if a company is sponsored, that transaction ‑‑ that activity ‑‑ then a smart contract is created and the person can perform the service. After performing the service, the person gets these BCoin, and it can be used in the local market. 
    What happens is where does this money come from? It needs to come from somewhere. It comes from the incentives that the government can provide to these companies. 
    So when they reward in BCoins, they can use that to a tax deduction or credit ‑‑ environmental credits like reduction of carbon credits or reforesting or things like that. 
    So by creating this virtual ecosystem, we hope that the inhabitants have an alternative way to get some income and improve their lives. 
    I'm running out of time. 
    So the other project I would like to present is called SuperACÃO, a platform for collective funding of innovative projects for women in Brumadinho. The project is based on the fact that many families depend on women's labor force. It was the tragedy. What happens is the tragedy aggravates the problem because in many cases, the women are the only source of income because they lost their counterpart. We heard that. 
    So they're being lost because they're not well connected to each other. So when a woman produces something, other people do not know that this service has been done, a product has been created. It's from craft work that could be sold in the existing marketplace. What they said is that they wanted something that was larger than WhatsApp but easier to use than existing marketplace platforms. 
    And we also heard from some young women there that they have innovative ideas which would demand more customized solutions, so they needed to leverage some money for that. 
    And the people from the Federal Institute Of Education, they got that and proposed this project. 
    The goal for this project is to collect innovative women ideas and create a platform so that these ideas could be implemented. So it would be necessary to support the maps for the project creation, execution, and management. They also propose to create transparent mechanisms to avoid what is really common in crowd funding platform are money laundering and illegal schemes. 
    So it would not go to any other source. They have created mechanisms to show that the money is really being used to fund these projects. 
    So in the technology stack, what they try to propose is to create a very simple subscription process, and in the technology stack, they're going to use PWA to create the apps, and they're going to be using (?) Which is used in Brazilian portals. It's safe with high performance and highly customizable. 
    To the fourth project that I would like to show you is called Brumadinho Alert, a technological solution for reporting environmental violations. What they realized is the existing channels for reporting violations are effective. You can do it in person. You can use online forms. You can do it over the phone using printed forms or email. 
    People in the city don't even know how to use email. Going there in person is really inefficient, and that contributes to many environmental reports not even getting reported after all. 
    An alternatively, there are some existing apps that could be used to fund these but they're (?) You report, but you don't know what happened to that report you did. It's really regional specific. So they do not necessarily work in every region. 
    So what they propose is to make the process for reporting environmental violations easier, more agile, and more transparent, and with that, they hope to strengthen environmental surveillance. 
    They even created a (?) That rewards the population for using the app. They have a lot of features. They have a complaints feed. It's really interesting. It's a really interesting solution. 
    So there are three main entities involved. The first one is the users. They report the violations. Then the non‑governmental agencies ‑‑ non‑government organizations, they validate the violations, and when the NGO's validate the violations, they go directly to the public entities to resolve these violations, and everything could be tracked by the user. 
    So when the violation would be reported, when it was validated, whether it was validated, when the public received it, and what happened to that report. They show it on a map as well. So it's really interesting. 
    And the last one I would like to present to you is called the real‑time monitoring system of water quality of a river. 
    As Vagner mentioned, contamination of water with mercury and led, the Parapeba River. It affects millions of people in some way by that. And inhabitants are not even aware of the river's quality, so they ingest the water. It makes everything difficult. 
    They propose to use two perimeters that are widely use. Someone is TDS, they measure the substances in the water. The other is called the turbidity, which is a physical parameter related to water, how opaque or how crystal water is. 
    What that propose is to create a low‑cost autosustainable water quality monitoring system. 
    They referenced it in the proposal, that the existing solutions in Brazil cost approximately $100,000. They're estimated cost of solution is approximately $300 per station, or less, and they are going to use that using, basically, this. 
    What they have here is a station, and the station is put here on the river, and the station is equipped with sensors. So they are going to use proposals to connect and communicate with a hub, and this hub is the device that can connect everyone to the Internet, and they're going to develop an app to monitor and give knowledge about how is the water quality to everyone else. 
    So that's the basic architecture that they are going to follow and they're going to deploy sensors and microcontrollers because they're easy to use, highly available, and low cost. 
    The web app is going to be based on the Django framework. There's a reach of 10 kilometers reach. 
    I extended a little bit of my time. I'm sorry about that. I look forward to hearing your questions and opinions. 
    I believe I should give it back to Vagner right now. 
   >> VAGNER DINIZ: Thank you, Jefferson. Jefferson is our expert in web technology at nic.br. He's also the originator of the move on the web app project. 
    Thank you very much, Jefferson, for showing us all the proposals and projects and the delivery and results. 
    Also, Marcos, thank you for being with us. 
    I have a question to Jefferson. Could you give us a timeline for the implementation of this proposal? So what are the next steps to implement all the proposed solutions that you showed us? 
   >> JEFFERSON DE OLIVEIRA SILVA: We started the training phase recently, actually three weeks ago. The project has 12 months to conclude. Students have 12 months from now, from three weeks ago. The next steps are to work from making the students think about the problems they are trying to solve. They are trying to validate what they're trying to solve if it addresses the needs of the local inhabitants of the city. 
    This process has been brilliantly conducted by the Ministry of Science and Technology and Innovation. 
    They are given this training, and that I have spent three months ago trained in this entrepreneurship part of the program, they are going to be trained in the web application and web technologies, PWA specifically, and Internet of Things by us. After that, they're going to have six months to implement and get us a working prototype of the project. That's the main thing. 
   >> VAGNER DINIZ: Are you with us? Do you want to talk? 
   >> Carlos: Yes. I would like to ask a question to Jefferson. Your presentation was very interesting, the models and methods to treat a very serious problem. We have these kinds of disasters in Brazil and also in other countries. And I wonder if all the technology, the learning that you are accumulating in the Brumadinho experiment, you can transport to other areas and other incidents and use these in other scenarios as a resource that can be used when other disasters arise and so on. That's my question. Sit just for the Brumadinho experiment or is it being ‑‑ I see the LEMONADE, which is fantastic. Probably weren't expecting to use it on a variety of situations? 
   >> VAGNER DINIZ: Okay. I think Jefferson can start answering, and I can also add something. And I hope that Marcos can also help was the idea of the scale‑up of this experience. 
    So, Jefferson, your floor. 
   >> JEFFERSON DE OLIVEIRA SILVA: Okay. Thank you, Carlos, for the question. It's a pleasure to have you here among us. It's a good question. We tried to select proposals that are scalable. So they can be used not only on the Brumadinho but also in other situations, in other disasters, situations, or our solutions can apply as well. 
    For instance, the Brumadinho Alert is the project that was thought for a city in (?). Many of the solutions here could work for Maryanna (phonetic), the other tragedy we had. 
    We had this concern, and we tried to address solutions that were not too specific but that could help other people. People could reach other people and be used in other scenarios as well, but we also tried to choose proposals that interconnected between them. 
    As you can see, we have the proposal from the Federal University of ‑‑ the projects interact with themselves. It's a good question. Thanks for asking. 
   >> VAGNER DINIZ: The Brumadinho project is a pilot project of a larger project called (?) Or in Portuguese, (?) Which is minister of Science and Technology, Innovative, and Technology program. 
    The project is to gather experience and have some solid background to implement this similar project in different areas in the country. 
    Of course that is still not dealing with the technologies to predict tragedies, disasters. We hope that the next edition of this project we could have another proposal addressing the specific problem. 
    So far, we have some solutions. 
    Marcos, could you give some more light for us about scaling up this project and also say something about the (?) Project from the ministry Of Science, Technology, and Innovation? 
   >> Marcos: I think there's a scaling up when we think of the plenty of different programs within the government to foster entrepreneurship and innovation, and then I would give an example. 
    Let's say from this idea of the sensors for checking ‑‑ for the water. Perhaps somebody who is involved will turn this into an actual start‑up company. Then we have plenty of programs within the governments, not only the ministry Of Science, Technology, and Innovation, but also in other ministries that will support this kind of initiative. And the fact that this project has already been selected would make it a candidate for other programs. This is something that we're working pretty hard now on to consolidate all the different initiatives we have to support innovative companies, especially start‑ups. 
    Therefore, we've created a website called (?) That consolidates all these different initiatives and makes it easier for the entrepreneurs to find out what is available to them. 
    If this works out fine, then we expect some of these projects will actually grow. As they grow, we will identify the different support programs we have within the government to make them scale up. 
   >> VAGNER DINIZ: Thank you, Marcos. 
    Also, can I read in the chat the Horst Kremers makes an interesting comment, talking about this idea to scale up the projects. We call it science/practitioner's gap. Some call it trenches. It's one of the political discussions necessary for Brad, national, implementation. To Marcos, he says from large‑scale implementation, you need the Ministry of Environment and municipal level at a minimum. 
    Yes, I said in the beginning that it's clear that the tasks to overcome this social, economic, environmental damage, and also to overcome this practitioner's gap, we need many actors, many actors working together. That's the idea we're developing on this program. It's put on the university, the ministry of science, technology, and innovation, and also, a nonprofit organization like the Internet Steering Committee and the nir.br to implement this project. 
    Thank you, Horst, for this comment. 
    Okay. So we are about to be over time. So I would like to thank you very much to Marcos (?) Di Piento, Director for Innovation, Entrepreneurship, Policies at the Ministry of Science, Technology, Innovation. Thank you for being with us, Marcos. 
    Also, I want to thank Jefferson de Oliveira Silva, our expert in web research in web technologies at nic.br. 
    Also, thanks to all people who are giving us support to this live decision. 
    The rapporteur Beatriz and Selby in the back office. Thank you, very much, to everyone who was engaged in this. Thank you very much. I hope that what we told you can somehow help you to join us and give some contribution to what we are doing. 
    I think that it's time to adjourn this session. Thank you very much, everyone.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-of46-beyond-personal-data-literacy-sovereignty-and-rights^^

 
  >> MODERATOR:  Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the open forum number 46, it is organized by AICOMS, Telkom University.  Thank you for the opportunity to have this open forum today.  
I am Suryo Adhi Wibowo, moderator for the current open forum.  The title of the open forum is Beyond Personal Data: Literacy, Sovereignty and Rights.  Before we start, maybe the IGF operator will brief about the technicalities for this online meeting.  Maybe you can help us from the technical aspects of the online meeting. 
I will explain about the technicalities:  the first, attenders, you can use the Q&A for question and answering and maybe you can raise your hand and talk directly to the speaker and we will give permission to talk directly to the speaker.  The other thing, you can use the chat in the Zoom application.  Okay. 
Maybe let us begin with the keynote speech by the director of ICT application governance, Indonesia Ministry of Communication and information technologies.  She is also the Chair of the ID IGF.  Please. 
>> MARIAM BARATA:  Thank you.  
Distinguished guests, first of all, on behalf of the Indonesia Ministry of ICT and the ID IGF, I would like to show appreciation to the UN for hosting this important and timely online event which invites government, private sector and Civil Society.  Ms. Marilyn Cade helped us a lot in the Indonesia government and her presence will be greatly missed, it was a blast for us to have her contribution.  
Distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen, the internet has become a powerful, liberating medium and it is borderless cyberspace providing limited opportunity for freedom of speech and expression as well as economic developments.  On the other hand, many aspects of the internet governance security, personal data protection, literacy, other, they're still needing to be discussed further.  These are the reasons why Indonesia hosts the 8th IGF in Bali and even during the IGF 2019 in Berlin, the Minister even expressed willingness of Indonesia to host the IGF again.  The President of Indonesia even works directly, activities for a country consisting of around 17,000 islands with a population of more than 250 million, to provide internet access to all of them, it is a must, not only because Indonesia committed to the standard but also because activities, including online activities in schools and universities are being held online due to the pandemic.  At the same time, the government is also increasing the awareness of cybersecurity, personal data protection and other aspects that should be taken care for a safe, secure cyberspace.  Distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen, Indonesia is hosting this open forum event with the topic of personal data, literacy, sovereignty and rights, the discussion will be focused on two main topics, internet governance, digital economic ecosystem.  The first topic is making sure that the internet governance which was followed by numerous discussions in many forums of the ITU, ICANN and others, can we develop properly and accept globally for the benefits of all countries.  
The second topic, I believe it is more and more important topic due to the pandemic situation as mentioned previously, Indonesia as well as many other countries are developing their ICT infrastructure and applications significantly.  It should be sure that these activities will support the economic development of its country.  The science, technology and industrial activities in the countries, both in software and hardware should benefit from the ICT developments.  At the same time, the economic activities developed with the ICT should be a part of the digital economies, eCommerce, and many other, they should benefit the country’s economic development.
Distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen, we're pleased to be able to offer a multisector ‑‑ multistakeholder forum for this open discussion.  I would like to close my speech with the hope that this IGF helps with the advancement of the internet for the benefit of all countries, societies and people.
Thank you..
I give back to you, Bhredipta Socarana.
>> MODERATOR: The next speaker, Mr. Arthit Suriyawongkul from Thainetizen and he's an expert on digital policy and researcher.  We would like to present the floor to you, Arthit Suriyawongkul.
Please. 
>> ARTHIT SURIYAWONGKUL: I will share the screen again here.  Okay.
You can hear, right?
>> MODERATOR: Yes.  I hear you clearly.
>> ARTHIT SURIYAWONGKUL: Do you see the screen?  The keynote?
>> MODERATOR: I cannot see. 
>> ARTHIT SURIYAWONGKUL: It should be here.  You see this one, right?  The full one, right?  It is confusing.
>> MODERATOR: Maybe you switch ‑‑
>> ARTHIT SURIYAWONGKUL: I have another one.  Sorry.  I have the shared screen and then ‑‑
>> MODERATOR: Perfect. 
>> ARTHIT SURIYAWONGKUL: Can you see the presentation?
>> MODERATOR: I see the presentation.  Now I see two slides.
>> ARTHIT SURIYAWONGKUL: Two slides.  Okay.  That's strange..
I will start.
The topic I'm going to talk about today, it's about ‑‑ I think a lot of people are talking about it, the privacy, the personal data, the information collected because of different security measure, right, during the pandemic.  I will try to give some perspective let's say for further discussion.  I borrowed the idea from the European Single Market.  In the context of what I just mentioned, it is not only about the rights and freedom, it is all about the economic opportunities, the market as well.  Let's see how these things can be considered together.  I borrowed the idea of the four freedoms from the European Single Market.  These four freedoms which I think all of the people have heard about, or maybe experienced themselves in some forms.  It is about free movement of goods, capital, so it is in‑person, and in‑person this is worker, citizens as well.  All of these ideas, in order to actually have a truly single market, goods, capital, persons, they should be allowed to move freely in the same market despite political borders, whatever.  This right was translated in different regulations and initiatives to support the free movement of main things and they actually use pillars of the single market.  For example, there are things like euro tariff, it is basically the way that allows people to use one single mobile phone number, mobile phone plan and go to Member States and still make a call without paying the roaming charge.  
Trying to borrow that idea that concern about free movement of goods, capital services, people, I would like to use that framework and invite everybody to think about what kind of things could limit the free movement, what kind of data that you probably have to offer or give away during the transportation of goods, of capital, of services, of people.  I think a lot of people who travel already experience this, we call it border controls, right.  When you cross a border from one country to another, there are different security check, bodycheck, document check, the passport, visa, if you go with luggage, that's checked as well all done for security.  These measures, they get more and more strict especially the context after different terrorist attacks in the past, especially like 9/11, it changed the landscape of life and travel.
Same as the current COVID, it has changed a lot on how people travel from one country to another.  Myself example, stuck in Dublin, I cannot go back to Bangkok because of these measure, I have to wait for approval from my own government for them to say ‑‑ they have basically a quota for people going back to our homeland.  So the attacks, they have changed the way we control how things travel and linked to this, terrorist attack, even the example of movement of goods, there is a link.  In 2001 I think some people still remember the attacks in the letter, in the U.S., people randomly got a letter with white powder or something and eventually some of them contained Anthrax, a disease.  It actually created a panic in the public and consequently, the U.S. postal service has actually installed a detector to take care of this.  It is a case of letter bombs in a lot of countries.
In Thailand, since 2015, you are required to have an ID card when you go to the post office, you have to show a ID card if you want to send any parcel.  It used tonight case that you could ‑‑ when you sent a parcel, the only address that you will give in the past, it is the address of the recipient.  Since 2015 you have to give the sender address as well.  Sender address used to be optional if you want to get the parcel back in the case of there is no recipient, you actually got the return.  If you put the sender address there.  That was optional.  Currently it is mandatory.  That's personal security as well.  In order to send goods, there is personal data involved here as well.  This can create a social will as well, if you can ‑‑ a public record as well, if you send what or how many grams or the frequency, someone sends something, right, to someone, you can actually create a social network and send for payment as well.
We see that using cash, it is decreasing in a lot of cities because of premises like restaurants, supermarkets right now prefer contact lists or payment because of the health and safety reasons and also food delivery and shopping and payment as well.
The difference is, cash payment, it is anonymous compared to other payments that have your ‑‑ some ID attached to it.  In terms of services, for example, work, work from home, study from home, there is an example, right now I'm literally in my bedroom.  We somehow, the borders between the public spaces and private spaces, right, working space, home, it is quite blurred at the moment.  Sometimes it is not only about the room itself, it is about the desktop as well.  Previously there were some chats that I shared with my friends and because of my incompetency basically in the technical of screen sharing, I could expose some of the conversation with my friends to the public.  
The apps in the U.S., schools use with students, right, they require sometimes unnecessary surveillance.  The last example, it is the most popular one people are thinking about, it is the contact tracing, moving, keeping track of people, not only the movement, they're keep track of who you are as well.  This is used to create the social network of people that you know, people that you spend time with, right.  I think just like using the freedoms as a framework of movement of goods, capital, services, people, we can see how our life in the market actually changed and this change oftentimes comes with increasing amount of the personal data that's collected just in order to do the transaction.  These transactions, they're movement, trials, it used to be the case of the intensity of controls most of the time at the borders.  The thing here because of the pandemic, it is not only that the controls are more intense at the border, the numbers at the border itself also increasing as well.  For example, for checkpoints for travel, it used to be the case that you only had it at the national border, but right now in some countries they do actually check at other borders as well and even at the gates of mall, or going into the restaurants, they actually ask you to write down your phone number, the data, the numbers at the border has also increased as well.
This is almost lie mi last one.
With these measures, the number of measure, number of borders were increased, we see a lot of things happening here, things like public ‑‑ when the data, when this go across the border, for example, our contact tracing app, it has been developed and used by the Ministry of Public health.  Things like the regulation about the data exchange, it is into the clear.  Currently we have one law for the personal data inside of a government.  For the personal data in the private sector, it is ‑‑ it is not that harmonized.  There are cases in terms of social mobility and access to work.
Some of the people, they found that fortunately they can work from home.  I have some friends who are living here, living here in Dublin, they want to actually move back to Bangkok or other provinces in Thailand because of the current situation and they found if they actually want to go back to that place they can no longer work because they work in data and because Thailand doesn't actually have the data protection law that's compatible to the standard with GDPR, they cannot work from Thailand.  Some of their Spanish friends, German friends, they can actually go to their home and work from their E.U. Member State country, but for non‑E.U. Member States, they don't actually have the options.  All right.
There are cases that use this control of security measures against COVID, this control, against the freedom of assembly as well because from the ID we can trace it, if you have a mental health history, we don't allow you to actually enter the process.  This happened last week in Bangkok.
There's a lot of stuff going on with the cross‑border things, the data, involving the data, discrimination, so this is the last ‑‑ basically I think just like the questions that I have received, because of the means and the modes of transportation have been changed.  Borders have been changed and are increasing as well, same as the controls at the borders, how the data protection has evolved, they catch up with the new reality.  In terms of the market itself, the economy itself, in terms of social mobility, accumulation of social capital, social capital in terms of education, economic capital, how isolation has effected these and which groups are effect the most.  This is interesting as well.  This is ‑‑ we have been thinking, this is ‑‑ yes, this is based on the data, the personal data, some of them, but the consequences is not only about the privacy, it is actual going beyond the privacy as well.
Thanks. 
>> SURYO ADHI WIBOWO: It is interesting to hear your presentation regarding people and borders.
Maybe we can move to the next speaker, the CEO of DotAsia organization.  He will give the presentation, around 10 minutes.  I would like to welcome Mr. Chung.  The floor is yours. 
>> EDMON CHUNG:  Building on what was just talked about, I don't have a presentation here, picking up on the increasing number of orders that are kind of private border, if you will that we're going through every day, and this merging between public space and private space, it is something that I think is at the heart of many of the things that we talk about, privacy.
Again, building on previous speakers, it is not just about personal data at this point, it is not just about privacy, there are cross‑border issues and stuff.  The part that I want to do to spin, to focus on, they are whether it is privacy or a lot of the things that we deal with online problems today, fake news, hate speech, freedom of expression, it all comes in what many people are starting to call privately owned public spaces that happens online.  These privately owned private spaces is quite interesting.  They are the Facebook, the Twitter, Tik Tok, whatever, social media that you have which acts almost like a public space, people protest, people talk over it, treating it as a public space.  In fact, it is privately owned.
The type of accountability, it is very different than a public space whereby the balance of freedom of expression versus hate speech, other incitement of violence, other issue, it is different and the expectation of privacy is also different.  If you're in a public space, obviously, the expectation of privacy, it is not high, however, the type of expectation, it is different because if you're in person, you won't have an ID that shows on top of your head and that everyone can see who you are and what the number is.
Online, it is very different.  These ‑‑ I think a lot of the issues that we talk about comes from these privately‑owned public spaces and the lack of accountability for them.
Ultimately, they're ran by corporations.  These spaces obviously ran for profit, they're customer driven.  When we talk about customers, it is not no longer the users.  Users don't pay, those that pay are the advertiser, including political advertisers and other motivations that are driving corporate decisions on these types of issues on privacy.  Of course, much has been talked about, the collecting and keeping of data, almost feeling the more data the better that at least has been the motto for the last 10, 15 years and while GDPR did a little bit to increase the cost of keeping data, which I think is a good thing, because ultimately, when we think about it, it is about whether that data is being kept at all.  The key aspect of privacy, it is not so much ‑‑ a lot of times, people kind of ‑‑ both corporations and governments and many, many people get twisted around when we talk about privacy, it is they twist it into saying the security of someone protecting access to your data.  In reality, when you talk about ‑‑ when we talk about privacy, we really want to talk about data sovereignty which is you own that data and if I don't ‑‑ if you're not ‑‑ if you don't really need my data, you're not supposed to keep it in the first place so that you don't really need to.  The talk about increasing security to protect you, protect your privacy, it is a bit of an oxymoron.  
The bigger question is whether that data is necessary, and a lot of times when we talk about the security, it is ‑‑ whether it is the Trump clean network, we border in the question of not just about data security but this type of national security or how or why this data is kept, why it needs to be kept very securely is about this type of security.  Earlier this year, here in Hong Kong, we have this national security law for Hong Kong, it was enacted in mainland China which all three of these initiatives are really a situation where it is twisting what starts with privacy into what we tried to think about security into what we think about as national security, but more importantly the extraterritorial nature of these type of initiatives, what it is trying to do is control things that are cross‑border, you know, by a particular jurisdiction, hoping to, you know, impose a kind of jurisdiction across the world and dictate the world.  That, to me, is one of the bigger problems that we need to really think through.  That's where I think the multistakeholder model needs to come into play.  In order for it to be interesting, you know, and I'm, you know, being the big optimist, yes, I am talking about potentially a multistakeholder governance model that can look at a general situation for be privately owned public spaces.  That's a huge wish.  I think ultimately that's what we probably need.  
In order to do that, there are two things my mind that's very important.  One, it is the general model of these apps, and the COVID contract tracking apps is a best example.  For the longest time, companies like Google, Apple, many app providers keep saying that user data, the reason why they want all of this type of user data is for the good of the user, for the user experience, they keep, collect the behavior data up to the Cloud and they do calculations and give you the service that you want.
What the COVID app actually told us, especially with the apple/Google model, that's not necessarily the model.  What that model say, is that the data can actually stay in your device, everyone can keep their own data, the algorithm is transmitted to the device and calculations are being done in the device so that, you know, the user actually retains control over its data.  I think that's going to be a huge step.  Now that the biggest guys are saying this model actually work, we should demand it as user, we should demand it.  It is not just users, I think that even governments want to demand it.  Other ‑‑ if all of the app, if most of the apps have this model, this sovereignty issue, it is reduced.  The data, it is not uploaded to some Cloud, some other cross‑border, everything still on the device.  The more applications that use this model, the more jurisdiction returns to be meaningful and the more data sovereignty for the user returns to being meaningful.  Another thing that's important to build on, it is open standards.  Right now all of these standards, Facebook, Twitter, so on, yes, they have APIs but they're not built on open standards.  
What I mean, when you send an email from Gmail to Outlook, it works.  But if you set up something on Facebook, it is not easy to move to another place and you can't send messages around.  The reason that's important, is to put the customer back into the driver seat as in, you know, if the social media platforms, if these type of privately owned public spaces are utilizing open standards, customers can move and exodus from a particular platform.  Today, that's not possible.
Together with these, I think that forms an interesting basis for a potential multistakeholder, global multistakeholder model that can then come in and look at the technical aspects of maintaining these two parameter, the model of the data, you know, with retention at the client and the open standards.  That would give us a fighting chance for a multistakeholder model looking at privately owned public space in that slice whereas in a global situation, and then the local jurisdictions can take over as they are now and, of course, I don't think ICANN is the greatest organization, but at least it is an example of how a slice of technology, technical focus coordination, it can help a larger piece of policy support across the world.
I guess with this, I close by saying this is the issue ‑‑ the issue of personal data, it is just one part of things.  I think the bigger problem, all of these problems circle around privately owned public spaces and as we cross these spaces those policies need to be in place and are not quite there yet and hopefully, you know, this could add to a step towards more interesting things.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Thank you, Edmon, for your speech.
Now we have reached the time for open discussion in the forum.  I will start by addressing the question from the Q&A session.
Each question can be discussed together by a participant in the forum, for anyone interested in answering or discussing the question please just respond or use the Q&A feature in the Zoom. 
>> (Poor audio quality). 
>> MODERATOR: I'm sorry, your sound is interrupted.  I will take over.  There are some problems.
The first question, it is from Egypt, how is access to electronic evidence effected by cross‑border mobility of people and particularly over Asia, are there existing or national level classifications or definitions of data, traffic data, content?  Maybe Edmon can answer this. ‑‑ sorry.  Sorry.
I will read the question again and maybe you can answer.  This is also from Egypt infrastructures Chris, public space, is there an indicator of the four steps and as a user, how are the roles as you're citing it.
The third question, it is how we consider the strength in the process of the data subject that lies in the idea of qualifying data as property, when is the data considered to be personal data.  
Maybe the panelists, Edmon, Arthit, maybe you could answer, please. 
>> EDMON CHUNG:  I will jump in.
The first one, I'm not familiar enough with, I hope others may be able to jump in.  
The second question, on privately owned public spaces, I think when ‑‑ how I see it, it is that when we ‑‑ when we talk about data sovereignty, just like in normal life, when we talk about sovereignty, you have to have a personal sovereignty and then a build up to a nation sovereignty that's at least by classic definition and classic political theory.  That's the same information, you have to have personal data sovereignty for it to make sense for national data sovereignty just as I explained, if your personal data sovereignty is not kept, that data, it is not with you physically or with your device, then, you know, it is no longer something that can be bounded by any kind of boundary, border, geographic border boundary, data sovereignty doesn't make sense in that case except for jurisdictions looking to over reach.  The time you want to talk to data sovereignty, you would absolutely have to talk about data of certain subjects that are being held outside of the jurisdiction.  I think they come hand in hand.
>> ARTHIT SURIYAWONGKUL: I can add a bit on this.  Sorry, I'm not that expert in the first question as well so I will go to the second question.
When we are talking about data sovereignty here oftentimes it comes together with the attempts of a lot of governments to push for that so‑called data localization, the legal requirement, if it is data about the person of this nationality, the data about matters of national interest, whatever, it should be kept inside of the country.
My view is that it is a goal aligned with what Edmon just said, we at the sovereignty level, I think people should have ability to choose to stay in the safe they feel safe as a person, as human.  The same thing should go with personal data as well, if we ‑‑ we should be able to choose where we like stay.  Right.  We should be able to choose where I work, the data should stay as well.  If it feels like ‑‑ if I feel like my data should be best kept in Thailand, I should be able to choose that.  If I choose my data should be in Hong Kong, Singapore, I should able to choose that as well.
The legal infrastructure should support me to fulfill this right and freedom.  In terms of national, legal infrastructure, right, you shouldn't limit the security of individuals.  If it is the case that keeping the data, it is actually better for citizens, I think that the Government of Our country should support that and when talking about this, it is not really promoting only one country to be ‑‑ in the data center, there is competition in the market as well and the same cashed data, piece of data, there can be many copies, another thing about data security, it is actually about our ability.  It means if you have copies, you can have more ability of the data.  I think this can go together, the freedom of choosing where to keep your data and also in this market competition, it can go together, and it comes back to the security of individuals.  It actual builds up to the national security.  It is nothing without the people.  It should be with the people.
>> MARIM BARATA: Help me with the question?
>> MODERATOR: Yes.  Please.  You can unmute. 
>> ASHWIN SASTROSUBROTO:  This question, it is a long time issue. 
First of all, regulation, like GDPR, it is on the basis of a multilateral agreement, and in Asia, we don't have yet that type of multilateral agreement.  Now, I think ‑‑ well, I'm a member of the group of the Indonesia IGF and this is really important, a very good question, because this will ‑‑ I can put this one in a proposal for the ministerial meeting, if you can have GDPR, why not an Asian agreement like GDPR, like that, but, of course, on a different type of regulations.  That's number one.
Secondly, in many countries, well, at least that I know, the definition of personal data is not yet fully designed.  This something we should agree first, what kind of personal data we should define.  And don't forget that ICANN still has open who is data to the public, although there is some ‑‑ some decisions in German for example that is still being discussed whether the data should be open north.  These are the kinds of things we have to consider at least in Indonesia and, of course, perhaps I think also in Asian countries.
Now, the next, let me check the question again.  How we can have the cross‑border ‑‑ cross‑border information about the data.  I think that this is very much depending on the agreement of the countries.  This is also important if we go to internet data usage.  Some of you may remember, this is also a problem of a global problem, where if data is stored in particular countries, it may or may not be possible for other countries to ‑‑ most of you are already familiar with this because with the development of the act of the U.S., that this demonstrates how difficult it is to get the data even from your country, in your country, to get the data which is stored in other countries.  These are the types of things, issues that we should consider together and perhaps IGF is a place where global internet governance can be discussed openly, together, how a criminal in country A sends the data in country B and country A should be able to get the data from country B even though the dataset operator of the place where they put the data is still in country A.  This is the kind of things that I think IGF can work together.
Bearing in mind, we already discussed this with the WSIS 1 and WSIS 2 and at the time, some of you may remember, we have the Working Group on internet governance to set up to solve these kind of problems and perhaps we can still continue to discuss this.
Again, once more, thank you for the questions.  I think it will ‑‑ I will propose this to be put on the table of the next ministerial ICT meeting.
Thank you.
>> ARTHIT SURIYAWONGKUL: I could actually answer as to ‑‑ the answer about ‑‑ where is that?  Yeah.
No.  I'm sorry.
There was questions about are these models suitable for others in general.  I think just an example that I just gave about how people ‑‑ citizens of the E.U. Member States, they can actually during the pandemic time, they can go back to their home and work from their home country because there's a compatibility, there is the harmonization of data regulation, data protection regulations across all Member States in the European Union.  This is a very good example.  I think working from home, whether during the pandemic or not, it will be increasing.  Without the data protection, personal data protection I think it is going to be difficult for people who are roaming around in different countries to actually get access to customer data, to contracts, to whatever is involved, the personal data of citizens, in different countries.  Just to give you an example, if I actually worked for a company in Bangkok, right.  In one day, maybe some companies in Singapore ‑‑ maybe in one day the Singapore government has a data protection law that said the export of the Singaporean citizen data should be allowed to the country that has the law on data protection, that may be ‑‑ I'm from an office in Thailand, I can no longer work on that dataset says WSIS.  So I think this can be obstructions for the economy as well as our economic community as well.  I think in order to actually go forward with this, the data digital market, digital service, data protection as a mechanism, as a regional mechanism, it is actually the thing that we should at least consider that there may be too many obstructions for the businesses of operations.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
>> EDMON CHUNG:  There is a question in the Q&A I would like to quickly respond.
Do I have anything in mind for the governance model for publicly owned ‑‑ privately owned public spaces.  Yes and no.  Yes, as I mentioned, I think something like in ICANN thing, that would have ‑‑ if we can successfully slice off a technical portion of these privately‑owned public spaces like the data model and the open standards component of it and with some support from jurisdiction, it is possible.  Of course, it is a very long shot.  The question is whether the platforms would really be bound by these decisions of the multistakeholder entity being set up, the platforms, how they play and how we enforce that.  That's all very difficult.  In my mind as a very early shape, yes, I do, how it might actually happen, I have no idea.  I'm throwing this idea out into the wild and if there are enough interests then maybe it would shape into something interesting.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
We still have 5 minutes, maybe we can respond to more questions.
>> ARTHIT SURIYAWONGKUL: There is one question asking about the possibility of basically if it is better to have only one internet from ICANN, maybe to have maybe more than one internet, right, from I don't know, whoever.  Actually I think we can link this back to what was suggested about the open standards.  I think we can actually have as many internets that we would like to have as long as those internet can talk to each other based on open standards.  Actually even mixing all of those many internets as one internet anyway.  In the end, when we talk about internet, it is not about physical network, but about the ability for people to actually talk across network based on internet.  It is about open standards, you can have as many internets as you like, but you have to have people actually talking to each other openly based on open standards.  That's my take. 
>> ASHWIN SASTROSUBROTO:  It is interesting.  We have heard about many proposal of the development of another internet and I'm ‑‑ I'm with you, Arthit, okay, as long as they're interconnected, but to get the interconnection, you have to have some sort of an agreement on the protocol, the protocol of the guy way, so on, so forth, owes they won't talk.
In this case, IGF is a perfect place to talk about that work with the internet connection, although perhaps ITU could also talk about it.  Thank you. 
>> EDMON CHUN:  On that question, building on what was mentioned, I think ‑‑ I don't think the way to think about it is having different ICANNs and different internet, what I was suggesting was not that at all.  ICANN has a specific purview, the domain names and IP addresses.  What I'm suggesting, it is ICANN for something else, in this case, for privately owned public spaces in a particular technical coordination of that, not necessarily creating a different internet.  I want to clarify that point.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Maybe we can answer one more question briefly I think. 
This is from Nadia, how is internet security developed in under developed countries, how can we get and give support.  Maybe answer briefly. 
>> EDMON CHUN: I didn't get that particular question?  'Twas ‑‑
>> MODERATOR: It was from Nadia, the question is ‑‑ Edmon ‑‑
>> ARTHIT SURIYAWONGKUL: To who?
>> MODERATOR: Edmon.
>> EDMON CHUN:  Sorry about that.  
To get attention and support, well, I think, it is a tough question as in, of course, sounding it here at the global IGF is a good starter.  I think if I understand your question in its context, internet security, I think this is ‑‑ this is something that more resources from around the world should be directed into. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-of49-upholding-rights-in-the-state-business-nexus-c19-and-beyond-%E2%80%93-raw^^

>> MARK HODGE:  All right.  Good.  So I think what we'll do now is for those of us in our team who won't be ‑‑ I'll ask you if there is a hypolate way to ask somebody to turn their video off, but thank you for doing that.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Okay.  Hello, audience.  Good.  Let's kick off then.  Great.  Thank you.  Hi.  Welcome, everybody, to the session.  Thank you for joining us today at this IGF panel.  My name is Mark Hodge, a senior advisor to the UN human rights B‑Tech Project and we're delighted to have you today with us, and for those not familiar with the UN B‑Tech Project, it's the OHCHR project to focus on the advancementst implementation of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights in the context of technologies, but another way it's really to look at how to leverage experience from corporate accountability and corporate responsibility field into discussions about responsible use of technology.  It's not the only piece of work that OHCHR leads with regard to technology by far, there are lots of other projects and efforts not needed by very special procedures and the office itself, but our particular focus at B‑Tech is to provide clarity, convene diverse stakeholders, to explore challenges, and produce ultimately some guidance and recommendations around how to advance stronger application of the guiding principles.  There are tower focus areas in the project and I will not go into them in depth.  Some of my colleagues will post links to the B‑Tech resources and those who want can look at that.  We have four focus areas and one is looking at how to address risks to human rights that are inherent in company business models.  The second one will be looking into human rights in end use.  And the third focus area is really unpack access to remedy and what does it mean and complexity of ways that technologies can impact the rightsholders.  And the fourth focus area is trying to unpack what it really means to states to apply a smart mix of measures to how they engage and make sure they uphold their end duties to protect human rights in the sort of digital era.
Really, please, a cross‑cutting area of work focusing on investors, so please just keep an eye on our project pages as we begin to produce more and more kind of outcomes and share insights from various experts there.
So today's session as stated in the title is diving into an aspect of the smart mix of guiding principles, the UN recognize something called the State Business Nexus and recognize that states when they contract with, when they procure from, when they license technologies, when they partner with technology companies, need to take their own role in guiding those companies and incentivizing those companies to operate respectfully, but also need to make sure that they meet their human rights obligations as states as they do so, so this plays into examples we hear about the digital welfare state, the use of technologies in the criminal justice system, in the police, also in intelligence and defense of course as well.  Also today realizing the global pandemic put that into sharp focus.  A need and dynamic and states are looking into technologies to help address and build their strategies and actually provide robust responses and effective responses to the global pandemic.
So the question today we've got four excellent sort of speakers to help us unpack how do we do this?  What are the dynamics, what do we need to think about as we think about this business nexus, and what are the reality faced by different stakeholders?  We've got Gary Davis the global director of privacy in law enforcement at Apple and Gary maybe you can give everyone a wave in case they can't see your name.  Stephanie Hankey executive and co‑founder of Tactical Tech and again Stephanie if you could wave pill.dawson, and John based in Australia and we thank you John hugely for being with us at a very late hour where you are.
What we're going to do is have a quick round of initial inputs from each of the panelists and then have a discussion, open up a discussion among the panelists.  We workedded very, very hard to bring in the questions that you raised, there is a Q&A function as well as a chat function, so please use that and then we'll do our best to find time at the end to try to address some of those questions, and please share questions anyway because from the B‑Tech project per spectdive there are questions that we can pick up and it gives us a signal of where we need to go with our work more widely.
So, Gary, I would like to start with you if I can.  We know that Apple and Google have been central to sort of trying to provide the technologies to help states and others find ways forward through your exposure notification work and really committed and tried to make a privacy‑oriented stance on this.  We love to hear, we read a lot all of us, so it's a really good opportunity for us to hear from inside, Gary, your experience of this journey that you've been through as the over the past months.
   >> GARY DAVIS:  Certainly, and thank you, Mark, and thank you very much for inviting Apple to participate on this distinguished panel today as part of this year's Internet Governance Forum.  In many respects, I think we can now say that the COVID‑19 pandemic has reaffirmed that the fundamental principles of data protection and privacy remain alive and well.  Perhaps this was a time there at the start when governments were rightly moving faft to protect their citizens where it may not have turned out that way but that passed quickly.  And I would like to take you back to what seems like a lifetime ago now to a Saturday afternoon in March, I joined Apple colleagues to talk to the Irish Public Health Authority in relation to support which they were seeking from us in relation to the use of Bluetooth technology to establish close contacts between persons subsequently diagnosed with COVID‑19 and persons they may have been in contact with.
Over the coming days and weeks, those contacts actually intensified with public health authorities around the world, and culminated in Apple and Google announcing an unprecedented initiative, really, on contact tracing.  And in the weeks leading up to that anownszment on the 10th of April, we were really in continuous contact with those public health authorities who were seeking our help.  So therefore, our response to work together while unprecedented, was appropriate to the emerging situation that we've all found ourselves in.
What was clear to us, however, very quickly was that some of the contact tracing ideas that were coming forward posed a risk to privacy and human rights as they involved extensive data collection on citizens, but more specifically in fact, some of the proposals would have actually undermined their very purpose, broad adoption, and our view was that the only way to achief broad adoption was to ensure and maintain user trust.  Here in Europe we're fortunate like many places around the world that we have a strong legislate ifer base that protects privacy.  Pu even here the legislative base cannot maintain trust on its own, so we recognized immediately that there must be fundamental principles we must adopt and be very public and open about.  That is why over the weeks between the 10th of April and the launch of what we became known as the Exposure Notification API we had a number of interim public updates to provide more information to public health authorities and the jeb public.
These updates were completed by extensive engagement with the media, privacy regulators, privacy advocates, and of course governments.  Transparency was and is a must in this space.  Transparency, of course, while a minimum requirement is not sufficient on its own when public health authorities want and need broad adoption of their contact tracing initiatives.
The second important principle is data minimization.  Together with other initiatives emerging at the time such as DPT3 we believed effective contact tracing could be used by using a decentralized system which maintained control fully in the hands of the individual.  So therefore we sat down some basic privacy protection principles, and those principles were users must explicitly choose to turn on exposure notifications, so they have to actually take the action to turn it on on their device.  The exposure notification system does not share location data from a user's device with the public health authority, Apple, or Google.  The exposure notification system doesn't share the users identity with other users, Google, or Apple.  Matching for exposure notifications is only done right here on the user's device, and users decide whether they want to report a positive diagnosis.
Importantly, the system is only used for exposure notifications by official public health authorities and isn't monetized, and also importantly, Google and Apple made a commitment to disable the exposure notification system on a regional basis when it is no longer needed.
We remain still very much engaged in this space and continue to iterate on exposure notifications in response to requests from public health authorities to support them.  We held over 100 technical briefings with those public health authorities, government officials, and others, so we remain in constant contact with them.  Just in the last few weeks, for instance, we announced exposure notifications express, which is a new way for public health authorities to deploy exposure notifications quickly and easily avoiding the need for them to build and maintain an app.  Public health authorities with exposure notificationsess press remain fully in control of how notifications will be triggered, what next steps to advise their citizens on and guidance to expose notifications for further contact tracing.
Importantly, however, our bases can line privacy and human rights principles which I just outlined have not and will not change.  I also want to briefly mention something about which I'm very proud outside of the contact tracing space, and that is the Apple Maps Mobility Trends Reports.  At the start of the pandemic and as governments responded with lockdowns, we started receiving requests from some of those governments for data that would help them to understand how their populations had responded to the lockdown orders.  We wanted to help, as that has remained our approach throughout the pandemic, but clearly we needed to do so in a way that aligned with our position on privacy as a fundamental human right.
Fortunately, therefore, Apple Maps was already designed from the ground up to reflect those principles, as use of maps is tied to random rotating identifiers on the device and not a user's identity.  However, even with those protections in place, we did not consider the rights that were to simply provide raw data in response to such requests, so instead we worked over a very short deadline to produce trend data against a baseline of 100 from the 13th of January of this year so governments could then visualize the movement up and down but not receive the individual data.
We also considered the issue of fairness and availability of this data.  Why should it only be available to those governments that thought to ask us and actually had the capacity to integrate it?  Therefore, we took the proactive step to publish the data on a worldwide basis with useful visualizations once a minimum number of journeys were undertaken in a particular region so as to ensure that there was no possibility to link the data back to individual journeys.
We continued to publish that data today and have committed to doing so as long as the pandemic remains a public health concern.  And with that.  Thank you very much, Mark.  I hand it back to you.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thanks, Gary.  We were able to give our panelists time to also ask questions and come back as well in a moment, but I wanted to just invite Stephanie to sort of layer in other perspectives, you know, the question of the State Business Nexus and from your perspective, how should we even just be conceptualizing and where should we be focused.  I invite you to help us widen the lens enough around this question related not just to COVID but more widely.
   >> STEPHANIE HANKEY:  Thanks.  Yeah.  I can talk about technologies in the context of crisis and disaster more widely, but I think there are so many technologies just within the context of the pandemic, so it's great to hear from Gary about two specific ones that Apple were involved in, but you know what we see is that technology is completely central to the response, and that it's a big problem that needs a quick response.  And so technology and so technology thinking or data‑centric thinking is definitely at the forefront of responses all over the world, and I think we tend to think of, for example, track and trace systems first and foremost, but I think what we're seeing is, you know, not only in the micro‑level in terms of how to help but also on a bigger level all kinds of innovations like the Map Trends that Gary just mentioned, but also lots of technologies needed for modeling and predicting and understanding the risks at a broader scale.  Technologies for monitoring it and also getting kind of feedback in an ongoing way, and being able to do things like predict clusters or monitor breaks can outs and so on, but also for mitigating and how to even enforce lockdowns and control it and that kind of thing, and then lots and lots of technologies coming, seemingly innovations in technology coming like wearable trackers to figure out if people left a space or not, whether people are staying at home or not, and also not just sort of looking at behaviors as well on a much bigger level.
And I think we see all kinds of technologies emerging which feel new, but mostly have been around for a long time or have been used for other things, and so I'm reminded of, I think, Naomi Klin's work thinking about the chain which is that in the crisis we have the ideas laying around and I think that's what we're seeing here.  I think the media reported it as new technologies for the pandemic, but actually what we see is increasingly enormous amounts of technology that's been around for a long time being used, and I'm thinking about specifically the type of data, so for example data from mobile phones, data from credit cards, data from TV cameras, home sensors even, but also technologies that have become sort of more clearly used or at least very often suggested to be used, not necessarily always successfully used and I'll come to that in a second.
What we definitely saw, especially at the beginning, was I think an unprecedented synthesis of private and public data.  I think, for example, if you think about what happened in Singapore, you ended up with information from location data, for example, from a mobile phone combined with credit card data, combined with travel data, combined with health records, and sometimes you see TV cameras as well, and that's a kind of data synthesis we haven't seen before and definitely not on the public level, so that raises a lot of questions about consent, about you know how these technologies which were mostly used by law enforcement previously, that kind of data synthesis was used ‑‑ is used commonly, so for example for intelligence in law enforcement.  So what happens when you sort of overnight start applying that to citizens in the public space?  And what kind of questions does that raise?  And I think that's what interesting in that is that it has also been largely transparent.  There are definitely some governments and instances where we haven't known about the technology, but very often the technology is testify might not be transparent, but the fact that they're using the technologies has been relatively transparent even in some countries where intelligence services offered over night, the technologies that they use, mobile phone tracking in Israel, for example, in the context of we've got this anyway and it works why don't we use it kind of thing, so I think we haven't had enough ‑‑ I was surprised even as everybody has been looking at data privacy and security and surveillance for really 20 years, that we didn't have more of a discussion about that sort of overnight switch, let's say, on sin sus and use of data that we saw.  This is very different to what Gary was talking about in the context of Apple, of course, and the reason why I think it's different as well, and I just want to flag it, is I think there is so much emphasis on these very large platforms and technology companies and the efforts they've made, but what we're seeing actually is entire industries that we perhaps are less aware of in the public eye, less aware of what the technologies are that are now being used all over.
And I'm thinking of technologies being developed by researchers and academics and small‑scale startups and so on but also an enormous amount of technology coming from surveillance companies and being used by governments as well, and of course, maybe not that surprising, if you want to do disease surveillance or you know help people track individuals in surveillance with technologies, the same technology that you use to track criminals or terrorists or in some instances they're used to track human rights offenders and journalists and those technologies are extremely useful in the context of tracking in this case coronavirus positive patients.
And we've seen quite a few examples of that.  Some just suggested and some not necessarily proven, but certainly a lot of activity in that space.  For example, an NSO group in Israel who does mobile phone technology for tracking surveillance are now applying it to the pandemic saying AI which uses facial recognition technologies, and you know it's endless, actually.  I mean, you could literally do a whole session on all the technologies that have been used in all the different contexts, and it's global as well.
But I think it's kind of raised questions also about what is that data that is there already, and I'm surprised that we haven't had more of a public discussion about the role of behavioral data because that's what's ‑‑ despite all the different examples of data being used, at the heart of it in terms of the most valuable type of data, it's really location data and you know information on where you are, how often, for what length of time, who you're next to, you know, and how close you are to other people, and even if you're at home, has become much more valuable than I think anybody could have imagine, and I think this is technology that has been there in the marketing, targeting, profiling industry already but not really used in the context of health previously, and in that context, I think the idea of consent becomes really complicated.  I just wanted to mention maybe one of the companies that is particularly controversial right now which is (?) an example of a company that most people probably have not heard of before, but they've been working for a very long time and they are an example of the kinds of technology companies where there is generally some slightly skeptical view of the company, maybe there is not that much transparency around how the company works, maybe the types of organizations they normally work with is quite complicated, gives them a complicated profile.  For example, Paletina do surveillance predictive analysis and modeling technology, so the way the technologies are being in the context of the pandemic, for example, they get hundreds of datasets together and use that to help the government get an overview of movement of people and of COVID cases in a country because a level of data complexity they're not used to handling as governments, but they're also now talking about an art to using technologies, which helps governments do tracking and tracing as well, but the reason why it's controversial is that they, for example, have worked with the government for years with border control, predictive policing technologies, and these are not consumer technology companies.  And.
And in the context of the UK Government, for example, they've been very I would say governments need to show that they're doing something and need to have these big solutions, and I think they've gone after partnerships like Palentire despite the fact they may not have been the human rights protectors or safeguards in place necessarily.
And maybe just, I know we probably don't have too much time but maybe to say one more thing, I think there is ‑‑ there is a very big focus on the discussion and there should be on privacy and security, and the examples that Gary gave about what Apple was able to do and they're able to do with the tool is really important, and I would go so far as to say that based on the premises of basic data collection and privacy and security right now, it's necessary for any responsible company to take the kind of steps that Apple has taken and Google, and you know I would say in the community of people, not only corporations but also in the sort of alternative technology scene, there are some basic principles and guidelines but all companies should be following it.  I don't think we should have that discussion anymore.  That should be a given, I think.  The reason why Apple and Google were trusted in that context is not only because of their scale and ability to deploy things without kind of confusing the public, but also because they're trusted in terms of not making those kinds of mistakes and also protecting people's data because as we know from a lot of the homegrown government solutions can lead to mistakes and lots of failures in the systems as well.
But there isn't enough emphasis on the other discussion which is why they're able to do it.  They're able to do it because essentially they have a monopoly in the space, they're able to do it because of the kinds of brands they've built up as kind of being the main player in the space, but they also get to define or in that case we have to think about like who gains the insights, who has the insights, who gets to define the problem, all of these kinds of questions we're not asking.  We're very focused on the privacy of the individual and we're not always thinking about are we really mature enough to think about, for example, a public crisis like this, where is the public good in that data, where is the public interest in that data and why working at private companies in that context.
So it's like I guess in summary of what I've just been saying, there is not enough emphasis on the whole industry and all the different small players.  But then when we look at the big players, are we asking the right questions even, and I would say that privacy and security is a given and they have to operate like that.  What's the next question we need to be asking in these kind of contexts?
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thank you, Stephanie.  You mentioned a few times sort of the states sort of working with who they're already naturally working with and sort of repurposing some of those things, and I suppose even though there is transparency there is a question there as you said whether states are asked, whether states are asking those questions and whether we're asking states to ask those questions, right, in that context as well.
Phil, I would like to turn to you, and sort of Element AI is really engaged around human rights issues clearly in relation to things like waterfront Toronto and Sidewalk Labs and I wonder if you have a point on how the state business nexus is playing out in the context of smart cities and also begin to help us think through, what do we do around this?  What are the solutions moving forward to help us put mechanisms in this business nexus to ask the questions Stephanie is talking about but also to make sure that we've got some governance around some of those things.
   >> PHILIP DAWSON:  Thanks, Mark and Gary and Stephanie so far for bringing some really interesting things to the table and hopefully I can make some good links.
Yeah, States Business Nexus has been around before COVID, obviously, and one of the areas when it comes to digital technology where it's been in focus already is definitely been Smart Cities.  Which is interesting because in some ways, municipalities or local governments have not ‑‑ are not the historical or traditional subjects of international human rights law and yet they have been looking to it increasingly as a tool to help guide the deployment of digital innovations in their cities for a variety of purposes.
But it does get a little bit ‑‑ it can get a little bit confusing because just given the history of development projects not only in cities, but typically proceed through private developers, and so it provides a kind of opportunity or an instance in which the responsibility for the development can fall into a bit of a gray area.  In Toronto last year our team at Element AI led a human rights impact assessment, or preliminary human rights impact assessment of Waterfront Toronto's Sidewalk Labs proposed digital innovations for the City of Toronto which they won through a request for proposals from a quasi-public entity Waterfront Toronto, and before even the deal was closed and the contract was agreed to, Waterfront Toronto commissioned the preliminary human rights impact assessment, and what was interesting is one that was in and of itself widely viewed as a very bold move by Waterfront Toronto at this stage with, you know, the deal still being negotiated and as probably many of you know, ultimately the project didn't ‑‑ it fell through.  But at this early stage, they commissioned a human rights impact assessment of the entire proposal, and what was interesting is that in that call for proposals for the human rights impact assessment, there were references to the UNGPs and references to another document as well beyond the universal declaration of human rights, the city's coalition for digital rights, and so there has been already a lot of work done by local governments to try to apply human rights principles in the local context, okay.  So this is another document that we had to take into account as a lens through which to analyze the potential human rights risks of the project.
And still more than that, what Waterfront Toronto was doing through the assessment and consultations and other initiatives that took place was to take the city's coalition for digital rights statement, and then further translate that into the specific context of the Toronto project that was being proposed.  They were developing what they were calling the draft digital principles or ultd matily these intelligent community guidelines that were even more specifically translating these human rights principles into ultimately contractual obligations that the developer and the developer's partners might have also had to comply with.
So in terms of, and when you look at bridging the State Business Nexus and you know this is one of the avenues that was being explored is taking the human rights law, the work that cities have been doing in transcribing it into the digital space, and then building out guidelines that are more specific and could be embedded into procurement contracts, and now we didn't obviously see those because the project fell through, but it was an interesting I think a pretty avantgard approach in the Smart Cities context.
And you know these contracts might have included penalties for intentional reidentification, for you know unlawful surveillance, anything that was in contravention with the digital principles that the city had developed and was developing in consultation with the public.
So, you know, that was kind of a fascinating experience to be a part of and to help begin to shape, and even though it did not ‑‑ the project ultimately did not continue, I think these are important precedence to pass along.
Something that did come up that was a bit of a challenge, I think, and I think Stephanie was touching on this in part of her comments in other areas is, is the challenge of oversight.  You know.  How do you really in that particular context, how do you ensure that these contractual provisions are being respected, one with your primary developer, the master developer, and then with other developers that are subcontractors, through those contracts, so you could require them these principles to be embedded in contracts, but how do you really know if they're being respected, and then how do you require ‑‑ or how do you ensure that enforcement is real and effective?
So one of the things that came up in that context as an idea is that, you know, the city, rather than outsource so many of these innovations, should have been taking a lead role in developing the digital infrastructure that some of these solutions could have been built on, and then they would have had a better chance of owning the governance of the system that was being deployed, they would have had a better chance of also incorporating citizen participation in the governance and not just consultation pre‑project, and then realizing some of the other principles that were in these, you know, in the city's coalition for digital rights and the guidelines that they were embedded in contracts.
So the question of ownership of digital infrastructure and ownership of governance, came up quite a lot.  And obviously we didn't get to see this play out, but you know, had the project proceeded, and largely the respect for rights is governed by contracts between two private parties, and you know if you're a citizen you have complaints, so where do you go?  Who do you file a complaint with?  So people talked about, should there be a digital expansion of the local ombusman's role to include digital rights complaints?  Would that institute ‑‑ would that institution have then been empowered to ‑‑ and maybe this isn't for John, but to file a complaint with the human rights commission or, you know, so there were some institution building that might have needed to take place.  And, you know, obviously we didn't really get to see where this would go, but the conversation in Toronto is going on with potentially another project in the future and other cities are having these conversations too.
I want to ‑‑ before I end, I want to tie it back to the conversation around COVID and the COVID Alert App because I think that at least in Canada, I have more experience.  The genesis of the National COVID Alert App yields some lessons for Smart Cities I think.  So obviously, Canada has been working with the Google App Foundation but what they did do then is they built out the rest of the app in house.  So the Canadian Government civil service, the digital service built out the app and carried out consultations on the ‑‑ on the direction of the app and also the governance of the app.  And they have published a Terms of Reference with oversights of this external council of public health experts and privacy experts and technologists, you know, have as part of the council to increase transparency of the app and to report publicly on the public health outcomes that the app is actually achieving to ensure that it's actually effective and, you know, not part of the tech for tech's sake criticisms that we often hear on these projects.  It reports on privacy and it reports on any complaints that may be lodged.  And all of this is online, and I think it's been an example of public sector leadership in developing civic tech that thus far, even as we're waiting for downloads to increase and for public uptick to improve, and I think we're at 5 million downloads in Canada there are 35 plus million people so we have a ways to go and provinces to get on board, but even so as we wait for it to become hopefully more effective in terms of uptick, at least as a public/private sector project, you know I think there are some lessons that we can import then to the Smart City context, and obviously there are things that would be different because a lot of this happened quickly in a time of crisis, but I think there are some valuable lessons here about the ability of public sector ‑‑ the ability of the public sector and civil servants to themselves build technology that will hopefully be useful to citizens and then to adopt the right governance mechanisms to ensure that there is transparency and that citizens have an account of the value that it's actually bringing.  And maybe I'll just stop there.  Thank you.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thanks, Phil.  I really appreciate that, and certainly from the perspective and what you put in force and how it's enforced and remedy for rightsholders, those governance questions are really central.  I'm conscious that you sort of mapped out, and I want to turn to John, you know, Gary and his story was sort of telling really the sort of process through which it and to be very much Apple and Google having to say look, here is how we're going to set the principles, because to Stephanie's point there is a knowledge base and within some of those companies of how to do this, and the leverage to say, no, this is how it will be done and we're into the going to do it this way or that way, and then both Stephanie sort of saying that we need to be asking the tough questions and Phil arguing for sort of a mechanism by which states take more ownership over the processes.  I wonder, John, if you could speak from your perspective, given the work that you've done at the Australian national human rights commission how do we think about even state's wherewithal capacity to answer these questions and I know you've thought about that a little in the context of protecting human rights in the digital era sort of work.  So John for your general reflections and also comments specific things that you've been trying to move for Australia to help states or encourage or guides or require states to be robust in this?
   >> JOHN HOWELL:  Sure.  Thanks, Mark.  Thanks to all panelists.  Some really interesting reflections here, and particularly interested to hear about the different perspectives on development of contact tracing apps at the current time and the bit of work that we've done with the government here on the Australian rollout of that, but that's slightly different from the question you've asked me to reflect on, Mark, which is the ways in which government can really help facilitate all players who are perhaps developing new technical solutions to respect, protect, promote human rights.
So, one of the big proposals which the commission has made in recent times is that there is a need for some sort of specific leadership on particular subject matters.  We've been focusing very much on AI technologies and running a major project on protecting human rights in the context of developing artificial intelligence, and in that particular context, we've made a proposal for a body which might have some sort of applicability to some of the technologies and solutions talked about today specifically or there might be some analog that could be used in other contexts or other sorts of technical solutions.
I have to emphasize at the start that this is very much a tentative proposal at the moment.  We're in the middle of a sort of project, a two or three‑year project, and when it wraps up we've released a lengthy discussion paper about 12 months ago containing this proposal, and then we've been road testing it with another set of national consultations around Australia, and we'll have a final report out in the coming months.
So at the moment, I'm expecting a tentative view of my organization, I'm expressing it, but it's safe to say the recommendation looks substantially the same.
So the concept of the AI commission arose in the context of it more generally so I might backtrack a bit to give some context for how I'm thinking about harm from resulting from AI has evolved and so that has led us towards this proposed partial solution to help, you know, harness the benefits of this new technology while minimizing those harms.
As I say, we launched a project in about 2018.  We released a couple of discussion papers since then, conducted two rounds of national consultations consulting in particular on artificial intelligence, what's being used in all forms of decision‑making, principlely by government but also in the private sector to a degree.
And then we've also had a subsit ree or secondary part of that project on accessible technology, including A I and other technologies as well.
What we notice is that at the time when we started this project there was a ground of interest in artificial intelligence, the benefits it could bring, the harms it could bring, but there wasn't I think in Australia or globally at that time nearly as much of a focus on human rights, so we weren't really interested in centering human rights in that discourse.
I have a slightly jurisdictional bias in the approach in that Australia perhaps has in some ways weaker human rights protections than some other jurisdiction so that may have inflected the discourse here a little bit but I think in general we weren't seeing a lot of discussion about human rights in terms of protecting against harms from artificial intelligence.
We've quickly starting seeing an increased focus on a different solution, which was a focus on ethics and creating ethical frameworks to help guide the development of human rights.  That was a great development for us, but it really strengthened our resolve to focus in on the role that human rights could play in the particular space to benefit industry developing and deploying AI technologies, but also to protect the rights of members in the community.
What we notice from the sorts of solutions that have been trialed and proposed were that they were nonbinding sorts of ethical principles, there wasn't much normative heft in terms of the ethical frameworks being deployed, there was a lack of precision in the content, framed at a high level of generality, and technically minded participants that we were speaking in consultations would often end up coming back to a question of oh, well whose values are we really talking about here, these values are all culturally situated, all relative, and my values may be different from your values.  And what is in the right to do as well is really embodying fundamental values is that they represent agreed values and normative framework they sit within allows to us apply those values in particular contexts.
This is all I'm sure preaching to the choir, but I think it's relevant in the way we've talked about a AI Safety Commissioner because we're focused very much on a body which is focused on protecting and promoting human rights specifically, so it's not just me simply preaching human rights 101, but it's really central to our thinking and how our thinking evolved to the need for regulation and what kind of principles would underlie that regulation.
In turn, that helps to build trust in the community because I know there are agreed standards which are being protected by a leadership body.
In the domestic political context, our thinking also evolved around a couple of big developments in Australia.  We were focusing very much on AI decision‑making.  There were a couple of examples of use and proposed use of AI decision‑making systems in Australia, which garnered quite a bit of attention.  One is something that became known as robo debt cloakialy.  It was a automated process to collect payments of welfare benefits.  It collected half a million erroneous debts but had had automatic decisions that had to be repaid against citizens whom it simply wasn't proved had been overpaid benefits.
That was a rules‑based tool rather than a machine learning tool, still within our sort of concept of an AI tool.  It was deployed quickly but it was erroneous and also the deployment turned out was unlawful and there simply hadn't been enough thinking in the particular department, which is the department obviously focused on delivering Social Security, to what or how they should be thinking about a tool working, thinking about if it's lawfully based, how is it affecting the rights of citizens, how transparent it is, how much of a right have people been given to challenge decisions affecting them in a timely way before they're negatively affected by the use of technology, and so there was a bit of a from our perspective, a capacity issue there that perhaps led to that deployment of that particular tool.
A second sort of big example which perhaps I'm more aware of fell within primitive work we were doing at the commission and the Australian Government proposed some legislation to allow facial recognition technology to be used in Australia.  Some of those solutions would have been available to private industry, some of them just to law enforcement and national security services in Australia, but it would have involved building a national database of facial images.  It would have been automatic enrollment for anyone that had an identity document in Australia.  It would have looked in space, territory, federal databases of identification information, and allowed both one‑on‑one verification requests, identification requests, but also this legislation which is drafted extremely briefly and very, very generally would have authorized theoretically realtime many to many identifications of unknown people in almost any context by national security services, for example, but every agency could have used both parts of the bill, but certain law enforcement and national security agencies could have.
And that was push through relatively quickly, or was going to be, but it's one of the first national security pieces of legislation that I can recall that was essentially blocked at the committee stage in parliament because of the concerns about the lack of safeguards built into the legislation.  It would have built that solution, and it was really the fact that there wasn't any significant safeguards and there didn't seem to be much consideration.  The list was made public about how the safeguards could have been approved, why they weren't present in the legislation, and that legislation has now stagnated for I think over two years since it was first proposed., which has actually been a worse result I think to the government and for law enforcement than developing a more protective solution in the first place to enable legitimate uses of those technologies.
And so, again, perhaps that's a sort of AI example, but it's an example of the way human rights perhaps were incorporated early enough within the agencies that were proposing that particular tool and the legislation that was going to enable that particular tool.
So, our proposal for ‑‑
   >> MARK HODGE:  Maybe just a minute to outline the proposals on the safety commission.
   >> JOHN HOWELL:  Yes.  I'm sorry about that.  So very briefly, the idea of a safety commissioner is really a proposal for a leadership body.  It's framed partly because we were thinking about how could AI perhaps be regulated.  We realize that there are already a lot of regulators throughout the industry, and we realize that government is reluctant to impose new layers of regulation, but that regulators needed support to apply their existing powers to the kinds of tools which using AI solutions.
We also realized there was a need just for the regulators but for government and industry that are using developing, procuring and deploying tools to gain a better understanding of how they could do that in a human rights way and what the impacts of those tools might be and how they could ameliorate those potential impacts.  The idea of a safety commission is really a body that could build that expertise, disseminate that expertise, build capacity, and provide ongoing support, particularly to regulators that are regulating subject areas where those tools are particularly likely to be used.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thanks, John.  It's something we had common in general in the human rights space, internal coherence across agencies around what it means to protect rights in the particular area of responsibility so in ‑‑ so that's a good example, thank you, and just John in a moment as we wrap up, maybe you can tell us the punkline as well and where that person might be going and how the government is reacting to that proposal to see where we are from it.
I wanted to ask and we do have a question from participants, so I'm going to raise that question in a moment, but firstly to turn to Stephanie, Phil, and Gary who I know you had a few Internet problems and John, but anything that sparked for you in terms of something that you want to react to or build on or something in your initial opening that you wished to layer into?  Maybe a couple of minutes each if you would like to do that?
   >> STEPHANIE HANKEY:  Should I go again or just jump in?
   >> MARK HODGE:  Go for it.
   >> STEPHANIE HANKEY:  I just wanted to respond to what Philip was saying about states building their own technology, basically.  I think it's a really important question and it's so difficult to ‑‑ it's so ideal and we might even want it but it's such a difficult question to realize that the engineering power and money and expertise is not with the governments and what we've seen again and again in the pandemic and I think his part about learning lessons from COVID is a really interesting one, is that there are so many failures.  I think if you look at the news, it's literally littered with examples of applications, for example, contact tracing applications that were funded or developed by governments or governments in collaboration with small companies or academic institutions but failed, and failed because nobody used them or failed because they didn't work very well, or like in the case of the UK, they just the UK example, they failed to contact 15,000 people that had it.  So just massive, also there have been security breaches and so on, so it's a good idea and important question, but I think the reality is the people have engineering power and expertise and that poses a challenging question when you look through it and I'm sorry you asked at the beginning, but I think it's because these technologies we think about in the context of the pandemic, but actually they're the same technologies that will be used and are used in any other kind of disaster or crisis in terms of the underlying technology, obviously the application is different.
And so the precedent that you kind of set in this context, I think is really important and I think the problem, and it's really important to look at the questions that we've got here and in the context as well of your mark in terms of what principles we need, why is it that for example, this example I gave, why isn't there more transparency, where is the human rights impact assessment, all of these things that need to be there.  We have to acknowledge on top of that that the pandemic is not just about health or technology, but it's also a political issue, and the responses are political, and so in my view the choice even to use a technological solution is a political and ideological response, and which is a little bit, I understand outside the remit of this but not in the context of how it impacts human rights.
When you have states decides that it's okay to use surveillance companies to track whether or not people have coronavirus, is that okay, I'm not sure it is.  They could have chosen maybe a different company because you know the perception and precedent that that sets, and again these extraordinary relationships going on like the example Gary gave around the maps, not just only Apple but Google looking at the trends, and it's extraordinary think being a technology company telling a country where its people are.  You know, we're relying on these companies to tell us whether or not people are staying at home or not, it's a extraordinary relationship and power dynamic as well because governments need those insights they don't have them and don't know if people are staying home or not, the only thing they can do is put people on the streets which is no more effective than a Google trends map or Apple trends map and same for the citizens it's like they put 100 million pounds into the moonshop project which is the budget for the health system for the year these are political decisions.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thank you, Stephanie.  I knew we would want more than an hour on this panel, but I think it's helpful to layer in that complexity and the reality of the political nature of some of the views and choices that governments are making into the conversation.  We can't ignore that.
Gary and Phil, I'm going to give you guys an opportunity to come in next.  I'm also in the interest of time going to flag the question that we've had from the Q&A from the audience if you are able to weave it into your response, great.  If it's not possible, don't worry but I wanted to put it out in case anybody wants to comment.  It's really the question of how engaged are, you know, Asia sort of big tech platforms on these questions around sort of privacy, security, and developing ethical codes, right?  I mean some of these challenges are clearly, you know, the pandemic is global and these challenges are global as well and how much are we seeing movement, I suppose around governments there, but also companies?  But don't fall only to that kind of angle in your comments here.  I want to open it up to Phil, and Gary, I think you're with us on your phone now, but did you want to weigh in at this point if you can hear us?  I can see your lighting up.  Your name is lighting up but we can't hear you.  Phil?  Why don't you go next and then we'll see if we can get Gary back.
   >> PHILIP DAWSON:  Sure.  Well I just want to respond to Stephanie.  I think, you know, I definitely agree with all of that.  It's highly idealistic to imagine governments being able to in the near future maybe even ever rival the engineering power and resources of Apple and Google.  Especially with this type of speed and scale in the matter of months.
Thinking ‑‑ I think it's meab a bit more realistic in the context of smart cities for governments to build simple applications that are, you know, that are, that they can control that the genesis and the governance of, I think that's probably more realistic.  To have relied upon governments to come up with this type of an app in the pandemic, you know, that would never have happened.
I know I've seen a lot of criticism globally, but especially in Canada that, you know, just like what you were saying that, you know, governments essentially allowed two of the biggest companies in the world to dictate the parameters of one of their responses, and I think I would say that while I agree with the points you were making in kind of a gentle pushback, I would just say that I think a lot of it also depends on how you are explaining what this tool is really going to achieve.  If it's being sold as like a critical solution for the pandemic and in like our best hope of reopening the economy, or if it's being ‑‑ if it's being described as one of, you know, a dozen approaches that the government is taking across many sectors and being transparent about the weaknesses of the app and the fact that without uptick it may never actually succeed, and if it doesn't succeed, they'll shut it down.  You know, one of the terms of ‑‑ one of the terms of reference in for the app in Canada is precisely that, that there will be advice from the external advisory council and public recommendation on if need be on winding down the operation of the app, whether there is no need for it or whether it just hasn't been useful.
So those things, at least, have made me feel that it's a bit more responsible of an approach to describing the real potential or opportunity or even value of the app and I understand that, you know, not everybody will internalize the message that way, and people might overreover‑rely on it and it's complex and I know we just have a few minutes so I just want to respond briefly with that and see if anybody else has something.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Thank you, Phil.  I'm going to add, in the interest of time as well, so I'm going to see if Gary and John if you want to comment on anything that you've heard and share any reflections?
   >> GARY DAVIS:  I have tried.  I'm not sure if you can hear me.
   >> MARK HODGE:  We can hear you.  You go, Gary.
   >> GARY DAVIS:  You can?
   >> MARK HODGE:  Yes.
   >> GARY DAVIS:  I think it's a bit delayed, but obviously I don't disagree with many of the points that were made.  I think in relation to the contact tracing initiative particularly, we weren't seeking to be involved there and there was no commercial imperative to be so involved.  It was a decision made by, and I can speak for Apple, obviously, in response to the level of contact that we were getting from public health authorities and the unique circumstances of that crisis, but we've never faced such a request before, actually, which I think tries to differentiate it from everything else.
And I hope, actually we never face the circumstances they would lead to a similar request because they were unique circumstances of a global pandemic, and I'm hoping it does not happen again.  But certainly, if the same circumstances arose, I believe we would be available to help again, but really they were ‑‑ (lost audio).
   >> MARK HODGE:  Okay.  I'm going to ‑‑ I'm not sure Gary was quite finished but it seems like he's on mute suddenly, so I apologize, Gary, I'm not sure what's happening.
John, I would like to just give you, you know, just to maybe end with sort of one piece of advice around, you know, through the just capacity building, implicitly there is a question of resource but also capacity and knowledge within government, and I just wondered if you could speak to that quickly and whether the Safety Commissioner idea is focused on that idea of capacity within different agencies?  And then I'm going to have to I think draw us to a close and say thank you to everybody, but thank you, John, you can go next.
   >> JOHN HOWELL:  Sure, Mark.  Perhaps I might tie that question in with a couple of comments from the last questions on the panel.  For example, Stephanie's point about, you know, sort of new uses of technology being deployed or technology being deployed because there is a crisis and justification for it.  I think that is a comment that goes beyond technology.  I think governments are implementing all sorts of measures now under the rubric of, you know, there is a pandemic we need to deal with and they'll have longer lasting impacts.  For example in Australia there is proposed legislation to enable the military to be called out domestic to assist in responding to the pandemic and other similar situations, and those will be increased towts of the military but would survive well beyond the pandemic, indefinitely, and that has big civil rights implications.
But perhaps the way NHRI such as the Human Rights Commission can play a role in decision making is simply by monitoring proposals to respond to the pandemic and attempting to insert sort of human rights discourse into decision‑making and reminding decision‑makers of the need for necessity and proportionality in implementing measures.  We do need measures at the moment to respond to the pandemic, but we also need to make sure that we think about the broader human rights context, the NHRIs are generally independent but have a close role to government, and I think a place to be a voice in that decision‑making.  That's a little separate of the question of capacity.  We like everyone else, you know, sometimes don't have the technical capacity to be experts on every tech question, and the safety commission might be a slightly different role for us but might be able to build our capacity as well.
   >> MARK HODGE:  Great.  Thank you, John.  We are at the end of our time.  Actually we're a few minutes over our time so I just wanted to end by saying, obviously, a huge thank you to John and Phil and Stephanie and Gary for leading and within an hour trying to unpack the complex space of where the state and private sector interfaces on these issues, and then how we both rely on expertise of the private sector, create oversight of it, build the capacity of states in that space.  I think the particularly interesting question of, in a moment of crisis, is that where we have opportunity to create more visibility and rigger versus the time where we're not paying attention maybe and it's sort of happening, and maybe it doesn't happen in just one go but maybe there are other many governments approaching companies in many ways day to day for different functions of government.  So to sort of look at that I think is an interesting thing that we could reflect on as we move forward.  Within the B‑Tech Project, these types of sessions are really for us to begin to kind of hone our thinking and identify the questions that are particularly of interest that we should try and unpack.  So we're going to be taking this away, and we'll probably do a small write‑up with the help of the panelists as well to make sure we crossed the key angles.  We will be releasing quite shortly just a sort of foundational paper on this area of work that will point to, no doubt, riffing of today's conversation where the opportunities for deeper dialogue and longer than an hour are to unpack some of these questions but also opportunities to try and push for solutions, I think.  And in short term, long term, right, some of these things are going to take a while when we talk about government capacity because we know it's a long haul, often, and questions of resource, too.  That's my effort to quite badly sort of summarize things.
There will be a short summary report that will far more eloquent in that regard.  So just thank you all.  Please stay in touch with each other and also through the B‑Tech Project we hope to really go deeper into this question over the years ahead.  Thank you and enjoy whatever time of day you are going to enter into now.  Thanks for joining.  Take care.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-of50-global-partnership-to-end-violence-against-children^^

 
>> MODERATOR:  Welcome, everyone, to the End Violence Open Forum.  We are excited so many people are interested in extremely important topic and I hope more will get on board as we are starting the session.  Today we will be speaking about technology and governance, and how they shape our ability to keep children safe online.
So why are we speaking about this issue?  As you know, every half a second, a child makes their first click online.  In fact, one in three Internet users worldwide are children.  And this number is only going to get higher as we are connecting the unconnected parts of the world.  And now couple those figures with the fact that in every single moment there is an estimated 750,000 predators who are looking to sexually exploit and abuse children online and the fact that technology is rarely developed and designed with children's safety in mind, and you will begin to get a picture of the risks and threats children face.
One of the unforeseen consequences of the rise of the Internet and digital technologies has been an exponential growth in child online sexual exploitation and abuse.  But not only, the way the digital platforms are designed and the way in which they incentivize user interactions are creating more opportunities and risks for children and their safety to go beyond online abuse and create multiple vulnerabilities that can be exploited.
You will get to hear about these aspects through the session today.  My name is Marija Manojlovic, and I lead the Safe Online team.  For those of you who don't know us yet, the global partnership was launched by the UN Secretary‑General in 2016 with the goal to catalyze and support.  We are also the only global entity making targeted investments to tackle online sexual exploitation and abuse.  This year our work has reached a milestone.  We have invested $50 million in programmes and cutting edge technology tools in over 70 countries, focused on tackling online child sexual exploitation and abuse.
What makes the job exciting is the fact that we get to support and collaborate with organisations that are doing ground‑breaking work to keep children safe, some of whom are with you here today.  So without further delay, let me introduce our panelists.
I will not attempt to summarize bios and achievements because that will get us to the end of the event.  Today with us we have Signy Arnason, who is Associate Executive Director of Canadian Center for Child Protection.  Emilio Puccio, coordinator of the European Parliament Intergroup on Children's Rights.  We have Beeban Kidron, founder and Chair of 5Rights Foundation, and John Tanagho, Director of the Center to End Online Sexual Exploitation of Children from the International Justice Mission in the Philippines.
A few words of housekeeping, as you know, the session will last 60 minutes.  And we will have one round of questions to the panelists who will take four to five minutes to respond, and then open the floor for questions.  Please leave your questions in the Q and A window, and not in the chat.  So please use the Q and A window for your questions to the panelists and we will monitor those throughout the session and please indicate to who you want the question to be directed, or do you want us to ask the same question to all the panelists.  My colleague, will be supporting us in taking notes of the session and monitoring the Q and A chat box.  Feel free to Tweet at us and use social media.  Our Twitter handle is GP to end violence.  And safe online, and you will see them written in the chat box.
So I will now open the session and start asking the questions to the panelists, and I am looking forward to the questions that will come from you as soon as we are done.  So let's start with Signy Arnason.  Signy, you have been with the Canadian Center for Child Protection for almost two decades and you have played a critical role in starting the tip line for reporting the sexual exploitation of children.
You have become one of the most significant global actors fighting for the rights of the victims of online sexual abuse.  Tell us a little bit more about the work with project Arachnid, which is a groundbreaking technology, what were the enabling and disabling factors throughout this work and what have you learned?  Over to you, Signy Arnason.  We need to unmute you.
>> SIGNY ARNASON:  Okay.  Perfect.  Thank you, Marija.  Thank you for coordinating this.  It's a pleasure to be on a panel with such distinguished professionals.  We are pleased to share information about what we are doing at the Canadian Center for Child Protection, and specifically with project Arachnid.  It's transformed into a platform for where companies intersect with the tool as well.  It goes out and seeks known images of child sexual abuse material and the purpose is to detect the children and send notices to the providers for removal.  The initiative has been around about three and a half years, and we have issued 6.3 million notices to providers.  We have detected 24 million suspect media.  So that would be media that would have a photo DNA match in some capacity but wouldn't be close enough for us to say for sure whether that was the exact image.
So that has to be assessed by analysts.  And essentially we have crawled 125 billion images and videos.  So what we are doing is looking for the needle in the haystack in trying to detect where this material is.  What is important to note about this Arachnid came in conjunction with your International Survivors Survey.  We did that in 2016.
This was the first time really we have comprehensively heard from this population it, a population who have been seen, tremendously seen online and exposed, but they have not been heard from.  And they have not been heard from for a variety of reasons because their safety is constantly at risk.
At the end of the day, while we believe certainly it's important to be detecting new victims that are popping up online at a regular, on a daily basis, we have residual material that's been left over.  We have a population of children who are now adults who have basically been abandoned.  So what we have done is the offenders may have rested, brought to justice, but little has been done to address the fact that their series and their material becomes commonly traded online and then the ramifications for them in their everyday living as a result of that.
So one of the things certainly that we quickly learned through project Arachnid is that it really has not worked in children's favor.  We have done a disservice to this population by treating child sexual abuse material at a jurisdictional level.  So what we have done is said to ourselves, okay, is this illegal?  Is what I see in the four corners of this image, is this illegal in my jurisdiction?
Well, I can tell you for certain that a Canadian, that someone in the U.K., they don't care what server the information is sitting on.  All they care is that they have access to the information.  And as a result what happens is some material comes down, some stays up.  So we saw immediately the issue just on the illegal side.  So if we go with an Interpol definition, we go with the worst of the worst, prepubescent, the genital area or a sexual act, the worst of the worst. Let's all agree that's coming down, we were seeing debates about whether that should be removed or not.
We know this is not how the offenders operate on line.  They possess images that are part of a continuum in relation to the entire series.  So a common tactic is to take an image and pull it from, say, a video where the video in its entirety would be deemed illegal, but in a still image of the 3‑year‑old standing beside the bad guy in a sun dress before she is about to be assaulted is pulled from the video and posted online.  That is used as a gateway into other material and other information.
What we have learned and what we are taking a stance on is that we need to stop approaching the removal of this material from a criminal law perspective.  We have to approach it from what is in the best interest of children and survivors, and we are talking about removal.  Companies have terms of service.  They are able to remove individuals' information according to the terms of service.
So we have been aggressively pushing as an organisation that really what's been happening online is not good enough, and it's no wonder we have an epidemic that we are facing.  The other point I would make before I probably have to wrap up my four or five minutes is that it's really essential that this issue be drawn out into the public light.  We have had copious amounts of conversations even with industry and these have happened behind closed doors.  This happening behind closed doors does us absolutely no favors.
We need to be exposing what is happening.  There is a reason why the cuties movie resonated with people, and it doesn't even touch what we see online in terms of the sexual abuse and harm that is occurring for children day in and day out.  I think what that demonstrates is the public doesn't understand what is happening for children, and when you introduce a world where we decide we are putting children with adults, we are commingling them in that environment with no rules and regs. is it any wonder that we are where we are today.  Project Arachnid is an important part of the solution in reducing trauma, the revictimization and providing survivors with hope that there is a tool dedicated to detecting their material and holding industry accountable for renew.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much, and thank you for the amazing work that you and the organisation are doing.  I think you have flagged literally three really important things that will be a good introduction to the intervention of Emilio Puccio, but I want to flag them first.  That's the lack of understanding of the profound impacts that CSAM circulating the impact, not only CSAM as illegally framed but the continuum of images and videos around that.  They have on humans, on children and how long those effects last.  The second thing is removal cannot be driven only by the illegal definitions, by the criminal justice definitions of what illegal material is, because that is not putting the victim in the centre.  That is not providing the victim‑centred approach, and finally, the public does not understand the issues and is not aware of the issues, and we need to really bring those to light.
Emilio Puccio, can I bring to you and flag a few things before I hand it over to you.  Recently, the European Union, there has been these issues of the interplay between these components that I just flagged are really important, and how they interact.  So sometimes they can endanger or support the efforts to prevent online sexual exploitation and abuse.  And in Europe a piece of legislation is about to enter into force the 20th of December, and this piece of legislation will effectively render illegal the currently used tools by the tech companies to detect the child sexual abuse material online.
You have organized recently under the auspices of the U Parliament child rights intergroup a meeting of experts to discuss these developments, to shed more light on the role the technology and the private sector play in the fight against Chile sexual abuse online.  Can you tell us what came out of the meeting and what are the experts saying?  And can we do something to ensure that we are not crippling our ability to help children stay safe online?  What are the things we can do to shed light on this issue and make sure that the public and parliamentarians and Europe are aware of what is currently happening and the dangers of it.  Over to you, Emilio.
>> EMILIO PUCCIO:  Thank you so much, thanks for having us here today with I allot of experts on this panel.  Let me start by say that I couldn't agree more with what Signy said before me, and what you said before handing it over to me.
So as regards these separate meeting we convene, what we wanted to do was basically to recreate the crime scene and give the politicians sort of a glimpse of what is happening out there in the real world when we deal with child sexual abuse.  As has been said by Signy and by you, unfortunate will there is not enough knowledge.  Us in the European Parliament as legislators are more focused on the legal answer for that, but it's important and it has been said by Signy, it's not only the legal responses we need to work on.
I have to say these expert meetings gathered experts so we have representatives of Microsoft, it garage gathered as well as law enforcement authorities on top of key lawmakers and legislators in the European Union, and we also heard directly from a child survivor. I think we should still stress more and more and more that the reason we are all doing this is just because, of course, we want to prevent this phenomenon from happening and we want to give some sort of justice to the people who have been victim or fallen victim to this heinous crimes.
And unfortunately, I have to say that in the European Parliament, in the European Union in general we don't give a lot of spaces to victims so it was important for us in our event to give the opportunity for the victim to speak and talk about what she has been going through and so because unfortunately this has been highlighted, the voice of the victims often is unheard.  So there is always room for improvement for sure and I have to say from this event, one of the main takeaways is that unfortunately, of course, this panel, the panel to fight sexual abuse online cannot be won by a single actor.  It has to be a joint effort, a whole society, multistakeholder approach.
I will not go into the figures.
You have shared with us the terrible and staggering figures about the increase, the consistent increase in child sexual abuse online that we have been witnessing over the last year and I think what was important as well in this expert meeting that we gathered, to give the voice to those front line professionals who are working out there hands on and especially the authority were actually confronted with an enormous amount of images online, and that was very important to listen and hear from them that, again, this cooperation that they have been enjoying with the private sector, with companies, it has been proven essential for them.
Actually paradoxically, I also have to say that in a way, the global pandemic that we are now all living in, and all of the lockdown measures that have ensued to actually contain the further spread of the virus has somehow in a way helped us understand what are the risks online?  What are the risks that the online world poses?  And in a way, they have somehow since the situation has been farther exacerbated, they have somehow also motivated, it was sort of a wakeup call for the politicians in the UR European Parliament to actually do more and try to have a global and legislative response to what is happening now.
To be honest, it has always been clear to me, the fact that I am a lawyer and I work with the legislators and I have been working in the European Parliament for over five years, the legislation alone will not be the only answer.  Legislation is just one part of the solution.  I have also been a firm believer of business for good, and I do hold that businesses are much better placed to invest in technological solutions to help the fight against child sexual abuse.
And I feel like that in fact with great powers always come great responsibilities.  And I will say that online service providers together with every actor in society has to do their part in this fight.
And the online services provider has to make sure that the networks are not used bisexual predators.  Now, more at a political level that we are now since the European Parliament are now actually working very much on the European Commission proposal on this very important piece of legislation to allow the online services providers to continue to make use of those technological tools to detection the sexual abuse material even after entering into force of the European electronic child code in December 2020, which will have the unintended consequences to prevent then these online service providers from continuing to use this technological solutions or tools to actually detect sexual abuse material.
It is important to mention that in this political debate, the eternal debate against privacy or security, or in purely legal term when it comes to criminal law, debate between repressive members toward preventive measures, because the two things need to go hand in hand.  I do think that in farther measures alone as it has been said by Signy before me cannot be the only answer because, of course, they always intervene after the crime has been done.
So this is why I want to very much commend the efforts of the European Union and especially the European Commission that has published recently an EU strategy for a more effective fight against child sexual abuse where it has included clear provisions for the European Union Member States to invest more in preventive measures.
So now the European Parliament is called on finding a legally sound solution to this unintended consequence of the European electronic communication code, and I'm very confident because I have witnessed it firsthand, even a lot of importance has been attached by the politicians, that an agreement within the Parliament is within reach.  So then over to you now.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much Emilio and thank you for giving us more background to the central issue that is being discussed in Europe now, especially giving that the predators don't care where the material is hosted.  They don't care where it's sitting.  They just want access to it.  We know that a lot of material that is being processed it actually hosted in Europe, and if this legislation is disabling us from using the existing tools both from industry, but also from the NGO side, I think it's going to be really detriment pal, have detrimental impacts on children and sour ability to protect them online.
I think the entire discussion keeps on coming back which I'm really happy about, back to the centering on the children and the survivors.  I want to go to you, and ask you a question that really is kind of at the centre of how you do your work.  So you at 5 rights foundation are centering on the child and how different factors in digital environments and policy space creates this risk environment or safety environment around children.  So you are looking into design features, and business model of disability platforms, policy and regulatory frameworks and so on.
Most recently you have been generating attention around your work around risk by design as well as efforts to get global guidance and tools for development of Child Online Protection policy frameworks.  So can you tell us more about what you are seeing, how the design features are proposing a culture either of safety or risk and how can we find a way to work with key stakeholders to crow yate frameworks where we could actually address these issues.  Over to you, Beeban.
>> BEEBAN KIDRON:  Thank you very much.  I want to say what an incredible privilege it is to come after two speakers, there is a breakout of agreement about what they both said and they put the case very well.  I thought I might just briefly touch on two narratives that I find very difficult because part of this, and part of the sub text of or indeed even the text of what the previous speaker said is about changing the narrative about how we talk about it, and then also perhaps talk about a couple of things we are doing at 5 rights.
So the first piece is really the idea that it is okay to suggest that child sexual abuse is an acceptable part of a company balance sheet.  So I'm forever being told that, you know, it will be, if we deal with it will be restrictive to growth, or as one tech executive said to me recently on the one hand, on the other hand, and I asked him to put both hands on the table because I said on one hand, on the other hand is not an acceptable framing.
It's not about a network effect versus children.  It's not about content creator's need for income on the one hand and on the other hand children's needs, et cetera, et cetera.  I think we have to stop treating it like a balance sheet and ask the more fundamental question which is to say if you can't run a company without spreading industrial levels of CSAM, are you fit to trade?
And I think if we answer that question honestly, it would drive investment into tackling CSAM out of the system much, much quicker than any of the conversations we are currently having including the current binary between privacy and protection, which I agree with Emilio is both unhelpful, untrue, and simply not the right place to be, and yet we are constantly fought into a corner that puts friends as foes in the policy arena.
I consider myself a Child Protection Activist and a privacy activist.  So that's where I sit, and that's where we all need to sit because the technological systems that are being built for the future right now, right now, the ones that regulators haven't even got their eyes on yet are being designed without the explicit needs of children.
So, I think that we have to remember that a lot of this is happening in the arena of private companies and as Signy said about terms and conditions that actually we need more than two people in this debate.  It's not about companies and end users, it's about nation states, it's about the international community, regulators, all of those people as one part of a tripartite thing between users, companies and what we might call society in a broad sense.
So that's one really important narrative that all of us, and sometimes myself included have gotten wrong and we have to be much, much more disciplined about the way we talk about this.  The think the other thing, and this is very particularly a function of 5 rights foundation and my colleagues in the team, which is that there is a tendency, it's driven by our own sense of horror, the media, the politicians but to concentrate on the extreme.  But we fail to look carefully enough at the culture that's feeding them or at least we excuse that culture very quickly.
So, for example, we know that child pornography straight into the hands of primary age different desensitizes them meaning they need ever more extreme sexual content to be excited.  We know it's within the concept of consent where young girls present in the hundreds and thousands with eye infections and able tears that are a direct result of acting out pornographic scenarios, often unwanted and nonconsensual.  Or the normalization of sharing in sexual content, for example, the U.K. company only fans which makes self‑generated sexual abuse material the fastest growing area of consent.
So we have these drivers that we appear to accept in the commercial world as absolutely normal and we are not really looking at it properly.  And it creates a very toxic environment for children and fuels a very distorted sexual and relationship environment which among other things creates a growing market for CSAM.
And what I find astonishing is that it's done in plain sight of all of us.  And once we will always have a battle against a group of bad actors, we really cannot afford private companies to profit from sharing, spreading and selling sexual content to and of our kids.  And I just put this in the mind of people, you know, it's like imagine if there was a local cafe somewhere on a high street with eight, ten, 12 or even 16‑year‑olds in the window selling images of themselves, videos of themselves.  You know, in reality.  And this narrative that it's somehow normalized in the digital world is really, really problematic for dealing what is really atrocious at the sharp end, because it drives a culture.
So those are my two sort of concerns around the narrative, and about how people like us may perhaps, and I really did hear very, very, you know, resounded in my imagination, both of the previous speakers saying we must put the light on it.  We must also start talking about it in a realistic way.  Do you know this is happening?  Would you accept it in real life?  Can you see this comparison?  And try and talk about it in languages that is perhaps not so expert but is evocative of something that they would find completely unacceptable in so‑called real life although we all know this is indeed real life.
So let me turn briefly to two things we are doing at 5 rights.  First, my colleague Victoria has been working on risky by design, and I will in the course of this session put a link in the chat for everyone, but what it does is it highlights the everyday risks and common features of the digital world.  For example, you know, introducing strange adults to children or exposing children's real time location to strangers or the problems of public streaming from bedrooms and then introducing private messaging into that environment.
And what it really looks at is the cumulative nature of the risk.  So if you make a child public to 500 million viewers on TikTok and then have direct messaging which thankfully they just got rid of it, but there are other services that do that, you are in effect putting them in the window that I alluded to earlier.  And so on.  And what risky by design does is it shows people who are not thinking about the system, who are only thinking about the content, that actually there is so much we can do by child risk assessment, by actually upholding a really basic set of design principles that have more to do with health and safety kind of legislation than any of the legislation that we are currently talking about myself included.
And then finally, I just want to just do a bit of a shout out because I think everyone on the call may in fact be our friend to this project, which is with the end violence community around the world, we are creating a global Child Online Protection handbook, and this actually came out of previous work where we wrote the Child Online Protection policy for the Government of Rwanda, and so many countries reached out to us and said we would really like your help in this.  And the idea that many of the frameworks that we all work to, the NNR, the Convention and so on are not quite practical enough.  If you are the person in a country who is actually given the job of actually writing the roadmap.
So what it is is very holistic, it has broad pillars, but it actually seeks to identify stats, pathways and best practice.  And those are just two of our flagship projects, but I think fundamentally, you know, what I would like to say is we must insist that society does not put up the big questions, the biggest of which is has the digital world delivered for children?  And the resounding answer is no, and we have to start from that perspective, not deal with the harm after the event.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much for so graphically and passionately explaining the key issues that are surrounding children in this complex environment that we are grappling with and not to mention how they feel in the complex environment.  I will now move from that level because you have set the stage perfectly for John, I think.  And John, through the work of IGM in the Philippines you are doing impressive work to support the justice system.  And then but you are not only working with the justice system, you are working seeing firsthand how the interplay between local capacities, normative frameworks, business model companies and then access to adequate technologies can either foster or hamper the response, and prevention efforts and actually to address child abuse.  Can you tell us more about what you have learned over the years and how we can draw from those lessons and use it more broadly beyond the Philippines?  What have been the main learnings and how do they relate to the things the other panelists have brought up today?  Over to you, John.  
>> JOHN TANAGHO:  Thanks so much.  Thank you for hosting this.
I'm so happy to be part of this panel and hear from all of the experts.  I just want to say I agree with everything that's been so far.  It's great that we have different perspectives from different kinds of work that very been doing.  I would just say, you know, IGM has been primarily working in the global south, and so a lot of what I'm going to share is really from that perspective, and where, you know, victims are routinely abused to create child sexual abuse material, videos, photos, live streaming, and yet the justice system is just not at the capacity that we, you know, we often take for granted in the more developed world.
So I would just say, you know, IGM has been operating in 13 countries, and over the last 23 years we have learned a lot.  So what we have been doing is working alongside Governments in the developing world to strengthen the basic infrastructure and capacity of justice systems to protect the most vulnerable people from violence.  And we have been doing that in the Philippines since 2001, and since 2011 focused on the online sexual exploitation of children.
But what I will say is we see the same thing in country after country.  When you strengthen the capacity of front line Government agencies in a sustainable way, then they can better implement and enforce the law to identify victims, to rescue them from ongoing harm, and to hold offenders accountable.  And I think that's really important not only for the justice system, but for the larger society and the community.  Because when you have a state of impunity where children are being sold online, where they are being trafficked, where they are being abused and it's sort of an open secret, and as it's a way that people make money, then what that communicates is this is okay.  Our society, our Government thinks this acceptable.
So you have to replace that environment of impunity with just a measure of accountability where some people are going and being arrested and being prosecuted.  Where victims are actually being identified and rescued.
So what IGM has learned is what's really critical is to enter into partnerships with specialized police, prosecutors, social service providers on the ground, and actually take cases through the justice system pipeline to identify what are the gaps in this justice system, and what are some potential solutions to things like victim identification, to case buildup, to police, you know, applying for and getting search warrants.  It's the things that we take for granted in other countries, but in the Global South, these are just some simple things that often don't work.
And so we have learned when you work with Governments to implement those solutions, you can actually see amazing results in terms of victim identification, victim safeguarding, offenders held accountable, crime prevalence reduction, and overall improved justice system performance.  And I just want to highlight four things I think that are so basic that IGM has learned in country after country and that now we are seeking to scale into new countries that we are not working in, and really want to scale through local NGOs, local partners.  The first is that you need a clear Government mandate to investigate and combat the crime whatever it is.
It could be live streaming of sexual abuse.  It could be a trafficking of children.  But you need a Government mandate that tells specific specialized law enforcement units, prosecutors that, hey, it is within your remit, it is within your job to investigate these cases, to prosecute these cases.  To provide social services, and aftercare to these survivors.
And often times, that mandate just doesn't exist or if it exists it's just sort of cascaded to all law enforcement.  But it doesn't work that way, because all law enforcement are dealing with all crimes.
You really need a specialized law enforcement unit with expertise, training, and time to work on these cases.  The other thing we have learned is units do need sufficient Government resources.  So you could introduce excellent technology that's working in the developed world, but what you need first is for those units who are going to use the technology to have staffing.  Enough staff to use it, right, with recurrent annual funding for their budget, and basic equipment, laptops, good Internet, office space.
Then when you introduce, you know, new technology, it's actually going to be used.  The trick is if you just, you know, bring the technology, it's just going to sit on the shelf and collect dust if the people aren't trained, if they don't have the resources, and the mandate to use it.
And then finally, I think what you have to do is always contextualize the response.  So what we have learned at IGM is, for example, law enforcement and prosecutors, they don't just, they don't need a one size fits all seminar training.  This is what works in, you know, in the U.S. or in Australia, so do it in the Philippines.  That doesn't work.  Because the training has to be contextualized to the local legal framework, what actually are the police allowed to do here?  What are they not allowed to do?  And what technology is allowed under the law, what is not allowed.
And so contextualized training  is really critical to strengthen the justice system.  So I think when you talk about all of these things, what's really critical is that when you are talking about technology or you are talking about training, when you are talking about balancing, you know, privacy and child protection, what's critical is that Governments really have a clear eye to understanding of what is happening on the ground, in their country, in their region, globally.  I mean, we have all sort of said this in different ways but sexual exploitation of children online is a global crime.
So it doesn't work to just have a jurisdiction by jurisdiction approach.  What children need is for the global community to come together and say, this is the standard across the board.  This is the material that has to get removed.  This is, you know, the data sharing that needs to happen between technology companies, and law enforcement.
For example, law enforcement in the Philippines can't goat the kind of evidence or data that law enforcement in the U.S. can get from U.S. technology companies.  They can't serve a search warrant on them.  They have to go through a drawn out, you know, process of MLAD and other things like that and it just doesn't work.  So I think what is really important is the Governments really ensure that their legal framework is actually empowering the justice system and private industry to do what's necessary to combat these crimes, and then, of course, at same time, you know, as Signy mentioned, we do need private industry to step up their game and say, okay, we are not going to do the bear minimum that's required under the law, but we are actually going to do the most that we can that's allowed under law.
And then as Emilio pointed out, even that's getting tricky with the EU, but I think we have to be speaking as one voice to Governments and to industry that, look, this is a pandemic.  The sexual abuse of children online in person to create, you know, online materials is a pandemic, and we should be responding to it the same way we have with this global pandemic.  I mean, look, Governments are shutting down countries, right.  I mean, nothing is getting shut down to protect children from sexual abuse and exploitation.  What that says is we haven't taken it seriously enough.
Governments have not taken it seriously enough, and also industry to some extent hasn't taken it seriously enough either.  So I think that's what IGM has learned from being on the ground.  All of these things are important, but in the Global South, don't forget, like step 1, step 2, step 3, strengthen the core infrastructure of the justice system first.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much, John.  And I think most of what you have said strongly resonates with the work we are doing at the 5 rights foundation to really enable more proactive and action oriented frameworks for the Governments to create not only focusing on a specific illegal aspect of CSAM, but what is a child online nurturing framework look like to empower the sectors to do what they need to do to prevent the risks and address the harms.  That's really important to emphasize.
I don't see any questions in the Q and A.  I will just continue talking to my panelists because I love doing that.  I'm going to go back to Signy for a moment, I don't want us to be, the message has been sobering for most of the people on the call.  I want us to be more optimistic as well.  And Signy, you have been telling us over the last few years you have started working more proactively with the ISPs, Internet Service Providers and they have become more kind of open to hear you and learn from you and with you over the years to become more proactive in removing material.  What was the trick, if you will?
How did you get them to become more positive players in this ecosystem?
>> SIGNY ARNASON:  That's a loaded question.  If I can be completely frank, The New York Times Article.  You start to expose the rot, then companies start to become a little bit nervous about how the public feels about what companies are choosing to leave up and what they are taking down, and often it was just the worst of the worst.  So we have certainly been on a journey with those companies who are prepared to be talking to us, and there are many of them, certainly.  To educate them on what this issue means.
So when you are getting a notice related to, you know, the CSAM adjacent image so the four corners may not meet the threshold for something illegal, but it's incredibly destructive and harmful to the victim because they are a known survivor, that needs to be removed and there should be no question about keeping that up.
It’s really odd sometimes the arguments that will come back, does the survivor really want this material removed?  It's just so out of touch with reality, and certainly not in step with what is happening for survivors so we have absolutely seen and we are more than prepared to give credit where credit is due, but at the same time I do not feel sorry for industry.
They are making billions of dollars.  I feel sorry for children and we will always land on the side of children and how we are not doing enough for them.  And just so that I can actually talk about a little bit about prevention quickly, I think it's really interesting, we bought into this narrative that it's parents' responsibility to keep children safe online.
And companies and industry has fed into that notion, which is quite frankly insane.  The idea that parents can manage and know everything their kids are doing online is absolutely impossible.  So while we do need to educate children about being safe online and being responsible digital citizens, we need to be creating platforms that actually are established with children in mind.  Otherwise, don't have kids on your platform.
If you have adult pornography on your platform and you have children intersecting with it, you are going to end up with problems.  Beeban mentioned only fans, companies, you have got Twitter as an example where they are the gateway.  They are the advertiser and leading teams over to that environment where then they are deciding that oh, I will monetize my sexual material.
And it is creating an absolute disaster online.  So I really think that we, it's, of course, essential that prevention, we are focusing on the wrong side of the coin.  Quite frankly, we have got all of this harm occurring online, and then Governments are actually in a position where taxpayers' dollars are going towards ramping up law enforcement efforts, looking at ground prosecutors, we are stacking it on the wrong side.
We need a framework that, of course, has civil society in mind, but a framework that holds companies accountable for the systems that they create and they are profiting from.  And they are profiting to the tune of billions of dollars.
So we are seeing a shift, and it's important, and we will continue on that journey, but I really, to be quite frank and honest, the reason companies are starting to care what we think about it is because they are determining that we have actually got big mouths and we are prepared to say where there are problems.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you.  I think Emilio wants to build on what you just said.  I think it resonates with European Union's current movements.
>> EMILIO PUCCIO:  Thank you so much.  I wanted to say precisely picking up on what Signy just left us with, prevention.  My experience having worked there for five years in the European Parliament with politicians, I must say that it's more difficult for politicians to understand that it's more important to invest in prevention.
Because, you know, prevention, you don't see the fruit of your investment immediately.  You see it afterward.  So it is also something that is very difficult for politicians to sell that to the electors.  It gives more strength to say we invested so much, we increased the number of police officers out there.  Even visually, it gives more sense of security that you put more police officers out there.
So unfortunately, like also on the legislative perspective, it's much more difficult to make people understand that it's more important to invest in prevention.  I have to say in this, I conclude, of course, that recently, in the European Commission strategy for the most effective fight against sexual abuse, there are often multiple calls from the European Parliament.  At that level it's been understood and widely shared so more is going to come and happen in prevention, in preventive measures and the European Commission would set up soon a preventive network.  So I just wanted to unveil this positive note.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you Emilio.  We have now a question for, and I will just ask from one of our colleagues and it says how can design for safety become part of industry culture?  I think that's a billion dollars question, but does anybody want to particularly address it.  Maybe Beeban, you, and maybe you can take the question asked also around the culture of balancing different aspects around sexuality of young people below 18 and above 18.
>> BEEBAN KIDRON:  I will start with the first question, because, so I have been asked this question about on the one hand, on the other hand and I have been told that I am against even 18 plus pornography, and I just put on the record I'm not against 18 plus pornography as a political stance.  I personally don't use 18 plus pornography and I have some issues around misogyny and consent, but in the context of this conversation, I want to be clear that I am talking about the routine delivery of 18 plus pornography into the hands of children, and in the U.K., at least, the average age upon which a child first sees hard core pornography is now 8.
So I'm actually talking about a child whose sexuality may be very different and blossoming, but at any age, but I am absolutely sure that it is not a great idea that the first idea of your own sexuality or indeed other people's sexuality is a gang bang into the school playground by your phone unasked for.
So I want to make that very strongly.  On the other point, I would absolutely say slightly guilty as charged because I do believe in balancing rights and I think what I was trying to say and maybe I should have been more careful and saying I do not understand this balancing between child sexual abuse and the commercial benefits of companies rather than balancing overall.  So the balance sheet of benefit from a corporate perspective is what I was saying and thank you for the comment because I will say it more carefully next time.
I do also want to just pick up on one thing, which is, which actually speaks to both of the questions I was just asked, which is around recommend loops.  About automated systems.  If I actually say something ghastly, terrible, even the worst in my own room here in London, and it is accessible only to those people that I can tell about it in a personal way, that is very much more limited than actually the way things are spread in ways that are deliberate and automated.
I think that we have to look, I think we have to look, and I'm talking about rings of pedophiles here, I'm talking about the sorts of spread of material that I was talking about in the more broader part of the conversation that actually this stuff is spread at super drive, and I think that that is one of the places where regulation has to now start looking.  Because it is different to say that anybody can say and do what they like within the law, than it is to say that you have an absolute right to spread that all over the world irrespective of the societal or individual damage or indeed the age of the person who receives it.
And then finally, if I might say, that actually educating children to deal with a toxic world that is built on the commercial interests of a handful of people is not an adequate response.  Absolutely we must educate kids, and actually one of the things that I do with my spare time, not that I have much, is data electricity for children and that's a very different thing from E‑safety, that's a very different thing from digital electricity, but data electricity really helps them understand how they are being nudged and pushed by the information around them including their own actions and makes them feel actually both angry and strong, I would say, but we cannot, we cannot let the final answer be that we educate children for a bad environment, we have got to clean up the environment.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much, and I don't think that anybody could agree more with what you have just said.  John, do you want to chip in? 
>> JOHN TANAGHO:  I wanted to add one thing from the prevention conversation, I don't want us to miss the fact that there are different forms of prevention.  There is going up stream and understanding what are the causes or factors that lead to offending, but I think also what IGM has learned in our experience is if you take a situation where you have complete impunity and no one is ever held accountable for abusing children and you replace that with some measure of accountability, then you actually do create a deterrence and that deterrence is itself a form of prevention.
So, for example, in several of our projects in the Philippines, in Cambodia we have seen significant reductions of the prevalence of child sex trafficking, in person child sex trafficking in bars and brothels and in street red light districts because you have justice systems that were stood up.  And all of a sudden a situation where traffickers were never arrested or prosecuted, now they are being arrested and prosecuted by the dozens or hundreds.
So I think obviously justice system importance to deterrents is not the entirety of prevention.  There are so many other ways that you guys are discussing and I couldn't agree more, but I think we don't want to lose sight of that, especially in the Global South where you do have pockets where there is just complete impunity.  And so if you are not afraid that you are ever going to get caught for selling, you know, and for producing and selling child sexual abuse material, I will tell you what, that is the number one reason that people will do it because they are not afraid of getting caught.
And so we have to just never forget that strengthening the justice system to create a deterrence is actually part of prevention.  I think we just take it for granted, you know, around the world because we have, you know, justice systems that more or less are functioning at some, you know, effective level.
I think the other thing I want to comment in terms of prevention is this idea of child sexual abuse materials getting online in the first instance, which I think to me is just actually ridiculous.  I think every tech platform should choose though use photo DMA and other tools to detect and block CSAM at the upload.  Because if you think about it, it is contraband.  It's illegal.  It's not a matter of freedom of expression.  Nobody has a right to possess the material in the first place let alone introduce it into a platform where there are children and other people.
I mean, just imagine if with other contraband like guns, if you are not allowed to bring a gun into an airport or into a mall, where do they check for that gun?  When you are walking in.  There is a metal detector, and so I think photo DNA and other AI tools should be like metal detectors.  They should be sat, when you are stepping into the platform, if you are carrying contraband, block.  You can't bring that in, because it's illegal, and so nobody has a privacy interest to possess child sexual abuse materials let alone to upload them.  So I think we have to have a higher standard for this idea of preventing CSAM not just taking it down once it's on, but it shouldn't get up there in the first place.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much, John.  I think we have left a couple of more minutes, and I do want to kind of summarize the key points you made, but I also want to give you a 30‑second chance to kind of like make one final point for the audience, given that there have been some questions around safety by design, questions around the role of users in preventing and thinking about all of the issues you have mentioned around survivors, impunity, normalization, and suggest 30 seconds if you have a message for the audience.
Let's start maybe with Signy and then go Emilio, Beeban Kidron and John.
>> SIGNY ARNASON:  The message is that Arachnid has changed the lens on what is happening with children on the line.  It is the evidence‑catcher.  So back foe John's point about companies blocking, we are seeing companies that are saying they are doing it and Arachnid are finding images, and we are seeing you mustn't be doing it in this area so there is inconsistent approach.
So at the end of the day, our stance is we have an epidemic on our hands.  We shouldn't be running around patting ourselves on the back thinking we are doing exceptional and extraordinary work.  Who has time for that?  We really need to be talking about the failures and then how we shift this dialogue and change what's happening for children, and while it would be nice to believe that, you know, there wouldn't be any need for regulation.  We believe there is a need for regulation.  We need Governments to step in, to lead, to protect children as they do in the offline world.  We would never accept the things that are happening to children in the offline world, but somehow we have turned this environment into all about privacy.
And we have completely forgotten the ones that actually have no right to send forward and say their privacy is being violated every day.  So this has to change.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you, over to Emilio.
>> EMILIO PUCCIO:  Thank you.
I couldn't agree more with what was just said, and I actually wanted to add picking up on what John said.  I do agree that the punishment, the functions as a deterrent is very important, but in Europe that is not even an issue because we have a directive that has made it is a crime all over the European Member States and yet unfortunately we are confronted with a huge number of cases of child sexual abuse.  So as I said before, I think we don't just have to focus on the punitive aspect.  And once again in the case of prevention, I think something that hasn't been mentioned in this conversation is that I think we should also, especially it's very important foreign legislators to take into consideration that unfortunately, as said, and as I'm comfortable in my sound we do know that some part of our world population has a problem, has a sexual attraction to kids.
So it's also important to look into this, into the health perspective, the mental health perspective.  So I think this has to be tackled as a public health issue.  And I think a lot more needs to be done focusing on the potential offender.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you for raising that important issue of potential offenders and offenders.
>> BEEBAN KIDRON:  Maybe I will use my 30 seconds to try and answer Hester's question about parents and so on.  Just to say I think we underuse consumer law in this area, and that sort of relates to something Signy said at the beginning, we don't use our, consumers don't use the companies that don't do the right thing, first of all.
Secondly, and similarly, I think as citizens, parents, school governors, so on, to fight to put this on the agenda in a sophisticated way, in the way that these panelists are talking about it with all of the tensions that there are in the conversation, but to actually say we need a world in which this is sorted and put it right at the top.
And I do agree with what was said earlier.  We don't take it seriously enough.  We brought the world to ground for the virus, obviously, but this is also a public health thing.  And then really just finally, I spend quite a lot of time with young people.  They are outraged.  They are upset, they are anxious, and one of the things they hate the most is standing by and seeing what is happening to their community and to other kids in their environment.  And I just kind of go, we owe it to them, you know, we owe it to them, and so I think we have to take a citizen approach and a personal responsibility approach until you have done everything in your own world, you haven't done enough.  Even if you are not an expert.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much.  John, over to you.
>> JOHN TANAGHO:  Yes, I think my last 30 seconds would be everything we do has to be survivor‑centred.  Everything we do has to look at it from the perspective of, you know, those individuals who are being harmed right now, and it could be that they are being harmed because there is still a trafficker or offender sexually abusing them in person to produce new materials or it could be that they are being harmed because they are not in that position anymore but their abuse materials are circulating online and that's an ongoing harm.  We talked about prioritizing things.
And I can't think of anything that is more important than protecting those children from further harm.  And so whether it's strengthening a justice system that can, you know, conduct good investigations, find those victims and safeguard them or whether it's, you know, ensuring that those materials are removed from the Internet as quickly as possible or not uploaded in the first instance, we really have to focus from the survivor perspective, because nobody is experiencing greater harm than survivors.  We talk about things like, you know, freedom of expression, and privacy and resources.  But the reality is, you know, all of those things can coexist with doing what's in the best interest of survivors.  Will and we do that, we do it all of the time.  We always balance things.  You have freedom of expression, you can't walk into a theater and yell fire.  You have freedom to drive your car, but in most countries, you can't drive at 120 miles an hour because you might kill people.
So I think we always balance our freedom with protecting people.  And there is no reason why we shouldn't do that when it comes to sexual exploitation of children.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much, John.  We have unfortunately lost Beeban, she had to run, but sending regards to all and thank you to all of the attendees as well.  I want to really thank you.  I have enjoyed this conversation a lot, and I think that we have started by talking governance and technology, but I love the way we have really kept it centred on the survivors, children, the victims, and the work that needs to happen around there.  And I just want to put emphasis on I think the key theme of the panel has been we need to stop normalizing and accepting that society and companies and users are accepting child stem usual abuse as an acceptable level of risk or acceptable level for their business model or acceptable as, you know, like a balance between issues around privacy and safety, because that is not helpful.
And I think going back to speaking about issues like what can happen, and I love the way that Signy was saying what helped them kind of advance a little bit at work was The New York Times Articles.  Let's speak more about the issues and find the ways for the people, societies, users and communities to use their power and pressure to make the changes within societies, companies and Governments.  So I think that would be the call that we at End Violence have to our partners but everybody on this panel and beyond.  I want to thank everybody for being here today.
I want to say this this event was part of the end violence Summit series which are aimed at inspiring and catalyzing political and financial commitments needed to end violence against children.  So I think your calls are really aligned to that.  As we enter a decade of action to deliver Sustainable Development Goals the global campaign we are launching will support acceleration after action, especially given the context of COVID‑19 and beyond.
So thank you, everybody, once more.  And I hope that the attendees have had a chance to learn something and engage.  Please be in touch with us, and we look forward to hearing from you.
Thank you.
>> Thank you, bye‑bye.
>> Thank you, Marija.  Bye‑bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-5-%E2%80%93-sustainable-internet-governance-the-right-to-development^^

 
>> MODERATOR: Welcome to the Internet Rights and Principles Coalition DC meeting, it stands for Dynamic Coalition, and we have a wonderful session ahead of us today called Sustainable Internet Governance & the Right to Development.  We're linking issues around environmental sustainability, the right to development as inscribed in UN treaties and covenants, particularly the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Right to Development itself and Human Rights.  That's the purpose of our meeting.  
We have a very strong team.  I will introduce you briefly, we have Minda Moreira, Co‑Chair of the Internet Rights and Principles Coalition.  
We have six speakers that I'll introduce one at a time.  We have June Parris, our Rapporteur, so if you have questions, comments, please put them in the chat because it is a little easier to collect that way.  We have been keeping track of any questions arising, and feel if you're an attendee to put your hand up and Michael will let me know that you're there so that we can put you in.
We will start with formal proceedings.  We'll have the first round of comments from the speakers and put it to the floor, and we'll go from there basically.  It is very straightforward.  Just in order to get ourselves in the right frame of mind, the point is that it is continuing drawing links between environmental sustainability and Human Rights within the internet governance policy consultations.  It is focused today on Article 4 of the Charter of Human Rights and the principles for the internet and we have convened this meeting on the light of ongoing, increasingly urgent need to not only identify, but to rectify the adverse environmental impacts of internet technologies so that outputs for this session, we will ‑‑ we will put in our meeting notes and that will be brought forward to meeting on the 16th of November, which is a workshop and we really encourage you to be there as well.  This is part one of a two-parter.
Without too much further ado, I can point you to the link, if someone, if Michael, if you can paste in the link to our actual session on the IGF website, people can check that out.  I would now like to give the floor to Minda Moreira, our program Chair and the floor is yours. 
>> MINDA MOREIRA: Thank you.  Good afternoon, everyone.  Thank you for joining our annual meeting.
I'm Minda Moreira.  I am Co‑Chair of the Internet Rights and Principles Coalition and it is great to see so many people joining us here today and the warm welcome to those of you who are joining us for the first time.  
I take this opportunity to talk a little bit about the RPC and the work that we do.  We're based here at IGF.  We are an open network of individuals and organizations committed to making Human Rights work for the online environment and we have been around since 2008, anyone can join us by signing up to our mailing list.  Every year we hold elections for available positions at the Steering Committee and this year the call for nominations will be made soon.  If you would like to get involved with sign‑ups for that list.  The role of the Steering Committee, it is to coordinate the coalitions outreach work and we meet regularly throughout the year to update on our activities.  All our outreach work draws on the Charter of Human Rights and the principles of the internet and this is our main document.  The charter basically articulates existing international Human Rights laws and norms and translates them to the online context.  What I personally find fascinating about the charter, it is that the outcome of an amazing collaborative exercise so many people, many organizations were involved in the drafting of this document and the result, it is this document, it is a strong, accessible, open and a living document as we will see throughout this discussion.  The charter was published in 2011 and so we are basically celebrating the tenth anniversary next year.  It is available in ten languages.  It also has ten principles for the internet which are translated into 26 languages.  Over the years, they have supported the rights inspired initiatives and we have done a lot of collaborative work with partners from other Dynamic Coalitions, Civil Society networks, universities, political representatives, technical community, all of these to raise awareness and we need to implement rights‑based frameworks for the online environment.  I personally find it really inspiring to learn of so many people in academia, NGOs, governments, that find the Charter is useful for raising awareness in communities and to advance Human Rights online.
Also, since 2014 the coalition is an observer to the CDMSI, which is the Steering Committee on Media Information of Society at the Council of Europe.  A very, very important part of our work is the translation of the Charter.  We are extremely grateful for the work of the translation teams that made the Charter accessible to so many people around the world.  Here in this room, for instance, we have some that coordinated the Charter to be put in Arabic and we have others that are responsible for the French version and next spring we're publishing the Italian translation and this is from students from universities and we're really looking forward to have the Italian version available for 2021.
Also, through the Charter we have discussed and highlighted many Human Rights issues online, to name just a few, the right to access, protection of Rights of minorities, including migrants, refugees, privacy and data protection, online views, emerging technologies, Human Rights, and more recently environmental sustainability.  This year the Steering Committee has been focusing on Articles 1 to 4 of the Charter and we continue collaboration was other groups and initiatives.  For instance, we joined digital sustainability to discuss environmental sustainability of the ICTs and we have had members of the coalition participating in rights‑based event, such as rights Con and we have worked together with Civil Society groups, APC.
We have been also participating in national and regional initiatives and we are part of the organizing team of creating internet governance last June and we're very excited to continue and contribute on this issue with them for other activities.  Here at IGF we are organizing a workshop as mentioned, environmental sustainability and Human Rights, this is a mandate on the 16th of November and we're participating in the main session also on the environment this Monday night, Michael Oghia will moderate that session, and we're also participating in the WSIS session on Wednesday, the 11th.
You can also visit our booth number 3 at IGF Village.
I will shortly pass it over again to Marianne Franklin for this meeting which we're focused on Article 4 of the Charter.  This is the right to development through the internet.  This Article has inspired a lot of our work in recent years so our meeting in Paris, back in 2018 and also our session internet and the climate crisis last year in Berlin.  
And in this session, we'll be looking at environmental impact of internet connected technologies effecting Human Rights, especially the right to development and also we can work together to ensure that we have the environmental sustainable and the rights‑based internet.
I think that's all for me.  I hope you enjoy the discussion, commence and questions, they're very welcome.
Thank you very much.
Over to you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
I did share my screen.  Could somebody just confirm that you can see the slides as Minda was speaking?  Thank you very much.  All right.
Just as a segue and for the record, for the audio record, I'm going to read out the Article 4 and remind us all that this was written 10 years ago when the environment was still not considered an issue, let alone an issue for internet governance.  Article 4 of Charter of Human Rights and Principles for the Internet reads thus, right to development through the internet, all UDHR Human Rights require economic, social, cultural and political development in order to be fully realized as recognized in the UN declaration on the right to development from 1986.  The internet has a vital role to play in helping to achieve the full realization of Human Rights, in particular in eradicating poverty, hunger, diseases and promoting gender equality and empowerment of women.  The right to development includes the full enjoyment of all rights related to the internet and set out in this Charter.  On the internet the right to development includes:  
A, poverty reduction and human development, information and communication technology shall be designed, developed and implemented to contribute to sustainable human development and empowerment; 
B, environmental sustainability, the internet must be used in a sustainable way, thus as it relates to the disposal of eWaste and to the use of the internet for the protection of the environment. 
Speaking to those very broad themes, giving us focus, con Civil society example, case studies and challenges and critiques, I would like to turn to our very first panelist, and I will simply let you have the floor.  I have a timekeeping device of an analogue nature which is an for example timer, and I will keep this running so that you can see me.  That's the 3 minutes.  Just the opening remarks will be 3 minutes.  Without too much further ado, I would like to introduce Noha Ashraf Abdel Baky, who is also representing our youth coalition, we're thrilled to have you here.  The.
The floor is yours.  And the for example timer now begins.
>> NOHA ASHRAF ABDEL BAKY: Thank you for the introduction.  As mentioned, I'm the student Committee member on internet governance and I work as a data storage engineer at a top IT vender.  I thank you for the appreciation between the Dynamic Coalitions and to involve youth in this important discussion.  Youth are the main users of the internet.  They are digital natives and tech savvies, which gives the advantage to the tech giants to push the trend and the urge of buying their latest versions of smartphone, smart devices like watch, screens, gaming appliances.  Amid the pandemic, the need ‑‑ there was an increase in the need of accessing the internet and processing more devices for purposes like online indication, working from home, attending virtual conferences like this version of the IGF.  A family of two parents, two kids might need to have four laptops at home apart from the phones.
Ten years ago, owning one smart device might be called a luxury, now it can be called minimalism.  The number of mobile phones in the world is now larger than the number of people.  It is not carbon imposing the threat any more as eWaste is the elephant in the room.  On the other hand, youth are the frontline of environment and there is a big group of youth advocates from activist, engineer, entrepreneurs and others, a great example is Greta, a 16‑year‑old environmental activist who brought this important debate to high‑level policy discussions.
Another example is the youth for digital sustainability program which brought 50 young people to develop 1 messages as recommendations, my colleague Raashi Saxena will discuss further on this program in her remarks.
Under limited opportunities, if we create more room for youth in sustainable tech to create innovative solutions through encouraging the start‑ups ecosystem, organizing hackathons and encouraging private sector and governments to adopt creative ideas, their creative ideas, this is a step in the direction towards manufacturing ecofriendly by design devices I would recommend linking Article 4 with the Sustainable Development Goals like SGs 7, 9, 12 and 13 as none of the SDGs contain the words internet or technologies in them.
Thank you.  Back to you. 
>> MODERATOR: Brilliant!  That was 3 minutes on the do the!  Thank you so much!.
Thank you for the recommendation which I know our Rapporteur will be noting immediately.
I would like to now give the floor to Hanane Boujemi, well‑known to our coalition and champion of the Arabic Farsi and Kurdish editions and a brilliant campaign in that region.
The floor is yours. 
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Thank you very much!  Good afternoon, everyone.  
My name is Hanane Boujemi.  I'm an ex Co‑Chair of the Dynamic Coalition on Internet Rights and Principles, and at the moment I'm working for the African Union as senior expert on policy and regulation among other roles that I have different entities in the field of IG.
Thank you, Noha, for your contribution and I have to add that the IPC is a pioneer when it comes to predicting, projecting out to the future what could be the policy challenges that we face in the IG discussion.  Indeed, environment now is at the heart of our discussion already for the last two years but the Charter itself has already highlighted this issue, hand in hand with the right to development.  If you look at the Charter, you will notice it was already cited, the text, and also, and you can see that both actually go hand in hand.  During our discussion, we anticipate also that this text may need updating although the process is tedious and requires consensus among all members.  I think why we're having this discussion today, it is because, you know, the sustainability discussion is very much tied to how we actually promote views of the internet in various contexts.  Now, I have to say, you know, the developed world, you know, it is more or less consumed with the notion of consumerism and it brings us to, you know, the discussion whether we really want people to be technologically advanced but on the other hand, we're not looking at the offset of having a tech‑wired society.  This is where the genius of the Charter comes from, you know, the principle point of view, where we promote, you know, the right to development, and we say hey, this right comes with the responsibility of protecting the environment, which is I think a very important notion.  It is also interesting because when we promote the Charter, I still have many copies here in my office in many languages and we tend to lobby mainly policymakers to subscribe to this principle, it is a soft mechanism.  It is not a legally binding let's say provision, but it is a soft mechanism that would convince the policymaker, the government officials, different actors to actually believe in the principles we're promoting through this coalition.  To spread this in a society, we need a community like this, what we have on the call today, to spread the word about ‑‑ the word that we're doing because the principles per se are text, it is black on white, but how to actually mobilize, you know, people to believe in what we're saying and knowing that there is many theories when we talk about the sustainability of the internet or the environmental impact of the internet.  The uptick of technology globally makes this kind of thing hard to promote as a principle, but I think we need to do a little bit more effort into actually bringing the society into this conversations.  Obviously, the big tech giants either working in the hardware industry, you know, because the business model entirely relies on that, or you know providing tech services, you know, to communities all around the world definitely should be part of this conversation.  I was hoping that one of the giants could join us today to have this conversation.  All in all, as I said, I wanted to focus mainly on the principle and how important it is for us to incorporate other components, you know, that would reflect the very true meaning of sustainability using technology.
Thank you.
>> MARIANNE FRANKLIN: Thank you very much.  Thank you very much, Hanane.  Thank you.  
We have 62 participants, Michael will be keeping track of the chat questions and comments which I'll ask him to bring in at a later point.
The timer will now begin for Mr. Ilias Iakovidis ‑‑ excuse me if I got that wrong, I practiced! ‑‑ and Ilias Iakovidis, the floor is yours.  I will start the egg timer.  
Off you go.
>> ILIAS IAKOVIDIS: Thank you very much.
Good afternoon, everybody.  I will speak a little bit about the European dimension and what we're doing in the European Commission and our vision for Europe.  We have, as you know, declared that our goal will be to climate neutral Europe by 2050.  When we did that, we didn't really understand, and that was a year ago, what exactly is the role of internet and in this case, digital sector as a whole.  As we're growing into this realization, we have understood how important it is.  In the beginning, the digital transformation, it didn't really care much about sustainable transition and sustainable transition realized early enough that they will not be able to get there without the digitalization.  
Deeper we go, we understand that actually, even the digital transition, the materials behind that, all of the issues around the environment also needs the sustainability transition.  This panel brings a third dimension of SDGs beyond economic and environmental, but the social issues, and if we don't sign them up in a synergy way, all three will not go far.  Without all, we will not achieve green or digital transformation.  Each have their own risks, introducing inequalities and unjust ways.  
Just one example green environmental sustainability, it is becoming so urgent and so important that we may actually forget the social issues as we go rushing into sustainability measures.  An example could be that we just ‑‑ and mayors on a local, environment, they say there are no cars in the center of the town, only people with electric cars can enter the center of the town.  You can imagine how just this is as a statement.
The same can be for many other services that are polluting and people just suddenly say we will text this carbon in a different way and ‑‑ you know, unless we get the right mix of the social, the just transition, the green and digital, we will not achieve all our goals that we set ourselves for 2030 and 2050.  I want to give two examples of what we do.
We are looking at greening of the ICTs so actually we can deploy more.  If we really want to connect another billion of people, we need to make sure that this in this case deployment is done in a green jacket way.  What's it mean?  We need to look at two dimension, the energy consumption, but for that, as I already said in previous sessions, energy consumption, it is something that we can actually tame and together with the renewables we would be able to get there soon.  It is the material consumption and the eWaste and the pollution and reliance on the earth and the deployment of the natural resources that's the major problem for in this case.
If we have to choose, let's focus to make sure that SDG12 is the principle for in this case development, responsible consumption and production.
On the potential of the ICT, so if you leave the greening of ICT, which is ‑‑ we have a lot of actions in the commission, we have a lot of actions that we will take together with all of the Member States on how to green the ICT and we are starting with the obvious, data centers and Telecoms and we have the clarity of the device, and as we have seen, there was a mention about digital smartphone, smartphone, it is the problem of today.  We change them every two years.  They are huge eWaste because we don't recycle, less than 15% is actually recycled.  There is a growing number of reuse and refurbishment and it is nowhere where we should, the biggest problem is durability, recycling is the beginning of a bad thing, to keep the value of the devices as long as possible, that's the issue we need to solve, repairability we need to enable the right to repair and, of course, the design for durability.  The design is not yet there.
On the enabling part of ICT, ICT can enable a lot of good things but only if it is green jacketed as I said if we really pay attention, to what we do with the streaming, the energy consumption, the material consumption, the good things it can do in every sector you can imagine, agriculture, energy grids, transport, manufacturing, but what I would like to select, just for today, just to conclude, it is that there is a silver bullet for me what digital can do, that is the clarity of our economy at large, the circulatory of our economy at large, it is the solution to climate change, even if all of ‑‑ everything that we have in our economy runs on renewable, imagine that the world of 2030 will be 100% renewable, we have not reached sustainability.  The material problem of produced use waste, that linear way of consumption, it has to completely disappear if you want to be sustainable.  People just focusing on energy consumption has a blind eye to this.  Circular economy is something I want it highlight. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  We have a lot of content.  Thank you so much!  It is important that we have an intergovernmental organization such as the E.U. who have a policy degreed internet and you are keeping us honest.
Thank you.
We're now going to move to Mr. Rigobert Kenmogne from our coalition Steering Committee and from Cameroon. 
And Rigobert Kenmogne, when you're ready, the floor is yours. 
>> RIGOBERT KENMOGNE: Thank you.  Good afternoon.
My name is Rigobert Kenmogne, I'm from Cameroon.  I'm a journalist expert on ICT.  I work as a digital right programmer from Francophone Africa, my presentation will be focused to show how environmental sustainability on Human Rights work in South Africa, especially from our country context and at the end of my presentation, I will try to respond to questions to identify and proposing possible solutions to the negative environmental impacts of internet in the region.
As you know, in 19 years the mechanical vehicle, Africa has turned to a massive electronic devices for decades.  Over the past two decades, the process of Technology Transfer as gradually involved in view of the dangers of coalition of technologies, the African continent has in recent year, in the regulation, in the environment, pollution, generated by technologies and we can say that South African countries often classify as technologies emerge in rich numbers and this is often newly used products and it is a real problem of the physical and future environment, pollution, physical environment, it occurs so that it is often poorly understood and the dangers are poorly assessed.  Virtual pollution is often generated by interference and different electronic devices, poorly connected or having exited their life span.  It is important to regulate the address and the stabilities of the internet by focusing on the risk internet users face in using the technical tool at their disposal in order to ensure several macroeconomic environments.  The technical company of the internet, it is the first ‑‑ so it must present annual reports ‑‑ okay ‑‑ a general report on the situation, but also presenting the technological resourcability for the company on the environment.
Thank you.  Thank you for letting me share on the subject.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for that.  It is great to get that view from Africa, Francophone Africa.
Now I would like to move to the representative from the technical community, Vesna Manojlovic.
The floor is yours.  My very analogue timer will now begin now.
>> VESNA MANOJLOVIC: Thank you.  Thank you.
I'm very grateful to be present here with all of you today.  Thank you for inviting me.
I work for RIPE NCC, the Network Coordination Center, we have three functions broadly, we are regional internet registry, so we distribute IP addresses to our members in Europe, Middle East, former Soviet Republics, and we maintain the database for those resources.  We're not‑for‑profit membership organization and located in Amsterdam.
We also are secretariate for the RIPE community, that's two different things with the same name.  It is very confusing.
We help to organize the bottom‑up development of the technical coordination of the internet infrastructure.  It is the engineers that maintain the internet infrastructure in the regions that come to discuss the things of their interest in an open forum and so you can all take part in meetings which are now online and also, the third thing, we are a neutral, trusted source of data.  We host the services that are benefiting the global internet community, for example, a name server, one of the 13 root name servers and the measurement platform, for example RIPE and the routing information service and we also participate in a lot of internet governance and other technical communities like ITF and ISOC.
Myself, I'm a community builder at the RIPE NCC, my job is to connect people and to cross connect different technical communities like hacker, activist, artist, feminists, with the right community.
One of my preferred tools for that, it is a hackathon, I was happy that Noha mentioned the young people and their involvement in hackathons.  I organized already many of them and we're still working on them.  Please stay in touch about this.
Originally, I'm from Yugoslavia, now that's ex‑Yugoslavia, but I live in Holland. 
Today, what brought me here today is Michael, thank you for inviting me, and my interest in environmental justice.  I would like to help decrease the ecological footprint of the internet by influencing the technical communities to include sustainability and Human Rights goals into their practices.  By using the feminist principles of the internet, which are resistance, non‑violence and care.  I made certain suggestions for adding to the Article 4, which can be summed with growth of the internet must not be the reason for destroying the environment or harming the environment.  There are many more words, but my 3 minutes are up!  Thank you so much! 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Vesna!  Thank you!  I'll paste in your proposed Article 4C text and we can perhaps take a quick vote at the end.
Last, thank you so much.
Lastly, but not least, Raashi Saxena ‑‑ I'm not sure if I said the name right, forgive me if I'm not ‑‑ from the Youth Sustainability Coalition.
Welcome!  The floor is yours.  All 3 minutes of it, plus give or take!
>> RAASHI SAXENA: Thank you!  Hey, everyone.  I'm Raashi Saxena.  Good morning, good evening and good afternoon from wherever you are logging in.  I'm excited to be here.
As mentioned, I am one of the 50 youth working members of the digital sustainability policies that we have come out with and I also wanted to discuss that sustainability according to me is two sides of the coin, where one side is Human Rights aspect without neglecting the climate change aspect and as a lot of distinguished panelists before me mentioned, I think the Sustainable Development Goals for 2030 can have the word internet and can have stronger motivations and visions and policies that incorporate the backbone of our future and we also see how the pandemic has exposed the social inequalities that people don't have access to a robust, healthy, sustainable internet.  I come from Bangalore, in India, we do have a lot ‑‑ we saw a lot of issues with children not having especially from rural areas and women not being able to work, going to ‑‑ everybody works on daily wages and the eWaste sector and the refurbishment secretary, it is a 23 billion‑dollar industry globally and we have policies in place in India that were put in place in 2016 talking about upskilling, providing economic incentives but I see something lacking and I would perhaps like to add to Article 4, it is that digital literacy, it is something that should be added.  We need to up skill people so that we can sort of make sure that the refurbishment and the eWaste industry are getting into sustainable practice, getting subject matter experts as mentioned in the policies and also not looking at diversity as a decorative piece or tokenistic, but looking at holistic measure, looking at Best Practices from other global emerging economies to make sure that that we are abiding by the principles of circular economy, making sure that working conditions in the industry are good and avoiding exposure to asset teaching and open air incarcerations and we have the refurbished smartphone market where we have each user has more than two smartphones perhaps and it grew by a healthy 9% last year and, of course, I can go on and on and on, but I think we need to ‑‑ we as youth, I'll end in the next 10 seconds ‑‑ we have to build legacies and also provide humane, and change in practices to make sure that this is a healthy and sustainability world.
That thank you so much.
>> MODERATOR: That concludes the first round of panelists.  I understand that there are two questions at least.  I think, Michael, are any of the questions in the Q&A, ones that our panelists could immediately answer based on the first interventions?  If so, could you read to us which one you think could be answered by a panelist immediately?
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: There was a really, really good question here that I'm quite curious about:  Is the Basel two convention, including eWaste followed by most countries and are countries using loopholes to dump this.  This may be really good for Ilias.  I don't know if you're familiar enough with the Basel 2 topic, would you be able to take that, does the mining community related materials such as silicon, but in this case, it refers to conflict minerals, tin, gold, et cetera, require controls for conflict mineral as there is in place for blunt diamonds.
I would answer that, but I open it to the floor as well.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  
I'm sure you have comments on the issue around the Baldwin Convention, perhaps you can remind the meeting what that is and also about the ‑‑ yeah, the issue around blood, diamonds, blood metals.  I will put it bluntly, that's effectively what we're talking about, at the beginning of the life cycle of our beautiful phones.
3 minutes, the floor is yours. 
>> ILIAS IAKOVIDIS: You don't have to answer the questions but feel free to respond.  Choke. 
>> ILIAS IAKOVIDIS: I would have to take the ratification on Basel Convention by all Member States, in the past, we exported our eWaste to Africa, other countries and that is now forbidden.  Now we have our own rules on how to treat eWaste, it is getting difficult.  We have our own internal market issues, how to get the eWaste as fast as possible to recycling plants and how to get the value back.  I will come become on the Basil convention if you want, I don't think I have direct access now to all of this information, okay.
I just wanted to say that I see on the chat that a lot of people say, well, we keep our mobiles much longer.  That's true.  I do too.  I change them every 5 to 6 years.  We had asked people, how long would you keep your mobile, what would you like to do?  That's an old one, yeah!  And there is easily more than 67% of people that said we would like to keep it five years.  We're forced to change it because my application is not any more updated.  It is kind of the software updates, it is the performance issue, it is the screens, it is the batteries.  That's what we're trying to do and maybe look at it from legal point of view.  You just do regulation that phones like that should not be able to be sold in Europe.
This is one issue we want to check.
On ethical, let's say the social, the social and Human Rights issue with respect to mining, we are working on a concept called product passport for electronics for construction for plastics, for packaging, for textile, for other products where this information would be captured.  The supply chains, the Human Rights of the supply chains would be very transparent and visible.  At the moment, it is kind of we're flying blind, we don't know where it come, where it goes, there is system leakages, and I think the first regulation, if you're interested in these things, it's on batteries coming up in a few weeks from now.  I'm trying to make sure that I capture everything from supplies and the original materials all the way down to use and recycling and reuse.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
Also, if I could just touch on a point asking for people to respond specifically to this important issue on the hard materials, the precious metals and the actual devices as Ilias reminds us, it is not about recycling but about the problem of the business model that builds in this obsoleteness, and this is scored at the moment as we go online for learning, teach, work, it is all of the apps we have to download are now forcing us through business models and designs to upgrade whole laptop, whole PCs, forcing us to buy new devices in order to be able to run the latest commitment there.  It is a software, hardware kind of relationship that is not inevitable and Ilias, you reminded us there is an alternative always.
I would like if people ‑‑
>> ILIAS IAKOVIDIS: If I can add now that we talk about this, I just want to make a very important point:  While we are talking that ICT is the dark side, the pollute, ICT is the only, if not the major solution to enable circular models product as a service.  Imagine in the electronics that we kind of pay for services rather than the materials and whoever gives us the material has all of the incentives for us to keep it as long as possible, it is an expense to them.  There are many other ‑‑ there agriculture, I explained this in agriculture, it is not about deploying digital as a goal, digital is there as a mean.  We need to kind of have a minimal principle of what we actually need as digital to change the business model.  I'll give you an example, instead of telling every farmer to buy a drone, GPS on the tract, subscribe to satellite imaging services and IoT in the soil, get a service to protect your plant health, and that service will kind of charge you per acre and that service will have the incentives to minimize the agriculture product, it is an expense to the company, the company will get digital because they have to have the satellite imaging, drones, IoT, all of the connectivity in place to be able to protect the field with a minimum expense, which is minimum application of pesticides.  You have healthy soil, healthy food, business models that work for farmers and the companies and this is the power of ICT that we need to promote and really make that realization.  Of course, it is good to do it always with a minimalist, kind of a ‑‑ what I call a green jacketed principle.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  Very important point.   .
Could we have ‑‑ I was just checking with our tech team, I understand that we can ‑‑ I know we can promote someone from the floor so that they can speak to the camera.  Rachel, was that still possible?  I believe that you have the controls.  If you wish to make a comment, please put hands up so we can promote you to panelists.  If you do want to intervene, please obey the for example timer.
Have our panelists have any comments directly to the issues of the materials, the supply chain issues and what Ilias referred to as the 360º in approach that the internet rights and principle coalition has been advocating and needs to be very, very visible 360º rather than a siloed approach.
>> RAASHI SAXENA: I would like to add to Ilias Iakovidis' point and look at the fact that there is no such thing as one‑size‑fits‑all.  That's important.  
Since the eWaste industry, the republished industry, they're informative and we have to look at testing and put in necessary regulations by actively involving civil participation and actually going through multistakeholder approach to see how we can make sure that this is going to be a viable business for people who are forced to go with obsolete smart phones that are not sustainable and have to be given up in the next year or so.  I do believe there is a lot of trial and error and we can't borrow exactly what one country is doing and we have to contextualize based on the social country context because secondhand items, they're still a taboo in especially India, especially given the virus at the moment, there is so much hysteria around it.  Yeah.  There is a lot of work to be done. 
>> MODERATOR: A good point.    
I wondered if I could put to the panel and the floor, there is a danger here in these conversations that we kind of expect the Global South to recycle, share the technology and the Global North by the latest or the flip problem it is only the Global North that can afford it and anyone in the Global South that has a fancy new iPhone has their priorities wrong.  So I was wondering if the panel could perhaps address I think the question going begging a little bit, within the Charter, Article 4 ‑‑ I will let you have the floor in a minute ‑‑ in the Charter, Article 4, perhaps it is a bit pie in the sky and asking too much.  That's my question to us all.  How do we drill down, making this actually workable and I believe, could you identify yourself?  You have the floor.
Hello?  Hello. 
>> (Poor audio quality). 
>> MODERATOR: Diedre, you have a criticism, it is not about best but about good.  Personally I say why do we wait for second best here, I think the time ran out for us worrying about best, better, good, we're at the point where we're not even reaching the minimum threshold of our planet's survival.  I would like to throw to the panel what do they think is the most urgent thing that has to be done now within our 360º in approach.  It is often an accusation at the Charter itself, that it is trying to do too much and some say this should be added later it is Human Rights should not be in business cycles, models, supply chains.  
Anyone want to comment to that point?  The floor is open.  Panelists, I think Hanane Boujemi has had to leave.  I wanted to ask if she had anything to add.  Okay.
Anybody want to comment on these rather large issues?  I think we have to be quite self‑critical as well.
Would anyone like to comment?  Someone asked do we instead have to specifically target tech companies?  Yeah.  Yeah.  You would like to speak to the issue around who is ‑‑ please?
>> ILIAS IAKOVIDIS: Can I maybe just break the ice first.
What I think we need kind of a triple offensive, of course it is too much maybe to ask for a panel but in the UN, there is enough agencies that could take a some of that.  One, to promote whatever is happening, the private sector to be green themselves.  We have to make sure that they themselves sometimes don't understand if they are green or not with that.  Try to get the private sector serious and agreed on some monitoring and calculations that are trustable, transparent, credible, so we can actually measure what are we doing with the technology with respect to sustainability and Human Rights.  Those are social issues.  
Second, to make sure that we commit at the highest level, the political, the politicians.  Now it is in the hands of ministries of environment, and I have seen that before.  I have worked for many years in ministries of health and if we keep it within cocoon, within the ministries of environment, it has no chance to really scale, it has to be a common issue of Ministry of Finance, economy, Prime Minister office, working with Germany we have to scale it to a chancellor, so in a way, it has to go high, this agenda, it can't be kept by one silo ministry policymaking.
The third, it is consumers.  How do we as UN through whatever agencies we have, to influence the consumer's behavior and to put it in a way, not ‑‑ you cannot, of course, tell people you should do that, but it would never go far.
Those that want to behave responsible, we should provide tools and guidelines on helping them with lifestyle choices.  Many people want a choice, how do we support them to carry that choice forward?
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for bringing up lifestyle, for hinger bringing that in the mix.  Noha Ashraf Abdel Baky.
>> NOHA ASHRAF ABDEL BAKY: It is about creating a lifestyle for products and a commitment that's sustainable as well, not always considering the disposal of the devices.
There is also ‑‑ the market pushes for the private sector to go to be transformed digitally and to adopt digital transformation, but the ICTs have the solutions or the answer for this too, you don't have to ‑‑ businesses don't have to create or to build their own data centers while we have Cloud computing for example.
As like we have the issue, we have ‑‑ we have the ICTs, they offer the solutions as well.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Yes.  Let's look at solutions, that topic can be overwhelming.  Before we do that, Raashi Saxena, would you like to take the floor?
>> RAASHI SAXENA: You know, I also wanted to kind of again echo in with what was said, all of the issue, rather the solutions that were brought up, they're action policy messages and the research we have done with 32 different youth stakers, and we have deliberated, seen, we have looked at the framework and this may sound a little too radical but maybe Human Rights issues and climate change, it should be bipartisan of an issue so that we don't stop the work or halt the work that other governments have been doing.  Yeah.  That's my only comment.
>> MODERATOR: Any other comments?  We have an interesting line on the chat about consumer led models.  My feeling is we're focusing ‑‑ it is a good thing ‑‑ not on so much the software but the hardware, the devices.  These are the things that we have talked a lot about software, data centers, the consumer consumption of energy and production of heat that adds to global warm, but today we're having an interesting conversation about these things that really are a part of our live, the wearable watch, the laptop, the tablets, particularly the smartphones which are just mini tablets basically and the fact that they're completely unsustainable in the long‑term.
I can give people speaking rights if they wish to.  I can actually just Rundown the list of participants.  If you want to speak to this particular topic, let me know now.  Panelists, any more kind of concrete ‑‑ how do we persuade people to let go of the latest model of the iPhone, if I may just mention one brand or the latest model of their Samsung tablet, just to be fair and to name another one, or not to update their laptop which is perhaps eight years old in my case.
Anyone wish to speak ‑‑
>> ILIAS IAKOVIDIS: Kind of a minor issue, but now that we're all home, we're kind of through COVID teleworking, doing everything, what we could do, trying either public or private sector teleworkers, to help, to have one ‑‑ I have two laptop, my personal and I have my work laptop.  That's true for many teleworkers, just a simple solution would be could we actually arrive to a position because teleworking will stay with us, even after post COVID, we have a projection that 30% of people that telework now will stay, at least 30% will stay teleworking.  Can we support actually that we use the same device for work and personal?  We don't have to have everybody double, double mobile, double laptop, that's what we have today.
On the latest, I think that's difficult, that's kind of cultural and difficult to get into.  What we could do, support services that do not ‑‑ help the models that are there, not to subsidize the newest device, so that they keep you as a service.  Most of the companies now, they just subsidize the new brands just to get you to sign up to renew your subscription.  That's maybe not the best way to do it.  At the same time we are trying to see if we can get take backs, schemes, campaigns, people have three, four phones in their drawers that are sitting there, just for some maybe sentimental reasons because there is a picture of my kid on it, whatever.  If we can find kind of a trustable deletion of whatever personal data that's true for data centers as well, there are huge, thousands of servers from data centers being shredded because people don't trust that the data on them would be erased correctly.  We can imagine the waste just from that little untrust in the personal data story.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Very important, concrete points.  Keep the examples going, everybody.  This is very informative as well. 
Amber, are you okay with taking the floor?  You were speaking about consumer‑led models in terms of wearable technologies.  Great to have you back, Anna. 
Amber, lovely to see you.  Can you unmute? 
>> AMBER HILL:  Yeah. I was ‑‑ I was thinking about what Ilias was saying, whether you're an iPhone person, an Android person, and people have become either one of those people with work laptop, personal laptop, having an iPad, an Apple watch.  These technologies, they're so engrained within our lives and we can't not take away from how much they are, we pay money every month toward them, and that relationship could start to be redefined in a way where it can express sustainable goals in a way that you're responsible for that type of technology, you're responsible for ‑‑ in a way, in so far as it takes up a lot of energy and it takes up a lot of ‑‑ a lot of resources to get there.  In that way, you can actually provide ways that you can sustain it.  What I said about tech companies, they could ‑‑ they could have a refurbishment service like in the U.K. now, you're encouraged to recycle your phone and you will get significant discounts.  It needs to be in a kind of consumer‑led model because that's what's going to work.
>> MODERATOR: Consumer led but how do we get the consumers to lead?
>> AMBER HILL:  I think you have to define it.  It is a big one, isn't it?  I found what you were saying about the global north, Global South, I think that's an interesting one. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Amber.  Thank you.
Anyone wishing to speak to this?  I think that we need to at the moment, we are struggling between the governmental responsibility, corporate responsibility and the point that maybe it is down to the individual and on that point, I think you had your hand up.  Lovely to see you here.  Thank you. 
>> LEANDRO NAVARRO:  I don't know if you know about the electronic watch, we talk about consumers, and corporate consumer, puck like procurement, they're able to do that and this is an interesting example and about the use, I think it is difficult to ask people to do efforts but we can ensure that the devices, they're not second‑hand used and that can be worked together with social enterprises, for businesses, they give, sell, primarily at a lower price for other users which may enjoy the device if you don't any more.  Of course, I mean, there is the abandonment of countries that produce the devices, don't forget about them, it cannot be that they abandon the devices and they do not maintain the software, hardware and other parts and also the software updates.  There are many things where we can really act, it is urgent to do it.
>> MODERATOR: I agree.  It occurred to #metoo, most people keep old devices in a box, in a cupboard, under the bed, there are many funny scenes of wires, cables, if we put all of our different antique devices together, but there is nowhere to go to take the old devices.  There is some law for our local governments, city governments and it should not be just seen as charity, it should be seen be an absolutely crucial.  It is not just behavior, it is perception.  Someone noted in the chat about perception.
With that segue, any comments on this?  I think if we don't mind sipping on this particular aspect, how we actually get the link between behavioral change and the opportunity to change your behavior.
>> VESNA MANOJLOVIC: There is one aspect which springs to my head, that's the free software, the opensource software, it is a connection between empowering the users to reuse their equipment because they can and on the other side, government mandating that the public procurement for software which is being used in public services should be open and free so that there are no companies that are actually keeping people hostage for the upgrades and so on and it is complex, it is difficult to achieve, but it is worth considering.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Any other comments on this particular point?  A new point that someone would like to raise.
We have only 15 minutes.  I would like us to have some wrap up takeaways from our panelists that were invited and have time to consider this proposal from Vesna in particular, added to by Raashi Saxena to create what we call a first protocol, protocol one for Article 4 of the Charter, namely to ‑‑ namely in protocol 1 to add an addendum, mainly Article 4 clause C and clause D I think.
Before we get there, any other comments on this issue between making it possible for people to see reuse as enabling and empowering rather than not ‑‑
>> VESNA MANOJLOVIC: That's only possible with the government really doing a lot of education, awareness campaigns, it is really how the messaging is done and, of course, you also have different sectors like Civil Society that bring in their expertise and talk about how perhaps the opensource community can talk about the advantages and look back on history, but I still feel that the government has a really important role in making sure that the economic incentive, they're highlighted very deeply because if you do have economic incentive, then you can hold the citizens accountable in terms of, say in India, we have environmental duties and then people perhaps would then be inspired to sort of take practices.  There is a lot of behavioral economics and science that perhaps we can apply and perhaps we as a community have programs like this and maybe something wonderful will come out of this.
>> MODERATOR: To remind the meet, our Article 4 was ambitious enough ten years ago, and it is still remaining ambitious, the right to development, it is actually part of what the internet technology is supposed to do and implicit in that Article 4 is the sense that internet technologies are actually hindering development, namely poverty reduction, they're actually a source of unsustainable forms of consumerism, production lines, all of that sort of thing.  In fact, these technologies, they're contributing to the environmental degradation rather than sustainability.
With that in mind, I have put on the chat the proposed additional clause, just before I ask our panelists to give closing remarks.  That's a draft text which could foreseeably be our first protocol, namely clause A, poverty reduction, human development, clause B, environmental sustainability, clause C along the lines of the usage of the internet for the protection of the environment must be balanced with protecting the environment from the growth of the internet and then she has a slightly shorter version.
I would like to put that forward for us to think about before we wrap up.  With that, whether the meeting feels that could be put for wore was a draft text.  Still broadly written, but this is the magic so to speak of these sorts of declarations and Charters that they need to be able to go past the next 5 minutes.  Thank you for the professional drafting already, Vesna.  Without too much Firth ado, I will start backwards.  Are you still with us?  I will ask the panelists to give us a less than 3‑minute take away, 1 to 2, maximum three concrete points you want to table for the meeting as our final takeaways because we need this as part of the protocol for being in this environment.
I'll start with our final speaker, with Raashi Saxena.  Would you like to give us your concluding 1 to 3, no more than, three concrete comments.
Thank you.
>> RAASHI SAXENA: I think perhaps maybe I could give comments on the existing clause.
>> MODERATOR: Whatever you want to do.  It is up to you.
>> RAASHI SAXENA: (Poor audio quality) maybe there could be something that we could have perhaps a multistakeholder approach and have youth participation.  We are the most active citizens, per se, and may also add a little bit on supply chains and talk about standards on how to clean the internet, bring about ‑‑ not really bringing about the SDGs, but perhaps talking about the circular economy.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
>> RAASHI SAXENA: I would add digital literacy and upscaling as points on the gender aspect, quality perhaps you could be mention inclusion, diversity, digital inclusion, it is something that's really important.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
That's all important.  That fortunately is covered in other Articles of the Charter, but I think we're on to something very interesting here.
Thank you.
Vesna Manojlovic. 
>> VESNA MANOJLOVIC: I feel like I already have said a lot and I typed in a lot to the chat.  I would like to have even loftier goals.  I don't know how to phrase them!  Some mentioned protecting the environment, but I would rather say respecting the environment and going for the environmental justice rather than just sustainability.  That's my final words.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  I think that's on the record.  Thank you.  Aim higher!  Aim higher!.
Thank you.
Rigobert Kenmogne.
>> RIGOBERT KENMOGNE: Thank you very much.
As conclusion, I think the Internet Rights and Principles Coalition should develop a strong advocate for interference for better organization under government to respect environmental practices around internet freedom, digital rights, also this is a good exercise, it would be good to join other actor, digital innovator, NGOs, it is good advocacy to share the guideline for all and to Friday to respect and verify the internet on technology, it will give us the best nature of the next 100 years of our life.
Thank you very much. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.
I like that timeframe as well.  We have less time than 100 years to worry about, I think 100 ‑‑ if we get to the next 100 years, we're doing well.
Thank you. 
Ilias Iakovidis.
>> ILIAS IAKOVIDIS: I'm thinking more what we can do for others other than the others for us.  What you as a group behind the Article 4, you could actually go and implant ideas in other discussions around UN or beyond.
For example, there is a big discussion on AI, social issue, Human Rights issues on AI development.  We could add the dimension of the environment, because the deep learning, it is very polluting, one algorithm just in the training phase of a deep learning is ‑‑ it is kind of equivalent to five cars' lifetime emissions.  AI, there are computationally and environmentally friendly ways to teach AI to be smart.  This has to be taken, the way ‑‑ the social issues are taken into account and Human Rights, we have to implant the environmental issues.  There is a lot of examples on circulatory, about environmental issue, we have to go back, remind these people that this will not go far unless the social issue, Human Rights are taken in.  I would say that this group, it is the one that is a 360 going to the discussions and completes the dimension that's missing that's one thing.
Second, we should remind governments that there are green public procurements that are voluntary and unless we really make it very visible, loud, that that it cannot be ignored, that they should , do there are huge IT projects around the world.  There are huge IT projects that are procured by public money. 
>> MODERATOR: Sorry, who was that speaking just for the record? 
That's okay.
Just checking.
Could you continue? 
>> ILIAS IAKOVIDIS: Okay.
So basically, there are things that you can make to be difficult to ignore because they're ignored at the moment.  It is not because of lack of regulation or standards, they're basically ignored, a role you have to do, put it high on the level of the agenda so that it cannot be so ignored and we have in the E.U. already green public procurements for data centers, so we can tell a country that wants to install a data center what is the green way to do it, we can ‑‑ we have it for desktop, laptops, public offices, others that want to buy computer, thousand do it in a green way.  That's a huge knowledge that's not being used.
The last, if you could also be a little bit of an observer, I don't want do any difficult observatory infrastructure and resource incentive things, but if you could set up a Wiki putting this knowledge on worldwide access to this basic awareness, that's a good start.  You will be surprised how people are innovative to translate that into action.  Let's enable a bottom‑up idea by at least making the world aware on the large scale, we have our own European but we're just Europe and you can go much more beyond.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  To remind U we have a wiki, a core wiki based on the European dialogue for internet governance Plenary session that we developed in July so that work is already beginning.
I think Hanane high school to leave.  That leaves us with Noha, we have 3 more minutes to go for concluding comments.
>> NOHA ASHRAF ABDEL BAKY: Thank you.
I would like to recommend combining both statements B and C in one statement after simplifying it.  My takeaways are promoting a shared responsibility amongst all stakeholders, open the doors for innovation, innovative solutions and I can't recall the last one.
I will say whenever I remember it.  Thank you!
>> MODERATOR: Thank you!  At this point, I would like to suggest, if people could indicate just with the chat, I would like to suggest the following, that the concluding comments from our six speakers be added as outputs for the meeting, they're all clear policy points, and secondly, that the protocol 1 text either clause B separately and clause C or as suggested to combine them, to be put forth as an output, a draft output, the first protocol 1 for Article 4 of the Charter.  Does the meeting agree?  I would like to end with a very brief show of hands.  Why not!  We'll not lower any hands.  Just put plus 1, #metoo, just to get a sense so that our wonderful Rapporteur June, can we put it on the meeting?  To repeat, all policy comments, at least from the speakers and all others that we can glean are put together as our output and the second one that we put forward the draft protocol 1 namely, clause 4C and possibly D.
Thank you, keep going.
We have one more minute according to my clock.  Only room for accepting, no, you can just say minus 1, if you don't mind, you don't have to say plus, you can say 0.
It just to get a sense.  Or you can say abstain or only legal votes count, all votes are legal in this setting. 
>> ILIAS IAKOVIDIS: You're making fun of our American friends.
>> MODERATOR: I'm not making fun! 
>> NOHA ASHRAF ABDEL BAKY: I wanted to add what I had forgot, building trust with tech with software and hardware by making them sustainable by design.
>> MODERATOR: Yes.  Sustainability by design, which is to rip off privacy by design which is championed by the Council of Europe and is a European mantra.  Yeah. 
>> ILIAS IAKOVIDIS: We have a history behind the design, there is also a long history of accessibility by design and inclusion by design.  We can follow those footsteps on the sustainability by design.  It is not the first time that we're trying to squeeze something in the design.
>> MODERATOR: This thank you so much.  360º in means around the clock, around the compass.  If we're all happy, I would like to end this wonderful session.  We have an enormous amount of material.  Is someone copying and pasting the chat box now just so we have a real record.  If someone could do that.
I would like to thank our speakers for your professionalism, for your expertise, for your extraordinary amount of knowledge.  I have read an enormous amount, thank you for all of the attendees, and at this point, I would like to declare this meeting closed.
I wish you a happy, safe Friday, Namaste, be safe, be well and join the coalition and enjoy the rest of the IGF online and don't buy the latest model of your iPhone or your tablet!  Yet f just to think about it really concretely!  Think twice!  Thank you so much!  Good‑bye, everyone!  Bye! 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-bpf-gender-and-access^^

 
 Hello again to everyone, Giacomo, Tomas, you should be able to speak whenever you went.
>>  Eddie:  I'm unmuted now.  Can you hear me?
>>  Yes.
>>  Hi, everybody.
Tomas, Sorena, there is one of the speakers that says not reduced.
>>  Yes, hi, Tomas, we can hear you.
>>  Mr. Wendland, welcome.  If you can hear us, please test your mic and camera if everything is well.
>>  Yes, good, thank you very much:  Is that you, Serena?  I can hear you fin.  Hope you can hear me.
>> Sorina:  Yes.
>>  Mr. Wendland:  I'll test my slides.  I'll be with you in a second.  Is there a way to test my slides and take it off again?
>>  Sorina:  You should be able to share screen.  The button at the bottom.
>>  Mr. Wendland:  You can see that?
>>  Sorina:  Yes.
>>  That's probably better, right?
>>  Sorina:  There is no difference yet.
>>  Mr. Wendland:  Is that better?
>>  Sorina:  Yes.
>>  Mr. Wendland:  Is it working?
>>  Sorina:  Yes.
>>  Mr. Wendland:  Then I'll stop share.  I'll try the video if a few seconds.  Then we should be fine.  Good.
>>  Your attention, please.
>>  Sorina:  Yes, please.
>>  Good afternoon, good evening.  My name is Akimbo.  I'm online ready to support you with Richard as my cohost.  Sorina has been made cohost.  Carlos has been made cohost.  We are waiting for the meeting to start.  Once you give us the go ahead we'll start the streaming.  Prior to that, I would like us to remember that this session is recorded.  Under the IGF code of conduct and United Nations rules and recommendations.  Participants will be able to post their questions in the available box made prepared for them to post their questions.  And of course the moderators will teach you ones to raise your hand.  Who feel that they should respond with direct question.  Thank you.
>>  Sorina:  Thank you also.  I think we'll give it one or two more minutes as we have two panelists missing and then we go ahead.
>>  Okay.
>>  Sorina:  Hello, again, everyone.  I think we should start.  Giacomo, Carlos, when you are ready, let's start.
>>  I am ready.  Should we start with the first item of our agenda, Sorina?
>>  Sorina:  Yes.  Carlos:  Which is welcome and setting the scene.  Fantastic.  Let's see if I can set the scene.  First I will try to make a summary, very short summary, I have five minutes of what the BPFs are.  They provide a platform to exchange experiences addressing Internet policy issues, discuss and identify emerging and existing relevant practices and are expected to be multistakeholder processes and their outputs to be community‑driven, which has been the case until now.  BPFs prepare the work in a series of intercessional discussions that culminate in a BPF session.  At the end of an IGF meeting which is what we're doing right now and outcome or document our report which is published as part of the IGF output at the end.
The objective of the BPFs is to collect from the community's experiences which will serve as a resource to inform policy discussions, standards development basing the decisions as well as public understanding, awareness and discourse.
It's interesting that there is more change in the procedures to define which BPFs are approved and should be carried out by the Secretariat.  Which is the main limit we have is the capacity of the Secretariat to support the BPFs and this defines the number of BPFs which can be carried out.
For 2021, proposals for the BPF intercessional provision should be submitted by one which is typical.  BPF proposals should be submitted ahead of the first face‑to‑face meeting of the next year 2021 in the case.  Mag members submitting a proposal are expected to take on the role of mag facilitators should the mag select the topic for a BPF.  Proposals coming from the community, this is important, can be for new topics or topics that build on previous BPF work.
For 2020, we had four BPFs:  Data and new technologies, storing best practices and cybersecurity, gender impact on shaping Internet policy and protection preservation remuneration, creative work and collective wisdom from a local content perspective.  That's our local content BPF.
Last year, the BPF local content decided to extend this call for these issues with special emphasis on preservation and promotion of languages and cultural heritage.  For this year, the proposal was that the BPF concentrates its work on one key element which emerged from the 2019 outcome report.  The need to further explore issues related to the protection, preservation and remuneration of creative work and collective wisdom from a local content perspective.
So, the overall theme for 2020 has been summary:  Local and indigenous content in the digital space.  Protection, preservation and sustainability of creative work and traditional knowledge.
The BPFs conducted, our BPF for 20 conducted an online public survey to collect case studies and examples of good or relevant practices on outlying issues.  The input submitted by the community reviewed many topics of interest to be considered for the possible recommendations.
We managed to put together a list of possible recommendations at the end of the document you have received, which is the draft outcome document.  And there are organising four basic overall themes:  Protection, preservation and promotion of local and indigenous languages, of course; protection, reservation and promotion of cultural heritage; protection, preservation and promotion of other forms of local content in the digital age; and, finally, local content production, issues of sustainability and funding.
These four topics are followed by many recommendations, which is impossible to describe in this short time span, which is in the report.  I mean the outcome doc.  I trust you all will read the outcome document and send your comments and suggestions.
Thank you so, Sorina, over to you, I think.
>>  Sorina:  Thank you, Carlos.  We're going to spend the next five minutes or so going quickly, quickly through some of the elements in our draft report.  But as Carlos was saying, it's a bit of a long report.  It has about 60 pages.  So it's impossible to cover it all.  We'll just give you a glimpse into what's good with the kind invitation for everyone to do take a look.  And if you have comments, to keep them until the end of the IGF.  So let me find my share screen button and then we go quickly through that.
And this is it.  So the topic we have sort of chosen for this year's draft report based on input we received from the community was ‑‑ is local and indigenous content in the digital space:  Issues of protection, preservation and sustainability of creative work and traditional knowledge.
How we put our report together, we ran a public survey.  We didn't get too many responses.  But those we did receive were useful.
There were also submissions from several organizations who are actively working on issues within the BPF focus.  Some discussions held for online meetings with interested stakeholders, and then some additional research that the BPF conducted with the aim of shedding a bit more light on others successful with practices on the issues explored.
We structured the draft report, Carlos, I'm going to ask you to mute your mic, I think there is a bit of background noise.
>>  Carlos:  Oh, sorry.  Sorry.
>>  Sorina:  Thank you.  So as I was saying, the report is structured around four main topics.  And the first of them is protection, preservation and promotion of local and indigenous languages as Carlos was also mentioning a bit earlier.  And on the screen you can see some of the guiding questions that we have used in our attempt to find examples of good and successful practices on these issues.  And these are some of the case studies we underlined in the report.  So starting with UNESCO's work at the international level on supporting multilingualism and local and indigenous language.  And then some examples of what has been done to empower youth to create work on the Internet and we will speak more later.
Preserving local languages and fostering local content and we have Wikimedia speaking about some of their projects here.
Then some initiatives which are focused on the digitalization of indigenous languages.  A few examples of radio and TV stations in local languages who are also working towards digitalizing their distribution of content, I would say.
And then last but not least the facilitation of access to COVID‑related information in local languages via digital tools, something that we really miss this year.
The second large section of the report is on the protection, preservation and promotion of cultural heritage.  Again, via digital tools and how digital tools are used to protect and preserve cultural heritage.
And some of the examples here are libraries and how they have been using digital tools to preserve cultural heritage.  Then issues of intellectual property in the context of traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expression and WIPO will do a bit more on this.
And then local and indigenous communities to preserve their culture and knowledge and protect their intellectual property.
The promotion and negotiating of cultural heritage.  Then a few examples of how tech solutions have been used to manage and publish cultural collections and including the digitalization of intangible cultural heritage.
The third section of the report is on a few other examples of protecting, preserving, and promoting other forms of local content in the digital age.
And here we have been trying to shed light on libraries as facilitators of the creation of local content.
Then the user free online tools to encourage its creation.
Then examples of initiatives focused on providing funding and training for local artists to freely express themselves, again through digital means.
And last but not least, web archives as a way to preserve access to content in local languages.
And the last section but not less important was around issues of sustainability and funding for the production of local content and its distribution through digital means.  And here the case studies and good practices we have looked at related to using digital tools to empower local producers and especially local artisans, how e‑commerce infrastructures have been used to support rural communities, production distribution, monetization to some extent of local content then a quick look at governmental policies to incentivize the production of local content and services in local languages.  And here the BPF has been doing a bit more work than previous years.  So in this report, we just remind the community about that previous work.
And, finally, local newspapers, the relation between promoting local languages and dealing with sustainability challenges.
So these have been the four main areas we focused on.  And as Carlos was saying, the report ends with some recommendations around those four main areas.  Here are just a few examples.  I'm not going to go through them now because we're going discuss them during the debate section of this session.  This is just the quick glimpse for you to see that we do have recommendations in the report.  And there's sort of an encouragement for you to scroll through the report, if not the whole document, at least the recommendations section and add your own contributions to what else we can do to support local content in the digital age.
And with this I end and many thanks to everyone who has been contributing to this report.
Carlos, Giacomo, back to you.
>>  Carlos:  Giacomo now, right?  For the presentations and discussions.
>>  Giacomo:  Yes, it's me.  I was trying to unmute myself.  I hope all the panelists are with us.  I will briefly introduce all of them.  We have the order in the programme The Guarda of UNESCO, the programme specialist for the supporting linguistic diversity in local and indigenous cultures.  Wend Wendland from WIPO who is responsible for the division of intellectual property in the context of traditional knowledge.
And we have then Eddie Avila, Director of Rising Voices,el he is an Davenport from Wikimedia, public policy counsel.  And then we have Stephan.  At IFLA, the library association.
And Rhodri from S4C Wales.  And Carlos Garcia Morlexer, editor of the La voz del Calicia.
So, let's go directly to Garda if she's with us?  Christina?  Please.  The floor is yours.
>>  Christina:  Thank you very much.  Indeed I'm using my colleague Christina's, but very happy to be all together with you.  And of course many thanks for all contributors who contributed to the preparation of this report.
And without further delay, I would just like to share what are UNESCO's views in connection to the protection, preservation of local content.  And then in the context of this report, we wanted to draw attention to the importance of languages.  Because languages are something that is really close to our heart.  And local content is an expression of very often a Century old wisdom and reflection of current realities which are colded in languages.
And what we can see today many languages are disappearing.  And there is kind of a stable trend where languages and especially the users switch to dominant languages.  And local content, of course, is in danger, as well, because it won't be created, it won't be passed to the next generation.
And during my short intervention today, maybe I would like just to draw attention to a few important aspects, reasons why as some languages are more or less vulnerable and why we see less and less local content being created and especially shared through different channels including, of course, the community members.
But one important element that I would like to emphasize since early beginning when we speak about languages and local content, we first of all have to speak about the users.  Language users and signers.  Because we are first ones who create content by those who are sharing the content and there are those who are preserving the content.  These are not theoretical aspects.  They are real human beings who live in different situations around the world depending on the social, cultural, economic, political situations.  And what is important to make sure what language endangerment according to UNESCO is in danger the younger generation, children no longer use that language.  And this is why we would like to emphasize where the local content should not be disconnected from users but as well would look very carefully to the different language and as well age groups.  And if children are no longer learning languages in mother tongue in their home environments and we don't have appropriate content in those languages, probably we will sooner or later will switch to more dominant languages.  And, where for, dominant, content available in dominant languages.
And this is why there's a clear trend around the world where we have more and more content created in the dominant languages.  And there is a need, an urgent need, to encourage creation of local content generated by the users themselves, generator produced by professional organizations or institutions.
And what is well important to take into account with demographic situation of communities, language speakers, in most communities, where content is produced because the small and vulnerable community is the more external pressures it will face to adopt to the dominant languages.  And from one side it is a very positive phenomena.  When we learn more languages, we become more multilingual.  We know more than one language, we are able to communicate with each other.  We can share our views and learn from each other.  But at the same time, we consume more and more content which is produced or generated in dominant languages.  So it means in a way we are leaving some speakers, some users, and I would emphasize signers, those who use sign language, behind, living with smaller languages and leaving behind with development.
Because we'll see that there are many factors that are related to education systems where education systems are based on monolingual curriculas where the curricula text box resources are designed and we are not necessarily localized, bringing real life stories, which would be built on local content once again.
And obviously globalization.  We speak clearly there is a massive migration from rural to urban areas.  And local content, which was very much appreciated, maybe circulated, shared by older population community, especially those which live in remote areas and once family moves to urban areas, disconnection sometimes is interrupted disturbed enough because we could see with technology nowadays contributes to kind of helping to ensure the family ties using a video conferences like we have today or even more simple solutions.  But at the same time, there is a gradual loss of native languages, graduate loss and replacement with the dominant languages.  And therefore our local content becomes more and more used for in dominant languages.
So, what we would like to emphasize as an organisation, there is a need to raise awareness around the world.  And we have one of the really unique normative instruments around New World which is recommendation 2003, which is concerning the promotion, use of multilingualism, universal access to cyberspace where UNESCO encourages all stakeholders in particular Member States to develop multilingual content tools and resources, establish, as well, systems and support professional networks and partnerships.
Next year we will be releasing world authors of languages, which will be an online repository for linguistic diversity and multilingualism and we will be inviting many stakeholders to share more data that they have to have more complete picture of languages and as well indirectly to local content.  Each we will be as well release a world report which will summarize data we will collected last years.
But most importantly what I would like to encourage today, what everybody who is participating and will be seeing this session later on will join our efforts and contribute to organisation of indigenous languages.  I know many of you are aware but last year 209, it was a year of indigenous languages.  We know quite well, what many indigenous languages are in danger.  Actually majority of them around the world are spoken by smaller communities, very often in rural, very rural areas.  They are freely limited infrastructure, conditions and of course we can observe as well during the COVID‑19 global pandemic where most of those communities, as well, are in bigger danger because we do not necessarily receive live, important life preventive information about COVID and what are the measures, what are the solutions in place which are not provided in local languages.  And where for, initiatives and I would say international cooperation mechanism like international decade is under a unique opportunity for us to first of all raise awareness about this issue as well to mobilize resources where we would be institutional, human resources, financial resources, and as well to position language and together with local content which would go together by promoting multilingualism and diversity to come immediately local content the creation and dissemination issues in the global agenda.
And I would like to probably complete this first part by saying what we would like to see what the future strategic global development agendas would address these issues more in more obvious way and would have more opportunities for all stakeholders to contribute.
And to conclude, I would like, as well, just to share information UNESCO leased universality in the stream work which is a very concrete project which includes a set of 303 indicators to assess how well the national stakeholders perform on the principles related to rights, accessibility, multistakeholder participation.  And we have already national assessments ongoing in 21 countries across five contents.  And it's very interesting to see what it actually contributes to our ongoing work‑related to the international indigenous languages world report which there is a need for more efforts and especially developed enabling environment which would force online content creation in local languages, inform us.  And there is a need obviously for, I would say, language‑friendly policies for preservation and promotion of cultural and linguistic diversity online.
There are many examples where public information available on websites, governmental websites, in public domain are not available in non‑dominant, obviously non‑national languages.  And where for communities, which use those languages, do not have full access to information, are not able to participate in meaningful, cultural, life in general.
So it is important that this work continue.  And we would have more evidence‑based data.  And those issues we object able to convinces policies and decisionmakers.
I'll stop here.  And I will return now to the session.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you.  You said the voice of indigenous are not heard.  And you talk a lot more than what was expected.  So I hope that the other will be more diligent because they don't have the excuse to be minority of oppressed minority.  So I give the floor now to WIPO that is not an oppressed minority.  And we have with us Wend Wendland that is the Director of the traditional knowledge division.  Please, Wend, explain what you are doing because a lot of initiatives are you following this field exactly.
>>  Mr. Wendland:  Giacomo, thank you, good evening, good afternoon.  It's lovely for me to be here and lovely for WIPO to be here.  Thank you for having included us.
And you're doing amazing work.  I've read the report very closely.  And I think that I'll be very concise.  So don't worry about time.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you.
>>  Mr. Wendland:  I'll be very quick.  And I'm going actually just highlight five of our activities, of our practices which actually I think connect quite directly to your report and to the recommendations.
I just now need to find a way of ‑‑
>>  Giacomo:  Sharing the screen.
>>  Mr. Wendland:  Right.  Exactly.  Can you see the screen?
>>  Giacomo:  Yes, we can see perfectly.
>>  Mr. Wendland:  Perfect.  Now the next challenge is to change the pages.  There you go.
So five things.  The first one is work we've been doing for many years with indigenous peoples to empower and equip them to record their own cultural expressions.
This is ‑‑ this couldn't be more about making local content.  But from an intellectual property point of view, what we are doing is putting the indigenous peoples behind the camera so they are the producers of the footage and of the recordings.  And, therefore, under conventional copyright law and enabling rights laws as you may know, they own the copyright.  So they are sovereign.  They have agency.  They are developing their own content with our equipment, which we actually give them.  We train them on it.  And we give it to them.  But then from an IP point of view, from an intellectual property point of view, they own the IP rights, which is empowering and important for them.
Secondly, and ‑‑ knows this very well.  We work closely with UNESCO on international year last year, 2019 I think it was.  We have a very short animation which we've had translated or dubbed into indigenous languages.  We have it in northern Siamese, southern Sarmi.  We also have it in Kidis.  And we have an open access policy at WIPO.  And we are very keen and interested in partnering with others who wish to help us to translate and dub this animation.
As I said, it is very nice.  It is very short of the it's 4‑1/2 minutes long.  And we're looking for partners to work with us and, again, making this content accessible in indigenous and local languages.
Number, three, our indigenous entrepreneurship programme is aimed at empowering indigenous peoples to make strategic and effective and smart use of intellectual property tools in their businesses and in their projects, including in e‑commerce.  We just running a series of webinars on that now.
But let me introduce to you Tia, who is from ‑‑ she's a Mari from New Zealand.  We currently mentor 24 indigenous women from around the world, each with a little business.  It could be a design.  It could be a medicine.  It could be a cosmetic.  That a little business or project that raises intellectual property issues.  And we have many partners we work with in this.  So Tia, her project is to establish a database of authentic indigenous images and authentic indigenous sounds that third parties can then access and then license.  And we are helping her with a copyright management of that, setting up copyright guidelines, protocols, and model contracts and so on.
Very practical.  And I think, as I said in the beginning, that connects directly with the report that you have produced.
In this context, a little shoutout for Jane Anderson's work that is in your report, as well.  We partially fund this.  And it's fantastic work.  And it's well‑described in your report.  The context platform.
And then fourthly I noticed in your report and the recommendations many references to libraries.  And I think IFLA might be participating in this.  We do a lot of work with museums, libraries and archives around managing IP questions and IP issues around intangible cultural heritage in their collections, whether that is traditional music, traditional art, designs, performances, oral histories and so on.  And we actually are busy updating guide at the moment.
And then, finally, I wanted to mention the ongoing norm setting that's taking place at WIPO.  We have a committee that has been meeting for many years now.  It's dealing with a very difficult issue.  And that is whether traditional knowledge and cultural expressions ought to be protected as a form of intellectual property.
Other work we do that I've been describing so far is working with in the existing IP system smart and strategic use of trademarks and copyright and so on.
But what this work is about is developing Sui generous or specially tailored intellectual property like systems.  We work with countries at the national level and in the international level.  We have a process underway at WIPO.  I'm giving you the name of the body there.
And this committee has been meeting for many years now.  They are draw texts that the Member States and the being stakeholders with many indigenous people who participate actively in this work.  And I've put up a little picture of what some of our meetings look like.  Unfortunately, as you can imagine, we're not meeting at the moment because of the pandemic.  But this is what a typical session looks like.
And the work is advancing, albeit slowly, these are very complex issues, as you can imagine.  And the key policy issues really that the delegates are pouring over, grappling with are the definition of subject matter, the beneficiaries, the scope of rights, and the exceptions to those rights.
So I promised to be short and to the point.  I hope I have been.  But I hope I also left time for the others and certainly I hope to have left time for Q & A.  Thank you so up.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you, Wend.  Very interesting ideas.  I was looking for these pages.  If you can put it in the chat, I think it would be useful for everybody to have a look at what are you doing and how your negotiations are going.
Then the next ‑‑ and to both of you, to Irma and to Wend, I suggest to listen carefully to the last example that we will have in the panel, one is La Voz.  And the other is S4C, how media could change the reality and the inverted curve about the use of languages without disappearing.  I think those are two interesting experiences there.
Eddie Avila, rising voices.  To empower indigenous youth to create more cultural linguistical diverse Internet.  Eddie, please.
>>  Eddie:  Yes, thank you very much.  Can you see my slides?
>>  Giacomo:  Yes, we can see your screen.
>>  Eddie:  Great.  Thanks for having me.  My name's Eddie Avila, the Rising Voices director from organizational Global Voices.
And we have been working with groups of indigenous language digital activists around the world.  And any time I have an opportunity to talk about their amazing work, I'm glad to do so.
And so we've been working officially since 2014 when we convened the first gathering of indigenous language digital activists in Mexico in the City of Oaxaca together with the library in Circo.  Before that, we saw an emerging movement of young people who were taking to the Internet to share their language and culture.  It was a very ad hoc type of activity.  Many people did so in isolation.  They didn't think anyone else was doing what they were doing.  And so we launched an open call for this gathering.  And so Rising Voices has been working to convene spaces, facilitate spaces so that young people who are using the Internet to promote their language can learn from one another.
And so we launched this workshop in Oaxaca, and we received about 150 different applications for about 30 slots.  And that's when it really clicked.  We saw young people who said "oh, I thought I was the only person doing this.  I didn't realise such and such was also doing similar work."
We're talking about creating social media campaigns.  Many were localizing free software into their languages.  Some were writing on Wikipedia.  Others were creating videos and audios and just very diverse mix of content.  But most importantly it was a place for people to connect and share experiences, share challenges.  Many times that are linguistic challenges that people face.  It's not simply as easy as writing on the Internet.  But rather there are some considerations, rather.  But the writing styles, you know, what happens when there's not a term for a new word, it doesn't exist in a language?  What do communities do to overcome those challenges?
There may be technical challenges where there's not a keyboard, even, to write on, to write in their language.
And also some social and cultural challenges that many groups have faced.  Maybe some of the questions about what to share on the Internet is really important to talk about.
So these meetings were about coming up with solutions but rather a space to talk about that.  And I think we achieved that.
When we first started 2014 with the first workshop in Mexico, we decided to replicate it in other countries.  We did one in Colombia.  We organized one in Ecuador, in Peru, in Bolivia where I'm currently located, in Guatemala and also in Chile.  And these were a place for people to meet one another and to carry over their work online.
So, all this work, all this talk about virtual connections, about, you know, remote learning, it's good.  But I think it'll never replace in person meetings.  And so those in person meetings really set the foundation for these ongoing connections.
And many of the people who connected in 2014 are still in touch today.  So I think that was a really important thing.
And so another activity at Rising Voices through our ‑‑ language activism in Spanish.  In addition to these gathers, we ran a series of social media campaigns.  And so these are all on Twitter.  And every week a different language activist takes ‑‑ manages the account.  And so they're here.  They're able to share their experiences.  Again, share these challenges.  Share whatever they want about their language for a week.  And then they rotate.
And so the Latin American one is called Act Lenguas.  I'll share the Lynn income the chat.  But it's real ‑‑ link in the chat.  It's a way for people to talk directly about their experiences.  With no filter.  With no, you know, media.  No need to wait for the media to come and cover their project or their activities.  But they could share it directly with others who are interested.
And so these campaigns are a way to amplify those voices.
Latin American one started in 2019.  In conjunction with the international year of indigenous languages and it carried on strong this year and we hope to continue next year and through the decade.
We've also ‑‑ here's one example.  So every week a different person takes ‑‑ manages the account and shares their experience.  We replicated to varying degrees of success in other parts of the world.  We had one for Africa language activists.  Also in North America.  And now in Asia, as well.
And so these have been really interesting experiences doing outreach and getting to know ‑‑ 
(connection to Zoom meeting lost, reconnecting).
In addition, Rising Voices has a directory that we're starting up.  It's still in a about way in Latin America where we invite people who have projects to share the information so we could be classified and categorized in a directory, like in a database.  So it will make it easier for someone else doing similar work for others doing similar things.
For example, if you're a speaker of the Quechua language, you could look and search all the projects working with Quechua, or all the projects working in Paraguay.  But also by tools.  So you could see who's doing what with podcasting.  So it's a very easy way to see what others are doing.  It's very much a work in progress.  And happily, there's more and more projects by the month.  When we started this in 2014, there were only a handful of projects in many countries.  But we've seen an explosion of interest.  I think people are seeing the power and the possibilities of using the Internet for promoting language.
But I think more importantly, these directories are designed to inspire people.  I think the Internet is not necessarily on for everyone.  I think there's different contexts involved.  And the language that has 25 speakers and only the elderly are speaking the language, then maybe the Internet using digital activism is not the priority here.
So I think the context is really, really important to see how people can adapt their realities, but more importantly they choose to do this.  This is not necessarily imposed upon anyone, any community.  But, rather, a community steps forward.  I am seeing what this group is doing.  I want to do the same for our language.  How can we share information?  How can we share experiences?  So it's really important to showcase and highlight the amazing work being done across the region.
And then ‑‑ sort of finally, I think is that people are taking matters into their own hands.  They're not waiting around for governments or institutions or the tech companies to create this content for them.  But, rather, they're doing it themselves.
I remember when a friend back in 2007 when he started to work with blogs, when I would search on the Internet for my language, I wouldn't find anything.  So we want to take it into their own hands.  So when the next generation comes along, they don't find the same void of information that we found.  So we're thinking ahead kind of laying the groundwork for more people.
And so I think finally just kind of my messages that just an amazing young people around the world, Latin America especially which I know probably better because I'm based here in Bolivia.  But they're the ones doing the really heavy lifting.  They're taking matters into their own hands.  You know, it's very much fueled by a passion and a love of their languages and the culture.  But they're finding solidarity with others.  And I think that's what we're trying to do with Rising Voices is to build those connections, build those networks.  We have networks from those different meetings.  But now we're also facilitating a regional network of digital activists in Latin America.  Right now we have 23 members from 7 different countries.  And I think they're ready to, you know, connect and partner.  And I think that's the las an the message that I want to send, the Internet is not a image teal collusion for language revitalization but rather it's part of an overall are strategy that includes academics, includes linguists, includes public policymakers, includes tech companies and organizations.  And I think we're ready to be those bridges that connect those people.  And I think one really good example is that Rising Voices was a partner in the international year of indigenous languages and that really opened the door for some of these young with people to get involved.  And I think there's lots of really interesting plans going forward and really looking forward to the decade.  I think it's going to be ‑‑ raise the profile of many of these young people and their work so that they can have a ripple effect and affect change in their communities but on a larger scale.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you very much, Eddie.  You also didn't respect the timing.  But thanks so many interesting things.  I hope that the other will forgive you.  Not me because as moderator, I cannot.
I hope that I will be more luck with Allison Davenport from Wikimedia Foundation that is the next speaker.
>>  Hi.
>>  Giacomo:  Did I scare you?  You will keep the five minutes?
>>  Allison:  Yes, I will.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you.
>>  Allison:  I just want to mention because of that, everything that I'm about to talk about right now is also included in the report.  So I really encourage people to check out the report.
And thank you so much for having us today.
I am from the Wikimedia Foundation.  We are the host of the Wikimedia projects, the most well known of which is Wikipedia.  And I'm going to talk to you today a little bit about how both the structural setup of our projects and specific incentive programmes have helped to grow local languages and locally relevant content on Wikipedia.
So I'm going to start with those structural encouragements because it's also a good introduction to Wikipedia if you're not really familiar with how it works.
So, so Wikipedia is an online encyclopedia that is entirely created and edited by our community members.  It's separated by language and not country.  And we currently have around 300 different languages on Wikipedia itself.
What these two aspects do for local content and local language preservation, it means that different language communities can decide for themselves within our policies what content they want to focus their time and energy on developing.
This helps make content much more relevant and more likely to engage new users.
And, further, by separating by language, we're able to create a Forum for languages which may be overcrowded or crowded out in countries that speak a much more dominant indigenous ‑‑ or official language.
One other structural element I'd like to mention is that we are a nonprofit platform.  And we are committed to being ad‑free.  This is really huge for our expansion into other locations and other languages.
One a for‑profit platform considers breaking into a new market, they have to consider things like the cost of translation for Terms of Service or the cost of content moderation in an unfamiliar language.
Because Wikipedia is built around how our editors do their ‑‑ make their own decisions about content on the platform, these considerations are not as relevant and also not as costly for the Wikimedia Foundation.
Ultimately, because an encyclopedia is a large amount of written text at its core, we tend to have aligned but not identical goals with the communities that are interested in preserving local languages.
Wikipedia is made up of a series of diverse, interconnected, comprehensive written articles and that's attractive to people who want large quantities of written language online.
Obviously this does not address languages which are spoken only.  And also puts the onus on indigenous language speakers to moderate their own platforms, which can be an issue for Wikipedias that are particularly small and don't have the sort of bandwidth to protect against coordinated disinformation campaigns, for example.
So those are some of the structural elements.  I'd also like to focus on two very specific initiatives that we have done to help grow indigenous languages on the projects.
First is a partnership that we undertook.  Yes, very quickly.  First a partnership that we undertook with both Google and the centre for Internet in society.  This was a programme called Glow:  Growing local language on Wikipedia.  The programme provided material support in the form of Chromebooks and Internet stipends for people working on the programme.  And also material incentives for article creation in the form of a contest with prizes.
This initial project helped volunteers create 4500 new articles in languages and improved insights into goggle's translation tools, which we think of as an important part of but not our entire language improvement strategy.  Since that time, over 14,000 Wikipedia articles have created with that content translation tool, which was developed as a part of that process.
I'd also like to highlight in light of COVID‑19 our partnerships with both public organizations and individual companies to get public health information out there in different languages.  We partnered with mole skin earlier this year to translate COVID‑19 information into 16 different African languages.  This was done in partnership with our African user groups.  And currently their articles about COVID‑19 are in 175 languages in Wikipedia.
We have just announced a recent collaboration with the World Health Organisation to release anti‑disinformation and public health information infographics on Wikipedia commons, one of Wikipedia's sister sites, under a free license so that they can be translated by anyone in our community to be spread throughout the full roster of our languages.
These very specific injections of, frankly, both resources and capital into these initiatives have really made a huge difference in growing these local language projects.  And so while we believe that those structural incentives are sort of what made Wikipedia popular for this early on, we also believe that these types of specific initiatives need to carry on in order to continue to see this growth.  Thank you.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you, Allison.  We are slowly improving.  For the last one, I will succeed only with the last speaker.  This is my chance.
Now it has been mentioned by many the role of the libraries in preserving and promoting the local languages and the local cultures.  And so we have Stephan from IFLA, that is the policy and advocacy manager.  I ask him to take the floor and to explain us what is exactly what they're doing in this field.
>>  Stephen:  Thank you, Giacomo, I will do my best to stick to five minutes.
>>  Giacomo:  Another under fake name.  We have problem with identity in this meeting.  Okay.  I take note.
>>  Stephen:  Okay.  When IFLA approached the govern net governance questions, the international federation of library association, we tend to think of a triangle of connections, competencies and content.  While libraries are strongly engaged in delivering content and skills, it's great to come back to content with this section because this is what brings libraries online and where libraries focus.
The topic for today is particularly relevant for libraries as we focus more and more on how we maximize our potential to be inclusive, to reach out to serve every group, not only in the work we do to preserve but also in supporting creativity for all.
To start with preservation.  Libraries and archives have a clear and recognized role including by UNESCO in ensuring the survival of documentary heritage including in digital form.
This covers both preservation of born digital heritage, for example, through web harvesting activities, and the conservation and digitization of physical materials.
Usually this duty covers all types of heritage.  We can see now how the choices made in the past about what heritage was worth preserving affects the way we see the present.  And it is important work ongoing to make sure that we are open and fair in our choices for the future.
Moreover, there can also be a tendency to think only of the biggest institutions involved in preservation.  National archives.  National libraries.
However, institutions at all levels have a crucial mission in collecting stories, testimonials, materials about their own areas and making them available.  This goes from the smallest public and community library, school libraries.  These are institutions which are there for this purpose.
This work can be essential in capturing histories, stories that might otherwise disappear.  And so to help ensure cultural survival and continuity.
For example, University of Alberta libraries work with born digital francophone materials in Canada or the work of libraries in Singapore with the Tamil digital heritage project.
Libraries in so many places also creating COVID archives, giving people the opportunity to record their own experiences and histories of the times they're living through.
Crucially, though, preservation is not a dead end.  While of course it's important that today's expression is safeguard for the future, it also needs to be available for the present.  And this is because from our point of view preservation, sharing, access and creation are all part of the same cycle.  What better way of encouraging creativity in any community than by surrounding people with it.
Therefore, libraries of all shapes and sizes are working hard to give access locally relevant materials that they hold as a basis not just for education and research but also for further creativity.  Falling cost of digitization and digital platforms really helps in this regard.
If you look at the report, there are many examples from Australia, Canada, Lithuania and Qatar all focused on stimulating local creativity.  There's a great example from Aruba in particular where the national library has been making content available during the lookdown to the Internet archives national emergency library as a means of supporting learning in the language.
Of course in doing this we recognize it's vital to apply professional judgment and ethics especially when working with indigenous materials in order to respect the interests of creators.
In terms of what's needed we need to share ourselves to respect needs, to make sure we're not missing anyone else in our efforts to collect and safeguard collections for the future and to support creativity in all groups.
We need laws and practices that allow for preservation, for sharing, for learning, including internationally.
Especially for groups scattered across borders or whose homes are threatened by climate change, this international approach is vital.
We need to find paths to not only reward the creators of today but also develop the creators of tomorrow.  And this requires careful choices around policy in order not simply to reinforce existing dominance but rather to promote local and indigenous creativity for the value that it is.  Libraries stand by and look to help.  Thank you.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you.  We are improving vastly than expected.  Thank you for the important remarks.  I think it would be useful if you could publish the links to the example that you mentioned, about the Australian, the Lithuanian and the Qatari libraries because I think there are web pages that could be useful for everybody to have a look at.
Now let's go to two examples of media.  Well, until now, we have other example institution, international organisation, activists network.  Now we have two media.
The first one is the S4C, Rhodri, which is responsible for the digital content of the S4C channel in Wales is with us.  Rhodri, the floor is yours.
>>  RHODRI:  Thank you very much.  I will share my screen.
Does that come up now?
>>  Giacomo:  Yes we can see it now.  Thank you.
>>  RHODRI:  So I will talk a little bit about the challenges, the opportunities and the content we've made in spite of those challenges in Welsh language.
>>  Giacomo:  Could you give some numbers?  Because if you look at the chart, one of the recording questions is how big the community we are talking about?
>>  RHODRI:  Absolutely.  The welsh language is spoken by around 600 to 800,000 speakers in Wales.  There are some unknown amount of speakers in England.  And there are some international speakers.  But, you know, roughly 600,000 speakers or the populations of 3 million in Wales.  So that's about 20 percent of the population.
I can give some more detailed stats in the chat if you want afterwards.
>>  Giacomo:  Perfect.  Great, thanks.
>>  RHODRI:  The challenges we face as a Welsh broadcaster is the ubiquity of English language content.  We are in a sea of content in English.  And our neighbors are making a lot of it.
So finding the attention of people is quite hard to do and that's a big challenge for us.  People are watching less television in a linear way.  Video on demand is squeezing public service broadcasting and other types, as well.  Technology is quite tricky at times and that of course has a cost.  Developing the new technologies all the time is quite difficult for a small broadcaster like us.
The speed of change is also very, very rapid, making things quite tricky.
So, we've begun our journey for digital transformation probably about three or four years ago.  And the main thing, really, is to try to move with the audiences as well as find new audiences.
The viewing population on television is aging.  And we want to improve our connection with people and really help give people the opportunity to engage with the Welsh language.
So there's a big shift now from TV first to do we do digital first?  And how do we grapple with that?  So here are some examples of how we've been addressing this.
The first one I want to show is Hansh, which is a social media content brand that we've produced aimed at 16 to 34‑year‑olds.  In 2016, we were losing this audience very quickly.  I had to make some decisions about what we were going to do.
So the opportunity was:  Social media.  And we decided to go all in.  To make ‑‑ change all the policy for making content for this age on those platforms.  Comedy, opinion, user‑generated content.  By this year we've grown to 50,000 followers on social and more than 9 million views a year.  And this has expanded to documentaries, Tik Tok, podcasts.
And I guess the lesson with this is always move with your audience.
We've tried really to address their concerns and be where they are.  That's the key thing.  I think Eddie mentioned this, as well, in his talk.  You have to go with where young people are accessing media and creating media, more importantly.
Another quick one is Welsh on Alexa.  So speech technologies are going to be a huge deal in the coming decades.  We're going to see it become everywhere.  And the access to this in even sort of midrange languages is not there yet.
So, you know, what are we going to do about this?
Well we're not going to be able to have Alexa in Welsh totally.  We want, though, to see how things might work.  So, we made a scale with a Welsh technology company which could understand Welsh commands through some clever coding and produce some speech, as well.
And this Welsh language podcast scale gives access to 50 Welsh language podcasts.  It is not perfect.  But it opens the door for companies like Amazon to think and consider how they might interact with smaller languages in the future.  And I think the technology partner for us was essential here to give us access to that enormous company.
So this is our online player, video player, click.  We've tried to grow this area because our audience on television is aging very rapidly.  And this is where we have to go, you know, we've invested in technology to get better data and better understanding of people.  But commissioned to go online first.  This means respectable girls.  It's our first online drama.  It won awards in the UK.  We're trying to shift in this direction.
So even though it's expensive curvatures do need to invest in technology.
Welsh learning?  Absolutely crucial.  If we are going to increase the amount of people speaking Welsh, then Welsh learning for adults as well as children is important for us.
And TV is not the greatest tool for learning languages.  And so we've turned this on its head, as well, trying to make as much online content as possible.  But the key thing here is working with Welsh learning providers who are teaching people.  What do they need?  What kind of video do they need for their courses?  And really collaborating very, very closely.  This video example shows the level of ability up at the top.  And so we try to target and do stuff which they can use.
One little example of how we worked with other languages and use maybe our position as a multilanguage with some resources to help those with less resource.  Answer Q, Q's adventure is our preschool brand in children 1 to 5 years old.  And we wanted to make a new learning app.  Literacy, numeracy and these kind of things.  But, you know, I've been speaking to some people in the Celtic media festival from Brittany in the Brett on language and corn well, which is a very small language in the UK, who have no resources, really, for making these kind of things.  And we thought we're investing in the technology.  Why can't we build it for them, as well?
And so we've started from the beginning to make it localizable into Brett on and Cornish.  And this is about to be launched in the coming months before Christmas.  I'm very excited, really.  We're able to share with others the technology that we build.  I think that's quite an important point for minority languages.
The sixth and final example for me is local media.  Now, this is a new area for us.  We are a broadcaster.  We usually connect from one to many.  That's traditionally the way.  But, you know, we are thinking the standard is a shift.  And in order for us to be relevant with our audience and be part of the linguistic landscape in Wales, in a real way, I think we have to engage with local media on a micro‑local level.
The opportunity here exists in that people are already creating media.  To quite a high standard.  Phones have very good microphones and cameras these days.  And some additional help with skills building can make ‑‑ have great results.  And so we're doing a pilot here with an area called angle C.  And looking to see whether this can work at that cross Wales in different areas.  And really a big part of this, as well, is about collaboration with the audience and really seeking to help create linguistic spaces beyond broadcasting.
So that's a big quick ride through some of the aspects that we've been involved in.  If you have any questions, I can send some links and please get in touch.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you, RHODRI.  I see the broadcast you were able to keep within the limits.  You were 30 seconds more than scheduled.  Okay.
>>  RHODRI:  That's great.
>>  Giacomo:  That's good.  For broadcasting time is fine.  Now we'll see the skills of stay in time for the printed media because we have the next example is from the printed media world, Tomas from La Voz de Galicia.
I found very interesting because the printed media has seen always as something old from the past, et cetera.  And we have an example where starting from very far can go very far.  Please, Tomas.
>>  Tomas:  Thank you very much.  I couldn't listen to RHODRI perfectly, so let me know if you cannot listen to me, right, in case I have any problems with my connection.
So I will try to be fast.  We are an independent newspaper founded 138 years ago.  We are the fourth biggest newspaper in Spain with a half million readers every day from the printed edition and 14 million unique users every month.
We have a similar model because we are a global newspaper, a national brand.  For example, the United States election is a big topic for us.  It's not only that we are a small hyper local newspaper, but we also have 13 different hyper local editions with local correspondents.  So we try to be everything in the print industry.  Not only hyper local.  Not national newspaper but everything.
Our mission as a company is to defend our readers' interests, which is the same as our small hyper local community interest, which at the end of the day is ‑‑ Galacia is a region in Spain with 2.7 million people.  And as I will explain before, as we have two official languages, which is Spanish and Galatian languages.
And, for example, projects ago we bought another local legacy brand due to the economic crisis 10 years ago.  And we bought the brand and now we have another company in the neighborhood of Estorian region.
But languages, you have spoken a lot before.  We in both newspapers we publish in the two languages.  Spanish in the local community language which is Galatian and ‑‑ for La Voz.
I would like to say that two elements that having the limits of gal Asia beyond the administrative borders.  One is that Galatian language and the other is la Voz.  It emerged in our local level has been bilingual media.  But since its establishment in 1882 with obviously big for the years of the Spanish military dictatorship when the language was banned, was prohibited.  We couldn't use it.
The language is spoken by 3.2 million people.  We are two fifths of a million people in gal Asia as I told you 1 million more of Galatian people living abroad especially in countries like Argentina, Uruguay, Mexico and Switzerland and Germany.
The main reason for us using both languages in the same newspaper is that our two languages coexist without any problem.  I mean, we try to be like middle of our community.  This is how it works.  This is how we do our job every day.  Write an article in Spanish or in Galatian.  Or even we can write an article in Spanish and people for someone speaking in gal Asia.
So, with this single ‑‑ I have to explain what are our challenges as a company and be sustainable in where we are living?
So the print news business has been in huge for past 20 years.  Since then especially during the last 10 years, we are developing a huge transition from a paper first to a digital first medium.
In parallel in the last three years we started the shift of our business model.  18 months ago we started with subscription model in our website.
We think that the only possible way to make this sustainable business especially at the local level is if real loyal readers compromise themselves by paying a subscription.  This is because we strongly believe that the future size of local news organizations will be set by the volume of subscribers that we are able to reach and the price they are willing to pay.
The other business, like print sales, we know we are in negligible form.  And ‑‑ hopefully it last.  There is no possibility of growing after.  And if we talk about advertising local brands will not be able to compete with huge global players like goggle, Facebook or ‑‑
They are much more effective.  And we at the end of the day we have the weaker side of the value chain.
And, okay, last but not least I have some good news and some bad news.  Good news is ‑‑ has celebrated everything.  They also the opportunity for us as a local news organisation to demonstrate that we are unique, useful and even essential part of our communities.  Many ‑‑ first event in the Reese et history that has global, national, especially hyper local interest.  And this is the reason why we are doing extremely well with not only with audience which was expected but also with subscription model which is a very recent model.  It is not a material business; right?
Bad news.  This is expensive.  The editors may think that in the near future they will not have to spend in print materials anymore, which probably will be right.  But the technologies we need for an intelligent reader revenue operation are expensive.  And could become impossible for some small local news organizations to stay in the game.  This would be a big barrier for local news.
And as someone else mentioned before, some new technologies like Google Assistant or Amazon Alexa, et cetera, are not considered in our small languages, at least in the following years.  So the way news will be consumed in the near future, maybe there is a risk that we are not going to be there because the technologies will not allow us to be there.
So this was everything I had to say.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you very much, Tomas.  Very interesting example where the Internet was able to overcome the distance because 1 million of your readers are at the other side of the Atlantic.  So only with the Internet you can reach them properly.
This is a message of hope.
What is not hope is that we finish our time because this was supposed to be also the space for public debate.  Unfortunately, there is not so much left.  And I would only give the floor to Sorina and Carlos for the conclusion.
I want to thank all the people that along the year have worked with us to prepare this panel and to prepare the report from WIPO, with victor with us, lane an from one, from IFLA.  One has not participated but he is always with us and many others.
I want to stress that the report has been mainly made by Sorina.  And we are very thankful for this to her.  She was the really the "man" behind.  No probably not the right word.  (laughing).
And then I want to leave the floor for Sorina that is to ask you for the commitment.
There were some questions and answers in the question and answer, if you can reply in the chat, it would be good for those that have been asked to reply.  Thank you very much.
Sorina, the floor is yours.
>>  Sorina:  Thank you, Giacomo.  And many thanks to everyone for the very interesting insights, although we don't have time for discussions.  We do encourage everyone to take a look at the report, the recommendation section in particular and do send us your further recommendation to help us finalize the report since we don't have time to go into this now.
Just a quick note.  The IGF Secretariat has recently launched a call for voluntary commitments.  You might have seen it on the website and through emails.  It's basically inviting everyone, panelists but also participants in IGF sessions to make pledges for voluntary actions to forward the goals of the IGF in general but also in relation to the issues that are discussed in the session.
So if we, I don't know if we have five more minutes, maybe we have a quick round through among all the panelists for a very, very short remarks on things you think you could do or your organizations could do to advance issues that we've been discussing about basically promoting local content, local languages.  And that's it.  Many thanks.
>>  Carlos:  Sorina, can I start with a very quick question?  Carlos here.  I saw the presentation by UNESCO and Eddie Avila, as well.  And the concern about how to represent the local languages in written form and disseminate the capacity to learn and speak and understand these languages.
The problem is that many of these languages, particularly in the south ‑‑ are spoken languages.  So what is the approach in these cases?  That is my question to UNESCO and to Eddie Avila, as well.
>>  Thank you for the question.  Indeed many languages are oral languages, especially working with indigenous languages.  And we users we observe with many of them we don't have even a written system and we are not present obviously in a written format and where for they are often not present on Internet.
Having said that one, of course it is a question of as well technological solutions.  Many language users would communicate using video settings.  So that could be as well a way to move forward to provide more opportunities for ‑‑ and look at solutions which would take into account functionalities which do not require written format.  And it could be used using voice functionality, helping those languages users who don't have ‑‑ who have only oral systems in place.
At the same time, what we suggest, and I think what our colleague Eddie already said very clearly was technological solutions, maybe it's not for everyone in terms of specifically what it relates expecting big changes, rapid changes.  But obviously what we encourage to do in communities like that to use technologies for language documentation, for production of content which would be not only local content as well scientific content about those languages and in those languages where community members could work together in collaboration with research community, preserving the traditional knowledge practices, cultural expressions and many other let's say cultural expressions which contribute to the safeguarding of languages in our communities.  And that could be kept in terms of archives and museums and digital formats sharing around the world.  And that would help obviously future generations.  Language shift can happen any time.  And that's what we need to encourage the older generation to continue using the language and sharing the younger generation.  And obviously if there are available tools, content and digital formats that could contribute to this process.
But obviously languages and the users have very different social, economic, political situations.  Maybe not everything could be let's say magic copy paste solution implemented in one or another community.  But at the same time, we strongly encourage use of technological solutions for language documentation preservation safeguarding and of course support of language users.
Thank you.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you.  Thank you.
>>  Eddie:  I don't have much to add to that.  There's different ways:  Audio, visual.  People are using audio messaging function on messaging apps.  So I think there's other formats for these audio.
>>  CARLOS:  Okay.  I think we are done, Giacomo and Sorina.
>>  Sorina:  We're four minutes past the end time.  If the host allows us maybe we could have a quick round among all panelists for some final remarks.  So please don't kill the meeting for us.  Give us a few more minutes.
Carlos, if you can just repeat the names again so people know when they're supposed to speak.  Thank you.
>>  Carlos:  Sorry.  I missed that, Sorina, please.
>>  Sorina:  Just having one final round of final comments, recommendations from all of our speakers and then we will end up.
>>  Carlos:  Of course, please.  It's open to.  Well, in regard already spoke?  So then maybe Mr. Wendland?
>>  Mr. Wendland:  Thank you, Carlos.  Time is short.  I will say one thing.  Local content is wonderful but it shouldn't be copied by third parties.  And that's where intellectual property rights come in.  And IP rights are both a sword and a shield.  But in order to effectively use the system either as a sword or a shield, one has to know how the system works.
And so we stand ready to provide IP training and information through our various tools to indigenous groups and anybody else who would like to know more.  Thank you again.
>>  Carlos:  Thank you.  Anyone else?
>>  Can I come in?
>>  Carlos:  Yes.
>>  RHODRI:  I think as a broadcaster, I think one of the key points I want to sort of make maybe is that we do still ‑‑ we do have power in the realm.  We have the ability to make content and work on technology.  So I think there's responsibility on us increasingly to be able to make that accessible to more people.  Not only our communities and sword of democratize that kind of media power but also in the way that we are working with the languages.  And less resourced languages.  Especially as minority language broadcaster, I truly believe that we have responsibility in that way in that these kinds of events, the networking, are crucial in order to be able to unlock that.  So, yeah.
>>  Stephen:  I'll jump in quickly to here.  To agree with Rhodri with democratization, in the report this needs to be seen as a public good and supported.  I would encourage people to make use of that network of 430,000 libraries we're talking about promoting local creativity, local culture.  These are your cultural centers.  So I encourage you to connect to make use of them, to work with them and draw on their skills, draw on their resources in order to promote the goals of this session.
>>  Giacomo:  I have a question that huge to me for Tomas and Rhodri, are you planning to cooperate?  You have experience of cooperation with Wikipedia?  Because at the end of the day, you are both pushing this same objectives.  So the fact that you come from different backgrounds doesn't have to be a barrier for cooperating.
>>  Rhodri:  Yes.  We already have a project that we started with Wikimedia in the UK.  There's a Wikipedia in the national library of Wales as well as a Wikipedia project manager at Wales.  And they've been crucial, really.  They've been funded by governments and by Wikimedia.  In order to assist us in finding ways as a broadcaster of how we can enrich Wikipedia and the commons and how it can be a value both ways.
I think many broadcasters and rights holders don't really think about it in that way.  But I think as a public service broadcaster, you know, we have an obligation, really, to think about how the legacy of content, how it can improve the resources available for schools, et cetera.
So I think Wikipedia and Wikimedia is really a place where I hope to do much more work in the coming years.
>>  Allison:  Yeah, can I just remark on that really quickly?
>>  Giacomo:  Yes, please.
>>  Allison:  It seems apt.
I completely agree.  I think that, you know, there are, as I mentioned certain limitations to Wikipedia.  A lot of spoken languages get kind of put to the wayside in Wikipedia.  But these are things that our community's grappling with and trying to come up with solutions for.  It's not a static process.
And I think that, you know, as we evolve and focus more, you know, one of our themes going to 2030 is knowledge equity and ensuring that knowledge is equally accessible on our platforms.
I think as we move towards that goal and make more decisions with that goal in mind, we will be developing ways of using Wikipedia that may sort of expand beyond the usual.  And I really look forward to seeing what that does for local languages and local content.
>>  Giacomo:  I think that now we are really beyond our time.  So, Carlos, the word at the end is for you.
>>  Carlos:  Well, I want to thank everyone who participated.  And I hope that everyone who can help us finish the outcome document with suggestions, corrections, additions, et cetera.  Sorina is doing a wonderful work with that document.  And we cannot disappoint her.  We are here to help her.
[Laughter]
Thank you very much.
>>  Giacomo:  Thank you to all of you.  It has been a very interesting session.  We will publish also the various presentations in our page, Sorina.  Can we?  We have some proposal conclusions that we hope you will share and support with us.  Thank you very much, everybody.
>>  Sorina:  Thanks, everyone.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-main-session-data-data-governance-and-practices-lessons-during-covid-19-0^^

 
 
>> MODERATOR: Can everybody hear me?  Brilliant.  I'm sorry.  It is not a very glamorize location in the back.  I'm sure we'll all survive.  I'm interested to see that I'm a minute behind schedule, I'm not sure how that bodes for us.
I welcome everyone today.  Thank you for joining us.  Our session is Main Session DATA: Data governance and practices lessons during COVID‑19 pandemic.  My name is Gabriella Razzano, I'm a senior research fellow with Research ICT Africa, South Africa based in Cape Town and an Atlantic social on economic equality and work with others.  I'll be moderating.  Time keep something not a strong point personally, but maybe I'll be better at drilling it in with other people.
Just to outline how we're going to run the session today, we have sessions split up into two parts with three speakers in each different section who will each have 5 minutes to give their interventions.  We'll have an opportunity to do crossover questions at the end of each part, and that will be followed with a 7‑minute audience Q&A to end each part.  The first session is dedicated to sharing experiences from different stakeholders and developing data‑driven technologies during the pandemic as well as the Human Rights implications of these kinds of technologies.
The second part of the session will be a discussion on how the challenges and opportunities present ‑‑ for data‑driven policies have impacted on the future or whether they have or haven't.
I'll be introducing each speaker just before they talk, trying to guide the session with time.  I thought I would take the opportunity just to set the scene a little with 5 minutes.
I think there has been obviously variances across the world in how technology and or data has been incorporated into the fight against COVID‑19 with various level was of efficacy for these interventions, there have been various potentiation of how they work together offline strategies and if they haven't.  I think that arising from these kinds of activities you have questions of both legitimacy, effectivity and scale of these initiatives being centered ideally considering social and political context more than the technology themselves.
One thing that distinctly emerges from the technology is that we're starting to incorporate, it is an expanded use of data, obviously with our technologies there is a lot more data‑driven technologies and this has direct implications for data governance and other principles around data.  I think that COVID‑19 has been like essentially an accelerant so we can see it as an accelerating moment for a lot of trends that we're really starting to gain insight into and it is happening rapidly but has happened even more rapidly.
So just from South Africa, just from my own context, I think we have seen particularly attempts to engage in both technologies and data‑driven initiatives in response to COVID that we have already failed to see an ability to o do bottom‑up solutions particularly for the national initiatives, which means that our solutions aren't properly considering both our significant digital divide and other forms of digital inequalities.  And other concepts of how the disease manifests in a country of just existing social inequalities.
I think that's what's been interesting, is that COVID is not just exposing that we have insufficient data frameworks and know that our digital inefficiencies are actually linked a lot to the third natural revolution just rather than the post‑industrial revolution, but we're seeing how some of these challenges implicate innovation policy and how moving forward we're going to engage with innovation and enable innovation locally.  That's been an interesting dive in some of the things that have happened.
Leading us into contextual considerations we'll be going into part one and underscoring our session for section of part one is the question of what useful experience can you share on ensuring privacy and other Human Rights while leveraging the use for data for tackling the pandemic.
Our first speaker will be Robyn Greene, a Privacy and Public Policy Manager on Facebook Privacy Policy team, USA for nearly two years leading on surveillance and cross‑data security flow.  Before joining Facebook she was at the Open Technology Institute and worked at the American Civil Liberty Union where she specialized in privacy issues in security policy.
I'll turn it over to you.  To flag, at 4 minutes I'll try and ‑‑ I'll raise my hand if I can find the raise my hand button.  I'll give a nod in the chat, that way we're running out of time.
Thank you. 
>> ROBYN GREENE: Thank you.  Thank you for inviting me to speak today and participate in this panel.  COVID has shown us that it is more important than ever to safeguard an open, free, unfragmented internet, and the responsibility lies with all of us.  We at Facebook are committed to preserving an open, secure internet allowing for information to flow freely and then enables the environment that's necessary for sustainable innovation, economic development and freedom of expression while creating a more connected, cooperative world.  Conversations like the one we're having today are critical to realizing that commitment.  I'm really pleased to be here.
Specifically with regard to COVID, at Facebook we believe we have got a really important role to play in the response.  We have focused on things that we're best positioned to do to help get people through the difficult time.  This is by doing things like, you know, really prioritizing how we help to connect people with their friends and loved ones, but also things like fighting misinformation online and critically supporting public health authority efforts to contain COVID‑19.  In only a short period of time, we built new features to highlight information about COVID‑19 from health agencies and other trusted sources.  We have also provided millions of dollars and free add credits to governments and small businesses and supported researches efforts to forecast the spread of the disease through a recently launched data for good surveys and maps which we'll talk about more later.
You know, as the world fights COVID‑19 and countries reopen societies, it is critical we have a clear understanding of the movement of people and how the disease is spreading and so one of the things we found is that better data has been really, really helpful for governments as they're determining whether to send resources like ventilators and personal protective equipment and which areas are safe to start opening again.  Getting that kind of accurate data is really challenging and obtaining such focus data from across the world is even harder.  Because we have a community of billions of people globally we have been able to help researchers and help health authorities get the kind of information they need to respond to this outbreak and plan for their recovery.
Our support for these efforts ‑‑ and I want to be really just clear about this and really emphasize it, our support for these efforts need not and should not involve compromising people's privacy.  You know, our approach has been very privacy first while contact tracing apps have, you know, for many months dominated the public debate our focus has been on identifying privacy protected ways that we can use the Facebook reach and resources to help researchers and health authorities respond to this crisis.  We provide tools and data that advance public health responses while maintaining our strong commitment to people's privacy and the security of their data.
So sharing our user personal and identifiable information has not been a part of our response at all, and we'll continue to require a warrant in the government seeks our user's location information, just as we did preCOVID and we have focused on how we use aggregate deidentified data, aggregate and deidentify data to help with the response through the data for good work as opposed to using people's identifiable, personal data and we adopted a framework to help us review proposal and requests to help us ensure that we actually fulfill our commitment to do everything we can with the pandemic response without jeopardizing people's privacy.  
First, our views are guided by experts.  When we're seeking to undertake these new efforts for pandemic response we have sought active and meaningful participation from relevant stakeholder, in particular, experts in the public health sector as well as Human Rights experts and privacy experts.
Additionally, we put advocacy first, the stakes are too high, so to that end, our COVID‑19 initiatives have been provided either in partnership or deemed effective by public health authorities such as the WHO and we sought to contribute in ways that integrate coherently with country's public health strategies and systems.
The third element of our framework is voluntary consent.  Our COVID initiatives have adhered to content‑based, voluntary data collection practices.  
Fourth, transparency.  It is an absolute necessary requirement for the work related to COVID‑19.  It is important to be transparent about our role and measures we're taking to help address COVID, including clearly disclosing how we check, use and share a person's data.
Fifth, element of our framework ‑‑ the fifth element of our framework is data minimalization.  We collected, used, shared and stored the minimum amount of information to support identified COVID‑19 initiatives.
Finally, it's last but certainly not least, we have prioritized Human Rights and conduct due diligence to ensure that we effectively identify risks related to our COVID response and only proceed if we determine they could be adequately mitigated against.
I think by really putting things like efficacy, consultation with experts, privacy, Human Rights first, we have done a really good job of really being able to respond to the pandemic, use data or surface information for people, use our services and help people connect in a way that makes this time easier and that sort of gets us to an effective response better without having to sacrifice people's privacy and we're really part of the work that we have done.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
I'll turn now to Gonzalo Sosa Barreto, he has been recently designated as Secretary‑General of AGESIC, Uruguayan Electronic Government and Information and Knowledge Society Agency, ARESIC, Uruguay, manager, he carries out teaching activities at the University of the are republic and the Catholic University of Uruguay, previously he carried out tasks of his profession in the public sphere in the tax office and in the planning and budget office as well as in his private practice.  Thank you so much. 
>> GONZALO SOSO BARRETO: Thank you.  I'm happy to be here.  I'll try to be brief.
Since the declaration in March, 2020, it became clear that a responsible use of data had clear roles and determinations of the responsibilities of everybody involved.  When it comes to considering health and other Human Rights, it is important to consider the opinion of the InterAmerican court of Human Rights and early on the court issued a statement stressing the fact that problems and challenges derived from pandemic must be addressed from a Human Rights perspective and with respect to ‑‑ sorry, for example, international obligations.  The enter American commission of Human Rights put in temporary restrictions in Human Rights due to the pandemic to be subject to strict observance of the public health objective to be temporarily limited and to have defined objectives and be proportional to the objectives pursued.
The Government of Uruguay has a health program, the participation of different public organizations, including the agency for the digital development, AGESIC and they worked with private developers since the pandemic and were one of the first countries to design an app with resources from the various sectors, the public sector, Ministry of Public health and the agency for digital government.  The result was an application widely unrolled to the public under responsible freedom concepts.  It was and it is now voluntary and many worked along with the digital authority and the national groups to ensure that the data policy of data protection and security standards were met.  The application goes in line with the resolution of March 2020 by the data protection authority, that establishes that the processing of sensitive data in the context of sanitary emergency must be carried out by the Ministry of Public health within the framework of certain legitimate basis, purposely protecting vital interests of the relation, considering principles and other data protection provisions and an example of collaboration between government and private sector has come from the accreditations of a scientific group that's been advising the government since the onset of the pandemic.  
To perform duties, the group receives information from private and public entities and the interpretation framework requires a justification of legitimate interests from the sender and receiver of the information, consent of the data subject or an exemption to such consent, for example legal mandate or a sanitary emergency.
There is legal framework for information sharing which is in public entities establishing principles and safeguards in addition to data protection regulation which may be agency for digital government or harder to deliver a safe environment have private and public entities can perform analysis for the Ministry of Public Health and deliver the reports required by the scientific group.  This refers both to personal and non‑personal information.  It is important to work on ethical frameworks also that complement existing norms and guide the way of processing information such frameworks could provide a needed transparency and guidance for all of the participants and a good example of such framework is the declaration that sets principles that could be easily extended to other areas of innovations for data such as accessibility, Human Rights, ethics, accountability, purpose, dataflow, open by default approach, privacy, data security.  There are of course, common standards in all of this analyses.  
There is a need when dealing with personal data, there is a need to perform the interpretation impact assessment prior to the collection of data to provide clear information for data subjects in which to ensure transparency, precise definition of the roles of all of the participants involved, the specific security measure, et cetera.
Of course, to summarize, accountability is key.  The protection framework, there is obligations and the internal processes, when they have an impact on the protection and in several cases to appoint a data position officer.  Governments and the companies will define and bring changes to the way that people receive personal data protection and trust that it is built under respect in the data processing by governments.  
I look forward to the Q&As.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.  I will turn to our panelist for part one, Carmela Troncoso, eHealth and Innovation portfolio of the WHO Regional Office for Europe, she heads the spring lab focused on security and privacy engineering and the work focuses on understanding and mitigating the impact of technology on society. DP3T Exposure Tracking Protocol Developer Team, Switzerland, they have been in involved in proximity tracing and has been adopted by Google and Apple for a guide in protocols and is a lead in technology.  Thank you. 
>> CARMELA TRONCOSO: Thank you very much for the nice introduction.  Thank you for the invitation.
First of all, let me say that I'm here in personal capacity by no means, it is the Swiss government but by less means I represent Google and Apple.
The applications came as a response to a need faced by COVID‑19 which we know that contact tracing is very important to stop epidemic was the volume of COVID‑19 cases it people were overwhelmed and they decided that technology could help.  Then people turned to technology because you need a sensor with the mobile, that's the sensor most people have in their pockets and I'm happy to discuss the technology divide and what this has caused in the Q&A.
Initial options for this kind of app‑based technologies were data hungry, and that was very worrisome.  This is not a question of privacy.  When we have data‑hungry technology, what we have, it is the huge potential for abuse.  Privacy is not an ends, it is the means to protect citizens, to pro secretary users and to protect our democracy.  Together with a group of scientists we joined forces to try to provide the most privacy preserving way of building contact tracing apps.  Again, let me insist, the goal was not to protect the privacy of the user, it was to protect the world from this information that had never existed, this information that we had gathered off of phones of everyone, we're going to ask every citizens in Switzerland and Europe and the world to put a sensor in their pockets.  The protocol we came up with, that in the end was the basis for Google and Apple is extremely privacy preserving and not only does data immunization but something even more important that I hope it become as concept in the future, it is this purpose of limitation, a basic principle of data protection and the protocol we built ensures that the information that flies around is actually useless for anything but this particular way.  This is opposed to many other options that came with like automatization, applications, many other things, we wanted to build in this but not bring in another problem.  When we introduce technology, we cannot solve a problem by causing a worse one.
Current applications, we're seeing early evidence that they help.  Maybe so far they have not been seen because of the adoption, because of some limitations that they have helped us to see and it is not really the technology that is not working, it is that the health system is still not prepared.  In most countries that I know of, many problems come from the fact that the health system is not ready to give support to the application.  For me, this is even more important from the data governance perspective, before we go to countries or to anyone to give technology, we need to help them build infrastructure and we made the technology successful.  Otherwise, again, we'll introduce infrastructure, collecting new data, putting in new problems without actually solving the underlying issues.
The last thing, because it is relevant for this, when we decided to be building an app, it is a ‑‑ not particularly, we, me and my group.  It was a requirement, we decided that we had to use the mobile system, we would build on the Google and Apple kingdom and as such we now rely on Google and Apple to maintain this creating a new governance issue.  It may be about data and infrastructure and the power that the sector has.
I'll be happy to answer any more questions during the Q&A.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
Now just to sort of round up part two, we have ‑‑ we have set up some crossover questions, so I'm actually going to call on the participants themselves to ask them, and then each panelist will have a minute for part one to answer the direct question.
The first question was to Robyn Greene.
Would you mind posing it?  Would you prefer me to read it.
Rasha Abdulla:  Whatever you prefer.  Fine with me..
>> RASHA ABDULA: My question has to do with data for good program or initiative that Facebook has been deploying.  I'm wondering if you can give us a little bit more information about that, the concerns that the program may be collecting more data than absolutely necessary for fighting the pandemic and particularly the concerns that users cannot edit or delete information posted about them by other users.  Can you tell as you little bit about that and also what happens with this data later on, when does this program end?  What happens to the data later on?  Thank you. 
>> ROBYN GREENE: Those are good, important questions.  Data for good, it is not a COVID‑specific response.  I know that some other technology providers, you know, hadn't previously been looking at aggregate and deidentified data to see how to use it for social good and so they have deployed it really for the first time for the pandemic.  Data for good has actually been around for several years and has been a critical part of doing disaster response and doing research that's very privacy protected but also enables people to understand how small businesses are succeeding and failing in different places and things like that.  In addition to doing hurricane response, and in factory responding to the Ebola breakout ‑‑ excuse me, the Cholera outbreak several years ago in Africa, we were able to use this kind of data in order to also very quickly respond to the COVID‑19 pandemic.  So part of our data for good program offers these apps that researchers and non‑profits are using to understand the coronavirus crisis and the effectiveness of non‑pharmaceutical interventions and this relies on using aggregated data to protect people's privacy.  
By using aggregated data in this way we're able to help health authorities predict disease spread, allocate resources and measure the efficacy of the mitigations and ultimately researchers and non‑profits have used these datasets to inform their decisions all over the world.  In fact, researchers in Taiwan were even able to identify the cities of the highest chance of infection, researchers in Italy analyzed lockdown measures and their impact on income and inequality and public health officials in California and New York in the United States have reviewed county‑level data to steer public health messaging to make sure that the responses are as effective as possible.
In terms of privacy, you know, one of the things that we are really proud of is that our disease prevention maps from the data for good program showed an aggregate where people were traveling and tracking between regions and these are colocations maps that revealed the probability that people in one area come in contact with others and eliminates where COVID cases may appear next and we have the social connectedness index showing friends across states and countries that can help epidemiologists forecast the likelihood of disease spread as well as areas that are hit the hardest by COVID‑19 and seeking support, and we have a movement of trend like mobility maps that show a regional level, what rates people are reducing mobility or remaining in the same place and this can provide insights into whether preventive measures are headed in the right direction.  
You know, a really important thing to keep in mind, it is the data for good shows protected datasets with network ‑‑ with our network of trusted research partners who are actually enrolled in the data for good program, but even those research partners only have access ting a great information from Facebook, we done share any individual information so, you know, questions about someone being able to delete, correct their information, their information is not used in an identifiable way in the data for good research.  Whether it's the research that we make available publicly or the data that people are accessing the portal when one of our trusted partners and research experts are at, so the key is these datasets include location information that's aggregated in a way that protects the privacy of individuals.  We use techniques like spatial smoothing to create weighted averages and avoid map tiles and very few people live there, basically the datasets are broken down in a way where they really con be disaggregated in order to try to sort of figure out who’s in which dataset.
For things like the public datasets on mobility, we use our differential privacy framework which takes into account the sensitive ‑‑ excuse me, the sensitivity of the aggregated dataset and it add as random number of additional observations to each map to ensure no one could identify the users.
The last thing I want to note, which I think is extremely important as I mentioned before, we ‑‑ you know, we consider voluntary consent for part of the COVID response we're undertaking to be really critical.  Facebook users can decide if they want to share their location data.  The data that's used by the data for good program maps, that location data, it is the same data that allows us to show people locally relevant content on Facebook and users can choose whether they want to share that information, the location history setting.  So this is actually ‑‑ the data for good program, it is only getting that location data if the user has already opted in to location data sharing and then the data for good program is aggregating it, deidentifying it and then only making sure that people can ‑‑ that researchers can access and use it once it's been aggregated and deidentified in a way where we're confident that the user's privacy and identity are protected and we put privacy first when it comes to our data for good program.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
The next crossover question is from Clayton Hamilton to Carmela Troncoso.  
>> CLAYTON HAMILTON:  Thank you.  
Carmela Troncoso, there are many discussions in Europe on the potential impact of privacy in Human Rights that digital contact tracing and other digital technologies can have.  Going from the very specific ‑‑ from the general to the specific, a major concern people have about the technologies and how they can be addressed as part of the implementation.  In your intervention you mentioned a huge potential for misuse.  Do you consider that the use of digital contact tracing solutions as they are now pose a direct or indirect threat to an individual's personal privacy?  Thank you.
>> CARMELA TRONCOSO: Thank you, Clayton.
What are the concerns, the kind of concerns we have heard a lot about surveillance, in particular, that potentially we collect now data, contact tracing at the end of the day is to collect colocations with extreme precision, much more than what we had ever seen before and at an unprecedented scale and that data could be used for, I don't know, almost anything from building the same kind of data we can do for data for good and also build databases with whom, how often and you can imagine how that could go down the wrong road when this data falls into the wrong hands and the wrong hands can be from hackers and vicious hackers, to also governments that may have the ability to use this data for population control.
When we designed this application, we have this in mind, that's why we went to an extremely conservative approach, that we had not created data.  Our goal was to make sure that there was not a powerful actor that would decide who and why would have access to the data, the moment that we have someone with the data that we can make a decision, they can make any decision and we have heard before that in different legal framework there is are exceptions under which data can be used for something that they had not been collected for.  It was very important for to us even not create the data, to not create the mediator, and to try to find a way which we build the system to avoids this.  To me, this was kind of the key and it was very important and I hope it is a message that that's not with these apps, we can build these kinds of things, there are plenty of technologies and plenty of people that are able to think in this way.  It is a hard way, we need to change the way in which we design, we have to change the way we train engineers to think about solving problems instead of driven by the data, driven by the problem and data is something that you may or may not need.  This is the way which we can eliminate the individual privacy.  
The bigger threat I'll say again is not the individual's privacy, but societal privacy.  Societal behavior, societal moves that if we learn them, can be used in order to ‑‑ to try to influence back and for instance you look at Cambridge analytic, when it went back, it went to individuals but the information gathered was information about the global sentiment of the population.  It is very important that we not only think about privacy as individuals, but we think about what we're collecting and how that can be used to influence and how to eliminate that to the best that we can while we build technologies. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
I'm also going to abuse my position as moderator to flag that issue of, you know, the communal nature of digital harms for when we talk about this later.
The final question for the crossover questions, it is from Amber Sinha to Gonzalo Sosa Barreto.
>> AMBER SINHA:  My question, it is towards the adoption of the exposure alert, how is the protection and how is the state law on managing these particular sectors that's been creating in the development of these apps.
Thank you. 
>> GONZALO SOSO BARRETO: Thank you for the question, Amber.
The adoption of the protocol is another example that collaboration between public and private sector can provide people with useful tools to face situations like the ones you're experiencing.  It is important to highlight the need and, in fact, the government, it was especially worried about this for transparency, to present the facts clearly to the population and to document in detail the responsibilities of the obligations and the Rights of the parties in order to preserve privacy when developing the applications.
Regarding data protection, the involvement of the digital protection authority and the issue was at an early stage, before the functionality was incorporated in the application, the protection unit carried out an remuneration of the different exposure alert systems and raised the necessary requirements for them to adopt this wider regime, transparency, a decentralized approach, appointment of the Ministry of Public health as the sole data controller and data protection by design approach considering principles like the one that Carmela mentioned, purpose of implementation, the deletion of information when the pandemic ends because the information has only one reason to be there, it is to address the pandemic so it should be among other recommendations that were followed when developing the app and those were key factors.
Regarding the accountability, the information and application, it is available through a procedure and for a specific purposes, but all the information and measures adopted by the government included reports made by the scientific or honorary group which the government based its decisions, they're available and published on the various websites.  This is also a key issue on accountability, transparency and informing the public.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, everyone.
I see there are three questions in the Q&A.  What I'll do, just to keep us on time, it is I'll address those three questions to the panelists and if they can just answer in the order in which they spoke, if they have anything to answer, but I actually think that the two questions, the first two questions kind of go together.
The one question, it was addressed to Carmela asking if your approach to the tracing app is privacy by design, would you go beyond that?  You said some things in there about it being about purpose, limitation by design which is underlined.  The second question, it is asking during most ‑‑ during the pandemic, a lot of people were unhappy to share and save the results of COVID‑19 in the systems of eGovernance, how do you motivate people to trust on the system of privacy in lower income countries.  Both of these questions link to trust, one is a possible aspect of privacy by design, but how else do you foster trust in the systems?  Particularly in different kinds of contexts which is a difficult question to answer and we may also engage on that more in the second session.
There was one more question on how does one ensure the accuracy, the completeness of the self‑reported data related to COVID, in addition to non‑reporting there is issues of lack of access of technology regarding infections and to lack of testing false results and policy made on this data, how can it be reliable.  
The second question talks a little bit to some of the mechanics of creating good data and what it means and what it means for our reliance or over reliance on it and policy.  
I will turn to you first, Robyn. 
>> ROBYN GREENE: In terms of all of the questions around non‑reporting, issues of lack of access to technology in reporting, misinformation, this is why so much of our work has focused on making sure that we are prioritizing making sure we get good information to people about the disease, about their governments response.  This is necessary not only to ensure people know how best to protect themselves with the most up to date, you know, medical information and research that's available, but also it is just absolutely essential to be able to instill trust in government and their response all over the world.
You know, the trust element, it is another critical reason why we're prioritizing privacy in our COVID response, joy we're only using data in ways to respond to the pandemic with data for good in ways where it is aggregate and deidentified datasets making sure that people don't have to worry about privacy or what will be done with the data or even, you know, other kinds of issues and to that end, making sure that we're actually only using that location data once consent has been given to collect it and use the location data which you can do in your privacy settings and your app.  I think without doing those kinds of solutions to make sure that people can consent, that people have transparency on what's going on and that people can actually trust the information that they're getting it would make the response much harder and those are things that we're really proud to be able to be well positioned to help with.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
We'll turn to Gonzalo Sosa Barreto, please. 
>> GONZALO SOSO BARRETO: Regarding the unreported data, in our experience, the Ministry of Public health has played an important role and a robust health system that gives clear information and also a team at the epidemiology, the Ministry of Health, they have an important role, a role that because they follow each lead and they confirm the information before making public the aggregated data.
Also regarding trust, as I said, trust must be built on the respecting the obligations by governments and companies and if I remember, there is an accountability measure, of course, they are a very important part of such trust.  Other principles have to be put in place and always adopting a Human Rights approach to the issue.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
>> CARMELA TRONCOSO: The first question asked did we go beyond privacy by design?  I could answer that your motion of privacy of design, a lot of times, it is understood as data protection by design.  In that sense, we go well beyond that, we really implement privacy by design as privacy is understood by the academic community and understanding that your privacy advisory could be anyone as we say, we have these ‑‑ no program balance should be created by the trust itself.
Regarding trust, a way that helped us a lot with the acceptance was openness, all of the design, the development, everything is available, I have been in panel, interviews explaining again and again what we're , do how we're doing it, exposing ourselves, I'm not very used to these things, getting so many questions, trying to explain again and again what is our rational and making sure that people and experts can check it.  I also have to say, again, when we move to other countries, it is very important that besides looking at how we're going to put the technology and the technology will work, we take care, that we also help them in improving their health system and proving infrastructures, otherwise there is no technology that is going to help.  Technology is only a complement and if we're trying to do this solution, that's important.
>> MODERATOR: That's a good way to evolve that section largely looking at the actual experiences and Human Rights and to talk ‑‑ how central the question of trust and legitimacy of these kinds of initiatives have to do with not competing issues of privacy and transparency or competing issues of privacy and access to information, but rather corresponding principles of access to information and privacy and how well partners those two things are and how well a lot of Human Rights discourse allows us to understand those two issues as partners.
We'll be moving on to part two now, in part two the direct question is how are the challenges and opportunities presented for data‑driven technologies impacting the perceptions of data governance and protection for the future. 
Our first speaker, Clayton Hamilton, eHealth and Innovation portfolio of the WHO Regional Office for Europe country health policies and system, providing guidance in all aspects of digital health and innovation to support strengthening and reforming the region's 53 Member States and working to accelerate the uptake of safe, inclusive digital health services for all.    .  He leads the development of dialogue and reaming Nall guidance on digital health systems and public health and provides thought leadership on the idea of frontier digital technologies to improve access to healthcare and empower individuals to make choices for better health and well‑being.
Thank you. 
>> CLAYTON HAMILTON: What we want to do today, have a brief reflection on the challenges and opportunity presented for data‑driven technology the in particular, what I want to try to do it was to reflect on some lessons that we have learned within the 53 countries of the European region and see how they apply directly to data‑driven technologies.
Firstly, a key lesson we have learned from the COVID‑19 pandemic is that even in the most well prepared health systems there has been wide‑scale recognition of the inability to the systems having access to data in realtime or near realtime.  This is despite the fact that countries have been working on developing the health information systems literally for decades, countries were simply caught unaware.  This lack of access has led to response efforts, it is less effective critical public health and social measures applied.
The second lesson, even if we do have access to data, we are unable to effectively analyze and act upon the knowledge which that data brings.  Again, some of the types of analysis that Robyn presented are really still very much a pipe dream for many national health authorities.  We understand the data quality is an issue to be tackled and we don't always have a standardized approach to be able to certify the quality of data and we have want yet within the health system developed a level of data literacy or a data size culture to be able to help feed the knowledge gleaned from data to either policy, decisions or logistics management.  Again, we say many examples of that arise during the COVID‑19 pandemic.  In terms of perception of practices, it is fair to say, when translating lessons learned from COVID‑19 to artificial intelligence and machine learning there's been renewed efforts from privacy advocates and international organizations to further emphasize the critical nature of strong data governance and accountability frameworks which take ethics considerations into full account.
Really to understand what it means to implement this in a very practical sense at a national level in data ecosystems.  One thing to say that it is important to have data governance and a completely different thing, often misunderstood, to actually apply it practically, pragmatically at country level.    The importance of addressing issues such as data privacy and privacy by design raised by others and also data bias and completeness, managing public private partnerships and renumeration models of data use is galvanized by the COVID‑19 pandemic, what it has done, giving us and sight into how to avoid the data and digital solutions are repurposed or misused, intentionally or unintentionally and that Human Rights and civil liberties are not jeopardized in seeking to implement public health measures very much has been learned there.
We understand also that on a more granular level the importance of legislation and informed consent as part of data governance and data guardianship measures have come to the for now and we have seen several cases where there's been ambiguity in how data legislation at the national level is being interpreted, so this, again, kind of feeds back into further emphasizing the importance more than ever of having this type of legislation applied and interpreted consistently within and across the national borders.
The perspective of the importance of international work has also been something that's come up specifically in terms of artificial intelligence in machine learning and some issues cannot be solved by national measures alone and international standardization alignment here is not only critical when showing we can effectively exchange data across borders and also that we can contribute to the collective poll of learning and that we can source larger datasets when and if they're required to solve certain problems and we're a long way from reaching that goal.
There is a perspective of the relevance of solutions so we have seen very much that solutions no matter how well developed and how safe or secure they may be are simply not relevant in every situation and we have seen some cases where the application of digital technologies has in fact confused or perhaps detracted from some response efforts.  Again, we firmly believe that the right job at the right time is applied and data governance play as role in determining when those situations are the right situations to have them applied.
Lastly, the perspective of equity, and this is something that was mentioned in the beginning, the risk of perpetuating inequities that may exist in society, and how they're likely to be impacted by data‑driven technologies, it has been a keen issue.  This is not a new issue and not unique to data‑driven technology, it ties closely to how ethics are applied to data ecosystems and the implementation of digital systems.  In short, we don't want a future where health systems are not affordable or accessible to all members of the population.  Digital inequities can arise basically in three ways, by either preventing access to health services provided digitally, either through the inability to identify an individual or perhaps an individual is shutout because they don't have a mobile phone or other digital ability and the ability of the individuals to navigate or they don't have the digital literacy needed to navigate those systems, and finally an individual can be excluded through cost barriers, we have to work to ensure that those particular situations don't arise with data‑driven solutions of the future in health.  To govern data effectively, we have to be ensured that the use is flowing back to the public system and solutions built on such data are accessible by all.
I'll leave it there and look forward to more questions and perspectives in the questions and answers later.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
I'll turn now to Dr. Raha Abdula, professor of Professor, Journalism and Mass Communication at the American University in Cairo, AUC, Egypt she is also a former member of the UN multistakeholder advisory group of the IGF representing Civil Society in Africa.  She's also wrote books and numerous Articles and book chapters and the recipient of several research awards on her work on social media and political ecosystem and she's an advocate for civil rights online and tweets regularly.  Thank you. 
>> RASHA ABDULA: Thank you very much for the introduction.  Thank you for having me here.  It is a pleasure to be here.
This is obviously a unprecedented situation we find ourselves in, one in which we're finding out more and more every day how just imperative and extremely important data is and online communications are and the means by which these data are governed, shared, collected, how it effects our whole lives.  It is a binding situation.  On one hand, literally, data information, they're key, that's actually the key out of the situation that we're in.  Also transparency, accountability, they're key because if we don't know how the data are being collected or are being used, that becomes a big problem for individuals.  
Unfortunately, in my part of the world, we tend to have very little information and usually from very few sources, from official sources especially at the time like this.  Basically it is the Ministry of Health that gives you numbers, that gives you data, counts, information about what to do if you get sick or a loved one is sick and there is absolutely ‑‑ there is usually no way to double‑check or to verify the information so whatever you get from the official sources, they're basically, you know, the way to go in situations like this.  Many times, unfortunately, the citizens are not getting enough information and that's really where the danger is.
  we have so many questions, and we don't have much answers, we don't know, you know, what data are the governments gathering in the name of COVID, in COVID‑19, what data are they gathering now that they have not previously been gathering because we don't know, you know, what they're gathering on a day‑to‑day basis.  What's different now, you know, all of the data that they're gather, is it necessary to combat the situation that we're in?  Are the data being protected, encrypted, how?  What happens if that data is compromised one way or the other?  Are the data being shared with law enforcement agents and again on what basis, how are the data stored?  How are they used?  Then, of course, you know, the sunset clause, you know, when will the programs end?  Hopefully there is an end to the pandemic, you know, what are we going to do with that data afterwards?  Where does that data go?  How long does it remain after the pandemic ends?  What kind of accountability exists to make sure that governments do not retain such data when it is no longer needed or do not use it in ways in which it was not supposed to be used.
In North Africa there have been several attempts at contact tracing and data gathering apps, Egypt has one, Egypt's health, it is an official app by the Ministry of Health, supposedly it raise awareness of the pandemic and it has over a million downloads which you need to know, Egypt is a large population relatively, we're 100 million people, you know, that's 1% of the population.  The download is voluntary, however there are many reviews on the app that says that even after entering your personal information the app doesn't really work very effectively and you have to enter a copy of your national ID or passport and you have to enter your phone number and automatically it gets your location information at all times even if you're not using the app.  Tunisia has one such app, it is protects, again, the collection GPS will he occasion, phone number, it is required for registration and again those sunset clause, Morocco has one, called our protection, developed by the Ministry of Interior and it had over a million downloads in a week and Morocco is a much smaller population, about 40 million, smaller than Egypt anyway.
Usually the policies are generic, not very clear, I tried to look for terms of privacy on the Egyptian app, I couldn't find any.  Again, you have to give a copy of your ID, phone number, your location, your contacts, your media files, it has access to a lot of data that you have to wonder and people have actually written comments like that on the reviews, like why do you want my media files?  What will you do with this?  I'm sure there are answers, but, you know, you kind of have to wonder isn't this a little bit too much information.
South Africa, for example, has a better app, you know, the identity is an anonymous, the user consents to reporting if someone tests positive, the office, you have to report that, but no personal information is reported, a better model.  Given that much of the efforts to combat the pandemic depends on delivering accurate and timely information in a timely manner, so the question is what happens to people on the low end of the digital divide and we have a few in ‑‑ in Africa in general and the Arab world, of course.  Egypt has an internet penetration rate of 60% which is not bad.  A phone penetration, it is about 95 to 100% depending on the population figure that they take into account for calculation, however that doesn't mean that everybody has mobile phone because many people have two three.  We still have quite a few people that are off that radar, we actually have about a third of the population still who don't have basic literacy skills, they can't read or write.  How will these citizens get access to the basic, basic critical health information that is needed to survive the pandemic like this?  I believe governments have a duty to provide this basic information to everybody, to all citizens regardless of their access to technology and that access to information because, you know, this is a matter of life and death obviously.  There are many questions to be asked, there unfortunately are more questions than answers coming out of our part of the world.  Once again, I will just stress the very key elements that I believe are for everything to be centered about, basically data and information because, you know, that's how you survive the pandemic but also transparency and accountability.
We cannot ‑‑ we cannot let our guard down, we have to be very vigilant and we have to be very careful with the information that's being gathered and who has access to it and how is this information being treated basically.
I'll stop here.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
Finally, on the panel, I'll turn to Amber Sinha, Center for Internet and Society, India, leading projects on privacy, digital identity, artificial intelligence and misinformation and has research has been cited with appreciation by the Supreme Court of India.  He's a member of the Steering Committee of about an initiative to bring diverse perspectives to test and implement machine learning systems and implementation practices, the first book was released in 2019 and a study on law and humanities in the international law School of India.
Thank you so much.
>> AMBER SINHA: Thank you.
Thanks to the previous panelists as well.
What you see, the pandemic, it has led us to techno socialism solutions in large parts of the world.  You have the contact tracing and often this has been seen as fairly complicated, there are solutions that are leading to the data which is seen as critical to the response to the pandemic, along with this, there's been negative impact.  Particularly on members of marginalized communities leading to this.  Every humanitarian crisis needs expedient responses and often in the responses we leave behind fundamental Human Rights.  It is easy to be swayed by the enormity of the crisis, particularly a crisis of a non‑precedented scale such as COVID‑19.
(Poor audio quality). 
There is contact tracing working in tandem and the digital solutions, they often work on analogue solutions and so a country like our, with limited internet penetration, the question must be asked about what extent contact tracing looks like and secondly, if you don't have sufficient number of testing within a particular geography, how useful is it to rely on the contact tracing with other digital solutions as to valid responses to the pandemic.  What's most disappointing in a lot of countries, it is that in a world of ecosystem, the solution, the app can always be the answer but it is even more troubling when the solution doesn't use the fruits of technology as it is disposed to respond and some examples that we have discussed in the first part of this discussion, particularly those highlighted Id by other, they give an overview of the kind of privacy technologies that can be deployed, yet if we do look at the technologies deployed in various parts of the world, we often don't include those privacy preserving aspects in the technological design.  For instance, with regard to contact tracing, (poor audio quality)..
Over the last year in a half, we created a framework for the digital identity systems.  In the last six months what we have tried to do, tried to adapt that toward the use of these solutions and in response to COVID‑19.  It essentially consists of three kinds of tests, three to four tests that are with the mandates of the government, they must be enacted by the legislation and it must be excessive and clear and accessible to the public and precise with the scope for the discussion.  The second category we have articulated, it is for the entire technology framework, including architecture, user, actors, it is against the rights that it potentially violates and we will be able to look he violations necessary to the benefit that's protected, specifically in that specific instance, what we have felt is necessary, it is also risk‑based assess where technology systems will have an impact on Human Rights and must be based on the analysis of the risk that system produces.  Those risks could be in the form of a centralized data source based on these uses or restricting the usage of the technology to limited actors that are benefiting, in the risk assessment, it is a requirement of the community to be responsive in a communication strategy.
We use that this framework to look at the digital contact tracing solution in India and our partners elsewhere also conducted services based on the framework to look into Colombia, Ecuador, Berlin, Brussels and largely what we felt, it was that there was limited compliance with the principles that I articulated and there is very listen mitigation maps that are placed in the systems and a lot of cases, even the risks they want this place, there is no framework that governs the application and the solution and in some cases the risks, often it is left to the discretion of the executives to change it at its discretion.
Largely, what we have felt was that by digital and inclusive solutions, there was a technological system that could lead to mobile preserving responses and the frameworks which govern that.  Most of the knowledge and capacity must be there to respond to the pandemic.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much.
I just would like at the end of part one, for the end of part two, before going to the General Comments we'll have cross over questions.  The first is from Gonzalo Sosa Barreto to Clayton Hamilton governments can you share health implications in the digital solutions? 
>> CLAYTON HAMILTON: There was a question in the chat where I shared the details, there are many Best Practices we can draw upon, as highlighted by many today, looking at the technical architecture design in terms of how individuals gain access and privacy surrounding it and transparency is who is accessing the data, having expert accountability and oversight, legal safeguards, important including public Civil Society and the scientific community in the development of systems.  It is often an area which people neglect.
Addressing aspects of data sensitivity, quality and minimization, they're also very important as well as data security measures and it sounds very banal but we have seep data security lax with consequences which have been widespread.
I think also looking at the trade‑offs between sharing data and not sharing data, looking that the from an ethical perspective and privacy preserving perspective and seeing what weather the risk is commiserate to the potential gain, it is not a thought process many countries go through.  You yourself had mentioned data protection impact assessments, that's one tool to help guide countries through that measure.
Other Best Practice perspectives are perhaps a bit more on the practical side.  For example, integrating the many silo data sources around the health information system together into one portal for easy access by citizens.  That's something that's quite undervalued but when implemented correctly really has an amazing impact in providing transparency and accessibility to data.
Having meaningful consent built into not only those types of systems but also when individuals are accessing other points of either care or public health from the national health information system or national health system it is important.  Having policies that stipulate the information that's only needed to be provided by an individual who wants but it sound simplistic, policies in place, it is difficult to reflect across a very disparity digital information system so that eliminates when people are inputting the same information again and again to authorities which we have experienced, it a great burden exposing the use of misinformation or information that gets out of sync.
Having logging of access and sunsetting of data, it is something that's been mentioned and I think log something one of those Best Practices which has now become very mainstreamed within the European region, now people have an inbuilt expectation that whenever access, the record perhaps is accessed, there is a clear log of who accessed the data and for what purpose, it is a very important element to it.
Finally, building digital health literacy to populations, I can't really over emphasize how important its including strengthening the work health force in the ability to use data.  They're the types of Best Practices that we have seen and we want to see again echoed more and more in the development of the national health information systems to protect privacy to the greatest extent that we can.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Clayton.
Dealing with one of the questions in the Q&A, two for one!.
The next question was from Robyn Greene to Raha Abdula.
>> ROBYN GREENE: Thank you.  So, Rasha, I really appreciated your comments in your initial remarks on how important it is to have access to good information and so I was hoping you could talk more about what effect COVID has had on governments behaviors when it comes to fundamental rights like freedom of expression, press freedom, access to information?  You know, is anyone leading by example and what steps are they taking others should be looking to as guidance and then conversely, you know, are there more draconian measures that you're seeing put in place and what are the harms that you see come from those measures?  What can we as a community of individuals who are committed to the governments of an open, free, secure internet do to respond to the harmful measures?
>> RASHA ABDULA: Thank you, Robyn.  An important question.
Honestly, I don't think I have seen much difference, you know, we do have a problem of course with freedom of expression in our parts of the world and I think it is ‑‑ it has been there since before COVID so I don't really think it has been much impacted by that.  The danger, it is more of a potential danger of gathering too much information without knowing, you know, where the information is going or what's happening to it.  I cannot think of any examples of something that's happened that's too drastic that was because of the pandemic in particular.  I think it is just normal data which is usually not the best, let's put it this way.  I can't think of a particular difference because of the pandemic actually, I think it is ‑‑ I think it is the overall potential for abuse that's really threatening and that we should be very, very because the problem is when you have a situation where there is a real danger and obviously this is a really dangerous situation, you have more of potential approval by citizens to willingly give in more of their freedoms, to willingly give more information, to willingly give, you know, to being monitored if somebody says that this is necessary to keep you safe.  I think it is that potential abuse that we need to be very careful about. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
The final question is have Carmela to Amber. 
>> CARMELA TRONCOSO: Thank you for the intervention.
My question is about use of data‑driven technology.  We have recently seen that some of them have created problems like facial recognition, automated creating, they have seen the downside of this, I'll link this a bit to a question that goes with the Q&A, a two for one who says that data in COVID‑19 is essentially not normal data, we don't even know how ML can react, what can it cost, and my question is in your experience, what's the best way of trying to avoid this practice and it is a question of design so we need to go back to the drawing board and redesign some of the technologies or is it really something that we can solve on the ground?
>> AMBER SINHA: Thank you.
There are definitely steps that can be taken, some examples I was talking about, in the framework, it is creating the assessments and having access mechanisms and it definitely can be developed but particularly, the kind of technologies that you mentioned, things like facial recognition technology, you have to look at the design of the technology and what we are essentially doing, it is using the technology for the purposes of the public purposes of sort of protecting and preserving the economic social and ‑‑ economic and social rights as well.
So to what extent are these inherent, given the datasets that we're looking at leading to discriminatory exclusion of the impacts, and I do think that the design, the overall design of the technology, it must be ‑‑ if you look at the principle of the proportionality, that requires when we deploy a solution, it must be ‑‑ it isn't less light preserving but it could be an effective solution that exists, something that is essentially a remote, covert system in some sense.
The question must be asked, and there must be limited circumstances where you don't have more rights preserving and other alternative, so you must choose it.
I think both at the level of the design of the technologies as well as the deployment states to recognize the risk and take steps to mitigate them.
We need to look at the issues.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Amber. 
We'll turn now to the remaining questions from the Q&A.  I'll read through them quickly and give you each, panelist in the same order a minute or two to try to address them if you can or not.
The first is a question on data literacy and the fact that as data breaches become more of a cross‑border problem with different layers of data literacy, do panelists agree that a way to provide trust is to increase the role of the data protection authorities when it comes to cross‑border transfers and also when it comes to data practices in general.
The next question ‑‑ it disappeared ‑‑ is it possible to discuss how we can address data retention regimes across the world noting there is a cloud agreement drafted between Australia and the U.S. giving more access to data between the two major states which I suppose also links somewhat to the DPA but any other suggestions people may have on cross‑border data transfer and regulation., as complicated as that question may be.
The next question, since many countries don't have data protection laws yet which we see how can data collection be accounted for during and after the pandemic and related to that it is part of the difficulties that we see in advancing principle‑based regulation and advancing Human Rights principles which are lovely but sometimes in our attempts to get normative standards that are broadly, you know, agreeable enough, how do we whittle those down in particular context in a way that's useful.  Then there's another question that's at the IGF we devote a lot of time and attention to Best Practices, what can we learn from worst practices, which of course is always a great question.
I'll give each panelist an opportunity to answer those questions and then we'll see how we go given that we're running out of time.
We'll start with Clayton. 
>> CLAYTON HAMILTON: Thank you.  I wasn't quite sure.
Let me take on the question on I think with the first one, on data governance, how to ensure that there is an absence of data regulation already existing in the country.  The simple answer is you can't.  And again, this is a foundational aspect that needs to be implemented in countries to ensure that all of the elements of transparency include data governance and they're actually valid.
What would likely happen is that under the auspices of COVID‑19 certain data will be gathered and then there will be some uncertainty on what that data is actually being useful for beyond the kind of basic elements of public health surveillance and social measures implementation.
Really what I think is important then, it is that we have an exchange of Best Practices from other countries shared widely and globally so that we can see particularly some of the really good examples that have come out of European Union and other countries around the world of where data protection regulation has actually had a very positive benefit in terms of not only controlling the dataflow but raising awareness to the potential risk that we have discussed in the session today.  I know that's probably not the answer that you were hoping for.  I think really we have to be frank, without the basic elements in place then really there isn't a foundation for the house to be stable.  Let's be honest here and say that we need to work harder to make sure that governments are held accountable for the data that they hold from the public.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Clayton.
Dr. Rasha. 
>> RASHA ABDULA: Thank you.
Unfortunately, I agree with everything that Clayton just said.  You know, in my part of the world, there aren't even data protection laws much.  You know, there's nothing you can rely on.  Even if there were, honestly, I mean, it is still not a guarantee that the data is not going to be misused or abused in anyway.  
I think the best thing we can do right now is just as an international community and as a civic society and international organizations from the United Nations to the WHO to, you know, whoever can speak up to just try to apply pressure so that the data collected are as minimal as possible, as absolutely necessary as possible and to make sure that we will keep asking where is the data going and how long will it be retained for and how it will be used.  We may not get any answers but we have to keep asking anyway.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
Finally, amber. 
>> AMBER SINHA: Thank you.  
I'll try to quickly answer the questions.  I think that the question about the fact of there is no data protection laws yet, one of the things to potentially look at, those that don't have data protection law, such as India doesn't have one, but if there is a recognized fundamental right to receive, often that right to privacy in itself is a positive application to create rules and under which those, the personal data of citizens must be protected, even from private actors.  In that sense, even in the absence of a proper framework, there may be other things that we can do to protect and create rules, particularly if the rules need to be created urgently during the pandemic because of the technical systems are being deployed.    .
Michael's questions on Best Practice, it is a very interesting one.  That also relates to the point where risk assessments, it was something ‑‑ risk assessment, it looks at the accessibility and in certain cases, something may be sort of out there, but those things, they also need to be addressed because even if there is a law, in the event that that remote risk, it does impact and it could be severe.  The other question, about how to ensure that no entity can use (poor audio quality).  That's a difficult one.  More and more what we see, there is a narrative about data as an ascent, in various countries, countries are interested in creating silos in which they want to provide some protections around the use of data.  First I think you'll have to get to some degree of convergence, around presents for data sharing and other interests that lay with the data.  When the principles are there, we have to think about other governance.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you so much, Amber.
Dr. Rasha, controversial.  Maybe what I'll allow you to do, just give me the word of the day, a quicker way of wrapping up our session!.
So I'll give Robyn a chance, and then everyone, a chance tore the word of the day before I wrap up!  Maybe 10 seconds! 
>> ROBYN GREENE: Thank you.  I'll keep this brief.
I just wanted to say thank you again for the opportunity to speak on this panel and I have learned so much just from listening to all of the other panelists.
I think, you know, a biggest take away we have seen from the COVID‑19 pandemic and governments response, and the private sector response, it is the important of establishing privacy‑protected responses that enable getting good and actionable information to citizens and individuals living in places that have, you know, significant infection rates and those that don't for that matter and making sure also that people can trust their government's response to the effective and to be responsible and to make sure that data is only being used in a way that is expected and that will be contributing to the pandemic response. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-main-session-environment^^

 
>> Thank you very much for joining our session.  Good afternoon, good evening, good morning, wherever from the world you might be joining us.  I am an online member, one of the organizers of this session together with my colleagues and I need a cheat sheet because there are many, the environment working group at IGF.
It is my pleasure to welcome you to our session today, the first ever environment main session of the IGF, we have an impressive list of speakers and moderators today, so I will not take a lot of time.  I want to hear from all of them.  But I would like to encourage all of you in the audience to make good use of the chat function to share your comments or to share any personal views you have, and please use the Q&A function to ask our panelists about anything that comes to your mind while they are speaking.  I would like to give a point of order to our panelists, to please try and keep their interventions short and punchy and team to the five minutes allocated time.  My colleague has a little bell that she will ring when you have one minute left to speak, and she will also ring the bell once you are out of your allocated time.  Please be mindful.  We are starting the session ten minutes after we planned.  We had a delay.  But we will try and make up for it and if needed we will run a little bit late, I hope you can all stay with us.
Without further ado, I introduce you to our host for this session, Mr. Krzysztof Szubert from the Republic of Poland.  He is the President of the management board of the NCBR investment fund and is our plenipotentiary for our UN IGF 2021, senior level executive with 25 year record of leadership within the ICT industry, and experienced CEO of private companies and Secretary of State and Government plenipotentiary track record in national public administration.  From 1998 until 2016 he was the President of the management board specializing in distribution of ICT solution in central and eastern European region.  He was awarded man of the year prize and he was named one of the 100 central and Eastern Europe emerging technology stars, very impressive bio there.  I will stop there because there are more accolades to sing your praises.  Let me pass it to you to start our session and kick off the discussions.
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Thank you for this invitation.  Distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank our colleagues for inviting me to be the guest host for the session on environmental issues in the era of digital transformation, within the Opening Session we heard a lot of about investment funds which I like a lot and I can speak about that.  But now let's focus on the environment side of our discussion today, as a former MAG member it gives me pleasure to be here with you today, as you are aware and was mentioned that environment topic has not been a key issue at IGF agenda so far.  However, we should have a closer look at this matter, I think.  This is because climate change and digital technologies are for sure two of the most defining features of our civilization for the future especially now during the pandemic time.  I'm happy we will discuss these two complex issues today at our session.  As you may remember, the next year's IGF host, to place the UN climate summit in December 2018, the entire region used to be one of the key symbols of the Polish mining industry for many years, but now transformed into the rapidly growing developing city with many companies focused on new technologies and innovations which is a great place to have a look at.  The linkage between energy production and consumption as well as the usage of ICTs and its impact on the environment is very strong.  We will come back to that later for sure.  Now let's move to our discussion, just to briefly remind you that we have divided our session into three segments, which is digital technologies for sustainability, reducing climate impact of digitalization, the second one, and the third one, harnessing data for the environment, all three extremely interesting.  We decided to divide the session into these three segments because they have different perspective.  We have with us a number of distinguished panelists who would like to use this opportunity to discuss that from very different angles, starting from the positive side, let us focus on the initiatives and ways of overcoming climate change and building bridges between different sectors of the economy.  This is a cross‑cutting issue.  There are no simple answers.  That is why I wish to give the floor now to Mr. Luis Neves, CEO of the Global Enabling Sustainability Initiative.  The floor is yours for the next 20 minutes and then we will be back to our mainstream again.  Thank you.
>> LUIS NEVES: Thank you so much.  I'm pleased to moderate this section on digital technologies for sustainability.  My name is Luis Neves.  I'm running the Global Enabling Sustainability Initiative, business initiative dedicated to investigate the role of technology in relation to the broad sustainability which exist since 20 years and this has been our main purpose and our main work.  I'm pleased to moderate this session, the panelist with Mr. Markus Wuest, the head of the Swiss office for environment, and Kara Hurst, Vice President, worldwide sustainability at Amazon.  Thank you for joining this session.  Before I hand over to you, let me say a few words about the work of JAC and what we have been investigating in relation to climate change or environment in relation to sustainability.
We have published last year two reports, the digital repurpose report and digital solutions for climate protection report.  Both these reports present data on what technologies can do to slow down the effects of climate change.  The first report presents COVID case studies of how the digital access to the Internet, the Internet of Things, digital reality and blockchain can support the sustainability development goals.  The report findings show how technologies can lead to the advancement of 1.34 gigatons of CO2 emissions in 2030 against the business as usual.  This can be possible through limit energy efficiency and intelligent transport systems.  The second report focuses on what digital technologies can do to support the fulfillment of low and middle income countries indices.  We have specific countries, China, India, South Africa and Vietnam and specify areas of those countries like power, transportation, manufacturing, agriculture, the report shows if applied digital technologies can lead to a microsecurity which means 10 percent of the overall emissions of those countries.  In both cases it is important to stress that digital technologies can mitigate climate change effects but these will be accompanied by more decisive actions.  I'm not saying everything is good.  I understand there are different views, different perspectives on this.  What I would like to stress, in our organization we have been looking at this since 2007, we have issued different reports, different investigations, and the conclusion is that digital technologies will be fundamental to address climate change.
Anyway, let's listen to our panelists, and I would like to invite both of them to join us.  I would like them to share their perspectives on how can existing and emerging digital technologies address climate change and foster change in sectors of the economy, manufacturing, trade, agri‑food, what conditions exist and what can be done to improve them.
>> MARKUS WUEST:  Thank you for having me in this session.  I'm replacing Karine Siegwart, but I hope I can entertain you with pictures.  I hope you can see them all.  Short confirmation, yes, you can see.  I have links inside so if you want to fill out some of my report or pictures, please find the presentation, will provide it to you.  This is our target image in the middle, we started to cover this issue with our office, environment Ministry, agency in Switzerland.
>> LUIS NEVES: Can you put this in presentation mode?
>> MARKUS WUEST:  Yes, try.  Better?  We started approximately four years ago, when we saw this target image, the University of Zurich is a active research group dealing with the sustainability of computer science and the Internet.  We discovered this work in 2017 and are still guided by this target picture.
ICT sector today produces even more CO2 emissions than the use of ICT has saved so far.  Our goal must be to reverse this differential and use the new technologies in a way that they ultimately save more CO2 than they themselves consume for the operation.  In the meantime many ideas emerged as to how this could be done, a collection of ideas and tips for municipalities and companies can be found on the Web site of the University of Zurich which we provide here the link.
Now if you want to dig deep into this, what can we do, we have to look at the value chain.  You know this probably, there is a ‑‑ sorry, next picture ‑‑ there are a lot of companies that, IT companies included, that have committed themselves to get rid of CO2 impact.  Companies usually stop introducing direct emissions in the middle of scope one, but there is a growing number that are extending this commitment to their suppliers and supply chains.  Covering the effects on the customer side, however, is the most difficult part.  But there are already approaches that I would like to show you a little bit.  Simplify picture of the economic circle, this clearly shows that the consumptions cannot be automated at will.  However, this purchase decision is in the middle of going to this scope 3.  In particular, it's a important lever for incorporating the environmental aspect in general, not only CO2.  Now some samples that I can show you in Switzerland, one idea is the integration of information, compensation possibilities, in the digital shops, in Switzerland such options are already available in many areas.  This goes to private consumption, private consumers.  Here is an example of a electricity provided in online detail from Switzerland.  This is one of the best ways for suppliers or traders to influence their downstream impact to scope, to go to scope 3.
However, as public office, you have also these decisions, that is the main initiative that I would like to show you from Switzerland.  We had so far public procurement law covered four purposes, economic, competition, transparency and even equal treatment, one of certainly, one idea that comes out of the SDGs, but now from 2021, we will start with this new criteria that really goes deep into the sustainability.  This criterion should be built in effect not only in the public procurement law but into all markets and jobs.  To this end, product data that is linked in these shops must be added with environmental impact data of products throughout a whole lifecycle.  Therefore, we need to standardize the data on products and the environment, and this is really a big challenge ahead.  We will probably hear a little more in the session today.  But this effect to go to directly with environmental information to the shopping decisions made by public offices or private consumers or business to business approaches, this will help to green the overall economy with the help of digitalizations.
This is the main idea that I wanted to show you.  Thank you very much.  I hope I didn't exceed five minutes.  If you want to see more, you can go deeper into the issues by the book or by block issues that I showed you here.  Thank you.
>> LUIS NEVES: Thank you, Markus.  It was comprehensive.  I would like to hand over to Amazon.
>> KARA HURST: You mean me?
>> LUIS NEVES: I do apologize.
>> KARA HURST: No worries.  Wonderful to be here with all of you today.  Thank you for the invitation from the Internet Governance Forum and the opportunities to share what we are doing at Amazon.  I lead the development and execution of our global sustainability work at Amazon and crosses all business areas globally, retail, cloud computing, operations and products.  We are focused primarily on using Amazon scale as well as capabilities for speed and innovation to double down on sustainability and I'll share a little bit with you today around things we are working on specifically and broad goals that we have set.
One thing I want to get to quickly in the context of this conversation is a exciting project we have called the Amazon sustainability data initiative or we call it ASDI, which seeks to accelerate sustainability research and innovation by minimizing cost and time required to both acquire and analyze large sustainability data sets.  This is a important part of our sustainability work to address climate change, enabling our core skills at Amazon and Amazon Web services business.  We work with scientific organizations such as NOAA and NASA, the UK met office and Government of Queensland and we identify and host and deploy data sets off the AWS cloud, including weather observation, satellite data, forecast data, climate projection data, satellite imagery, air quality data, ocean forecasts.  You get the picture.  But on and on around these types of data sets that come together and have not yet been available in the cloud, many times and haven't been co‑located.  We work with the group on earth observations, which offers research and organizations access to the AWS cloud to help countries realize the potential of earth observations for Sustainable Development.  We support digital earth Africa which enables African nations to track changes across the continent.  This is a unprecedented way of looking at detail making earth observation data more accessible.  One of the core things we can help do is put these data sets together, they provide valuable insights around better decision‑making for prevention and planning, including things around flooding and droughts and soil and coastal erosion, agriculture, forest cover, land use, water availability and so forth.
We work with clean energy start‑ups in this space to produce realtime historical and forecast estimates of the available solar radiation resources around the globe which helps us scale up the deployment of renewable energy as efficiently as possible.  That is one specific example of, in this way, how we are connecting data and technology and cloud computing services to promoting more accessible information around climate change effects.
To go back up to our macro level, we have committed at Amazon to the climate pledge which is our commitment to reach net zero carbon by 2040, a decade ahead of the Paris agreement, and we cofounded the pledge a year ago in September 2019, when global optimism which is led by Christiania, who many of you will know, who led the Paris agreement in 2015, and we are doing a number of things at the company to commit to being on this path to net zero carbon by 2040.  One is we have committed to a hundred percent renewable energy by 2025, on a interim basis, to power all of our global operations with a hundred percent renewable energy.
We have ordered 100,000 fully electric delivery vehicles.  We have invested a hundred million dollars into our fund on reforestation projects.  We look at the potential of e‑commerce business that we are in, making significant investments to drive our carbon footprint to zero.  We know shopping online is more carbon efficient than going to the store.  We are trying to show which products and services can drive this.  We have spent three years developing models and tools and metrics to measure our carbon footprint, but we are sharing the detailed analysis to see how shopping online and transportation that we are doubling down on electrifying, to generate less carbon than driving to a store.  A single delivery van can take a hundred car trip round journeys off the road on average.  We have a lot to share about our commitment to tackling climate change, ways we are making data more widely available.  I'll end there.  Thanks very much.
>> LUIS NEVES: Thank you, my apologies for my previous mistake.  Thank you for letting us know about your amazing achievements from Amazon and the progress you have been making.  Now it is time for Q&A.  Timea, can you help me with questions.
>> There is a lot of discussion in the chat, but I haven't seen many questions asked.  Please everyone, go to Q&A and ask your questions.  I'd like to turn to our first discussant.  You are one of the founders of the climate hub which is a platform to help businesses of all sizes to make pledges such as the one Kara mentioned from Amazon.  Can you tell us about the initiative and how it links with the discussion?
>> Great to see initiatives like Amazon's.  We are seeing so many businesses coming forward with a progressive, bold climate commitments.  In order for companies such as Amazon to be able to address their full value chain, we need to address the SMEs in that value chain.  One of the ways in which we are looking at doing is to mobilize and also support SMEs in the value chains of companies who have made strong climate commitments, to help them to align with their supply chain leader, so whether it's 2030 target for net zero or 2040 like the climate pledge, but certainly no later than 2050 which is what the science tells us is needed, SMEs can come on to the SME climate hub, make a commitment that is internationally recognized by the United Nations race to zero campaign and align with a net zero target.  For those of you who don't know the race to zero campaign, there is parallel discussions happening now, within the United Nations framework convention on climate change, called the race to zero dialogues.  Race to zero is all about bringing together all stakeholders whether they are governments, business, investors, universities, you name it, all around one goal which is really to make the Paris agreement ambition a reality and align stakeholders with net zero by 2050 at the latest targets.
On the SME climate hub a company with less than 500 employees could come to make a internationally recognized climate commitment, and also access tools and resources that will help that company to very practically curb its emissions, measure and track progress, and benefit from a large number of incentives, including recognition from its supply chain leaders, recognition by the United Nations, and we are working on financial and policy incentives as well.  I encourage you all to have a look at the SME climate hub, whether you are a supply chain leader or a small business.  There is definitely a place for you there to link up to the race to zero.  Thanks so much.
>> LUIS NEVES: Thank you so much, Majda.  I saw a question coming up from David Jensen.  Maybe I can spell it for you, how can we get the environmental reform of all products on Amazon covered to consumers in a easy way, comparable way?
>> KARA HURST: We launched a program in the United States and North America and in Europe called climate pledge friendly.  This makes it easier for customers to discover and shop for more sustainable products, we did this in a way that has a high bar.  We used 18 different external certifications, they differ between the two geographies but we looked at third parties, groups like the certification bodies that are looking deeply at the ways in which products are made, and thinking more about the sustainabilities attributes making those visible to customers.  We created one of our own called compact by design.  Customers when they shop online will see these certifications, will see information about what is involved in these certifications, and these cross not only some Amazon products, but they are brands that people would recognize, and it's a exciting way to start to convey sustainability information more broadly to customers.  These are, I think attributes that we look at package dimension, item weight, number of units, calculate the unit efficiency of a product, it's science driven and it's been externally verified and we have worked with partners as well, outside of Amazon, to verify this information and provide credibility behind it.  We are excited about the beginning of this, that we can easily make it visible to customers, where they can shop for sustainabilities products.  It's called climate pledge friendly.  You can see the certifications, the different ways in which we are telling customers information.  We will increase the number of products enrolled, and there has already been thousands that have applied for the certifications to be part of the program.
>> TIMEA:  Luis, I'm afraid you are on mute.
>> LUIS NEVES: Thank you so much.  Do we have any questions coming up?
>> Yes, we had one question, will be addressed in the next session, I think, regarding digital technologies environmental impact.  Our next speakers, be prepared to answer that.  There is one more question, I hope we can answer it quickly, does speaker think it is feasible for developing countries to build environmental impact checks into a procurement policy, does it need capacity development for both Government as well as for companies who bid for services, how does one prevent this from being a tick box exercise.
>> LUIS NEVES: Question for Markus?
>> MARKUS:  It's in the beginning the check box exercise.  In the end we should use AI assistance for buying, to help buying decisions to integrate all those other information enterprise.  We need to get away from the price as unique identifier for your buying decision.  And of course, the more data you have, this can become so complex, that we probably need more help from AI.  This will probably automate a little bit our buying decisions, but can also help us to integrate environments, social and other issues into the choosing of your product that you want, on the front of this I'm sure.
>> LUIS NEVES: Do we have time for another question?
>> TIMEA:  We should move on.
>> LUIS NEVES: Very good.
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Thank you very much, Luis Neves for this important interesting discussion.  It shows the use of the ICT and the digital technologies general can create synergies with other sectors of the economy, which is really great.  What is more, they make a big impact on our sectors and contribute to create new value chains and business models which is really good to see and especially now.
Now let us move to the second area of interest today which is maybe somewhat negative effect of the digitalization, both on the climate, and how we could reduce this impact, first let us proceed by presenting the possible influence of digitalization process and ICT sector as a whole on the climate.  The area of interest, the first one, so called direct carbon emissions coming from the manufacturing process, as well as further use of disposal of the equipment we use today on daily basis such as telephones, computers routers, elements of the networks, etcetera.  The second one covers the indirect effects created by the usage of these devices, and other spheres of life, like transportation, logistics, business management, so we mention that already a little bit.  The third one touches upon the psychological effect of our behaviors and preferences towards the usage of ICTs in our everyday life.  So three very interesting angles to look at.  Let us start the discussion around that topic at the moment, that part of our meeting.  Let me present the panelists for this segment, first one Maya Ormazabal, head of environment and climate change at Telefonica.  Second one, community engagement lead and board member at health club foundation, they both present the business and NGO perspective which is perfectly fitting our current discussion.  If I may, I would like to begin our panel by addressing Miss Maya Ormazabal, share with us your experience and good practices from your company, from your life, particularly what can be done to reduce the carbon footprint of the digital technologies.  Madam, the floor is yours.  You have five to six minutes.  Yes, please start.  The floor is yours.  Thank you.
>> MAYA ORMAZABAL: Thank you very much.  Thanks for introducing me and for inviting Telefonica to share our experience on how we are trying to reduce impact of digitalization when we are providing solutions to our clients.
A quick view of what is Telefonica, we are a Telecom company based on Europe, but we have businesses also in Latin America.  Our main businesses are based in Spain, Brazil, Germany and the UK.  In terms of sustainability strategy, we see this is a competitiveness issue and it's helping progress in the company, and we are confident that the transformation will lead to more sustainable world as has been shared in the first table, front table.  We are both trying to reduce the impact of our operations, to deploy and to give solutions to our clients, to a low carbon economy, so that the solutions are based in a really green network.
Our climate goals are aligned with the 1.5‑degree scenario.  We have committed to be 100 in 2030 though in our main markets we are already 100, consuming 100 renewable electricity now.  We have been able to decouple energy efficiency from traffic growth.  In our business it's important, our main consumption, main environmental impact comes from consumption.  We have been able to decouple this.  We are going to reduce by 90 percent between 2015 and 2025.  All this is conducting us to reduce our emissions.  We have committed ourselves to become net zero company in scope 1 and scope 2 before 2025, and also we are reducing our value chain emissions.  It's relevant also.  We have been able, we are going to reduce it almost 40 percent before 2025.  All this to have green network, green operations, and also work so that we can help our clients to reduce their own emissions.
We have been committed, we have committed ourselves to reduce, help our clients to avoid five million tons of use in 20205 thanks to our services, telecommuting, for example.  How we are going to achieve these targets, because they are challenging targets.  To reduce CO2 emissions is relevant to transform our network thinking on efficiency all the time.  We are deploying the more green and clean technologies like optical fiber and removing the old ones, promoting circular economy at the same time.  We are implementing energy efficiency projects based on technical solutions that we have in place.  Also because our main source of emissions come from the electricity consumption moving towards low use electricity is key issue.  For that we have different strategies depending on the country, depending on the momentum.  We have guarantee of origin but also PPA agreements we have signed in Spain, Brazil and Mexico and while improving, increasing self generation in our own facilities is another strategy.  With green economy we can take all the potentiality to decarbonize all the sectors.  What we have been doing until now has been helping us to issue two green bonds until now, we are part of the CDPA list and other things that I have mentioned before.  But what we have is the targets but also the results.  Our performance is quite good until now, as I have mentioned we have been able to reduce 50 percent our emissions globally, and to keep energy consumption always almost flat, until, instead of the traffic that is increasing year and year.  This is all from our side.  Thank you very much.
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Great, thank you very much.  Now I would like to hand over to Lily Botsyoe, great example of skilled IT expert and manager as well as representative of youth from the West Africa.  She is currently working for the Heartland foundation and will share her experience in capacity‑building and communication around environmental sustainability and climate change, in particular what lessons can be learned from the perspective of various communities, based on already experience.  The floor is yours for the next six minutes as well.  Thank you.
>> LILY BOTSYOE: Great, hi, everyone.  Good afternoon from Ghana, happy to meet everybody.  Sorry my lights tripped before the meeting, but I'll try and be quick about this and then move to a interesting part where we talk about what young people around the world have rallied to work on regarding green and the Internet and that is what you see on my screen.
Let me start with the reason why I got interested with wanting to know the intersection of the Internet based on technologies environment.  It goes to show that we are naturally becoming, technology is becoming manifestation of who we are.  Who would have thought we would have effect of things done online felt off line.  But this is how we have come, we are part of the system and not just working in isolation.  I'll start with the work I'm doing, what we have seen in my subregion and in Ghana, which regards the impact of digital technologies and electronics and all that.  I'm in one of the largest sites in Ghana and West Africa and is very popular and I'll share how is it giving me the interest in this and knowing how we can have sustainable use of technologies.  It will interest you to know the issue is about looking at a blessing in disguise.  There is import and heavy dismantling of technologies so people can find things they can sell to communities.  You want to look at the dismantling of these things in these places.  They dismantle it in different ways to fight iron and copper and plastics.  In this place there are 20,000 people living in the place, and these people are feeding in the place, they are working in the place and making estimates for what has been done.  You want to look at what is happening, why we are displaced and what has come to be.  First, entry point of electronics into the country, we have collection, we have imports and we have people getting these into the country.  But it got to a point where we see the impact.  Some people go on about the convention, the Government has brought up to help the situation, but we look at what more can be done.  From my point and speaking from the experience of communication of these villages we want to look at the recognition of multisector activities.  Ghana, 95 percent of the work that is done with regards eWaste and recycling is informal.  Once we look at the awareness and how to involve and provide information on what the processes are, that could lead to the better recycling of these things.  Once you look at knowledge transfer, these are people who probably left school and working to make ends meet.  But they know how to do it the right way.  But when it comes to discussions they are sidelined, and they replace the path behind them and don't help them to great extent.  Now we are seeing the impact has gone from being a individual approach to sovereign situation but we need more systematic reform.  That is why the work we have done as young people for the program with people around the world is very ....
>> Seems like technical issues.
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Yes, we lost Miss Lily Botsyoe.
>> That is unfortunate.  While we wait, maybe we can go to the questions.
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Yes, exactly.  Quite a lot of interesting points brought by Miss Maya and Lily, hope she will be able to continue in a couple minutes.  In the meantime we have a few minutes allocated for questions and answers.  If there are any questions to both panelists or to the session in general, we can do it right now.  If the moderator can help me to read them out or if you can write them out in the bottom in the Q&A option, not maybe in the chat, it will be easier to bring them and treat them.  Hello?
>> Can you hear me clearly?
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Yes, now I can hear.
>> LILY BOTSYOE:  Let me present briefly before the Internet trips again, what we worked on as young people, and what are the best recommendation we have regarding the green of the Internet.  We discussed that we want to, we are calling on Government or different stakeholders, having messages to people, our first message is we should actively strive to mitigate the environmental impact of the Internet and ICTs, both public and private stakeholders should strengthen collaboration by following responsible good, consumption of data resources and promotion of innovation.  Once we look at our second message, we ask that the promotion of access to the Internet and other ICT is sustainability.  If we want to connect the next billion, we must do it in a eco friendly way, taking into consideration the environmental impact.  We have to do this in a way that synchronizes every other thing that nature gives to us.  In our course to connect people, our activity shouldn't negatively impact things.  Policy recommendation is that the environmental impact of the ICT must be communicated in accessible and effective language.  It is important to bring stakeholders to action as a country for change being based on scientific information.  You want to have communication widespread, so everybody can understand, if you want to use video, or audio, but don't make it as dull, so they see a option to salvage the situation.  You should let people know that this transform is a systematic approach of changing things, speak directly to stakeholders and respond to these recommendations, so people get to see how important it is to first know in our world the things that are happening and are able to contribute to doing it and to solving the situation.
This is something we have done for our perspectives and maybe when there are questions I can expand some more.  I hope you didn't lose me this time around.
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Yes, thank you again.  Back to the questions, now I would like to ask our online moderator to check the questions we may have in the chat or Q&A box, and read them out so we will do our best to answer them right now.  Do we have any questions?
>> Yes, I have something here.  We have a few questions in the chat from a number of participants, I'll try and bundle them and put them to the both of you.  Hopefully you can comment.  We have a comment about 5G networks will they have a beneficial impact on reducing impact on data servers, etcetera.  Another question from the youth IGF in Germany, apart from energy consumption devices electronic waste is the major problem for environment.  How does Amazon and Telefonica plan to tackle the issue and how to limit waste or transition to more circular model of economy.  Maya is the speaker for this segment.  It is directed at you.  There is a third question and last one, a misalignment is the concept of growth, profit driven market perceive people as consumers, more gadgets mean more depleted physical resources and more waste produced, is the private sector considering models to switch to the perception of owning a piece of equipment to framing it as a loan to future generations and the environment.
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Interesting questions.  We will cover some of them later on.  I'm not sure if Miss Maya would like to take the question on 5G.
>> MAYA ORMAZABAL: Briefly, what are 5G, when we are deploying technology, we have to think about the overall picture, is it going to help our clients to reduce their emissions, is it going to allow us to reduce emissions of the electric sector or the transfer sector for sure.  But we have to think on the environmental, eco design of this from the beginning.  We can do that.  We can do that.  But we have to do it, so the play in it also removing and switching off old technologies and for instance Telefonica, we are employing 5G but at the same time we are going to switch off 3G and 2G.
When we are deploying, we have to think also at the same time, switching off and removing old technologies, because in the end, if you put on top, new technologies on the top, you are increasing the logistic consumption.  Dealing with energy efficience, 5G is going to be more efficient in terms of petabyte, so in terms of traffic that we need as society.  This delegation is about everything, and looking at the whole picture.  We need to deploy in a efficient way.  We need to, based on electricity in terms of the source and we need to switch off old technologies.  We have to think about all of this, and also we need to innovate services to take all the potentiality of the digitalization.  That is regarding 5G.
We have some studies of the efficiency of the 5G comparing to 4G and it's more efficient, and about 90 percent, if you deploy it in a very efficient way.  We have some figures.  Dealing with electronic equipment, and we have too many impacts in our sector, one is consumption and the other is electronic equipment.  We have to promote reuse, more than recycling, because recycling is good but we have to promote reuse and eco design from the beginning.  We are promoting that very much.  The old equipment in our client's house we are using four million in one year, last year, and we have to do more.  We have to encourage clients to be part of the solution.  We have to innovate more, we have to think more in eco design, in using reusable plastic, in using recycling plastics and biodegradable material with low energy consumption, but also we have to involve our clients to think about these things.  But there are many things going on in the market, if you can see, that informs our clients of a mobile device, is it more ecofriendly or is it less, and we have these kinds of things to engage our clients and consumers.
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Thank you.  Lily Botsyoe, would you like to comment on that, jumping into our discussion?
>> LILY BOTSYOE: I'll add something I learned in a earlier session today, not to say much on 5G because I don't have so much expertise.  But if the solution is not sustainable ‑‑ we are going to believe all manufacturers are going to bring something onto the market provided they have a way to follow that is sustainable and going to yield results, if only that way, that is when we can see that the solution.  Also there is probably ways to offer technologies and solutions to everybody around the world, and looking at the sustainable angle.  I've seen that companies sometimes give us their footprint, they share their permission, maybe it's time to explain it more to all of us, that is a bit about communication that is important to us as young people and people who can get information to better what is happening.  Even the solution is coming out and there is information that is understandable by all, not only by people who are technical and can understand.  If you want to go sustainable and want efforts to be all encompassing, there should be a way that communication is clear enough and should be another way where we can have people running not because of scares but because they understand the issue as it is.  They are running to help but they know inasmuch as this is happening, these are tools we have.  There is empowerment to contribute, and there is clear understanding, and even in my part of the world, when we talk about 5G, we talk about 4G and having to stabilize.  This is where we have to understand clearly.  Once we are able to run the world on what is happening, eventually everybody gets to a point where it's sustainable enough and we don't have, in our quest to connect the next billion, we are having also effects in another way.  We should make the system sustainable, make the solution smart.
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Exactly.  Sometimes I have the same feeling that we are discussing different technologies subjects in different size of bubbles and outside of those bubbles people are not so sure what we are talking about, and what the message we would like to bring.
Okay.  Let me now just jump to the next part.  Thank you very much for your comments and questions.  They constitute the most valuable contribution to today's discussion.  It's clear as you can see that the situation and our discussion is quite dynamic.
However, we must remember that our common goal is to make the best about to reduce the environmental impact of digitalization, and we should always keep in mind our actions and initiatives.  Now the question is, is there something more that we can do to reduce the carbon footprint in our day‑to‑day habits, and the answer of course is yes, we can.  There are two main issues which I would like to bring to the table.  One is the utilization of electricity, from the renewable resources to charge the batteries of our electronic personal equipment, and in some extenses we can do it, and second, what was already mentioned is the sustainable usage of these devices by trying to use them as long as possible before they are disposed of.  There is one more important point to bring to try to make sure that they are left formal recycling by handing them over to professionals and gathering electronic waste disposals, also important having in mind the sustainability and the environmental future.
These are just a few proposals, but they are pretty good I think way to start.  We have one more segment ahead of us, actually the last one, but not least.  Therefore, I would like to now hand over the floor to Mr. Michael Oghia, manager at the Global Forum for Media Development, but also a researcher and editor being the author of over 60 publications in that matter.  He will focus on a interesting issue as well from my personal perspectives from data, data usage for the environment, in particular the collection of data including big data to monitor the emissions and identify climate risk in order to implement this knowledge in business decision and investment, which is key for the future, I think.  I'm sure Michael Oghia will provide valuable expertise in that subject matter.  So the floor is yours and for your segment of today's discussion you have as well approximately 20 minutes.  So the floor is yours.  Thank you.
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you so much, Krzysztof.  My name is Michael Oghia, and it's a pleasure for me to introduce both the session as well as our two speakers.  I'm here representing the Internet rights and principles Coalition one of the IGF Dynamic Coalitions as GF is my day job.  I've been a IT sustainability advocate working in this community since 2016.  I open the segment by stressing that the progress we have made on the nexus of Internet Governance environmental sustainability is significant, although now seemingly validated by the MAG as a Internet Governance issue the relationship between the environment and Internet Governance has a rocky history, with some questioning the need to include such discussion with a Internet Governance Forum.  As our previous speakers demonstrated, however, this is a topic inherently connected to Sustainable Development, human rights, international efforts to combat climate change such as COP and of course digital inclusion.  Moreover, many of these discussions are happening in a siloed way, where there is little cross pollination of ideas and communities.
It's also important here within this section, sorry, within this session, to, it's important to recognize that there are three key components that the session is meant to address.  One is the role of digital technologies, in creating a more sustainable world, while the second highlighted the other side of the coin, ensuring that ICT is themselves and the infrastructure that supports them are sustainable from their design and production to their emissions and lifecycle.
Now, this section will focus on the third critical element, the data that fuels these technologies and how such data can be harnessed to assess environmental issues such as climate change and biodiversity loss, but also monitor the issues raised in sections 1 and 2, specifically it seeks to address how we can unlock relevant data held by public and private sector actors and collectively build a digital ecosystem of data, and analytics to monitor greenhouse gas emissions, climate risks in realtime, while informing climate safe investments and promoting a more sustainable digital economy through robust collaboration.  I'm honored to introduce head of program at the UN environmental program, David Jensen, UN AP, who will present the work of UN AP's digital transformation task force and address how policymaking can benefit from big data to better understand the impacts of policy decisions on sustainability, and joining David is Pablo Hinojosa, strategic engagement director at Asia Pacific Network Information Centre, APNIC, one of the five regional Internet registries who will discuss how policymakers, businesses, Civil Society, and other actors can cooperate within the existing infrastructure of the IGF to harness the power of data in emerging technologies in the face of a climate crisis.
David, the floor is yours.
>> David, you are on mute.
>> DAVID JENSEN: Thank you for letting me know and thank you for the excellent introduction, Michael.  Can everybody see my screen?
>> Yes, we can.
>> DAVID JENSEN: Wonderful.  It's a great honor to be here.  I'm absolutely thrilled that this is being addressed at the IGF in the main session, this is a huge precedent, and I'm pleased to be able to speak to this particular issue.  The title of this five minute intervention is digitalizing environmental sustainability and climate action, how do we actually do it in practice.
The context for this session is straightforward.  We have these two core trends sweeping the planet.  On the one hand, we have a compounding set of environmental crises, be it the climate crisis, the nature crisis, the pollution crisis and business as usual is not working at the speed and scale necessary to solve these crises.  We fundamentally need exponential change in the way we go about handling these problems.
On the other hand, we have digital technologies and digital transformation also sweeping the planet, and these are leading to a exponential increase in the availability of environment and climate data.  We had unprecedented access to data now at a speed, scale and scope never before seen.  We have data coming in from a number of sources, public sector, private sector, citizen science, academia, and a lot of the data is now spatial.  We can see where it's coming from and the environmental context that is generating it.  These are hugely important characteristics.
The question for this panel, how do we begin to embed environmental data and sustainability metrics into the digital economy, so that it helps to solve these three planetary crises in the next ten years.  That's the problem statement we have to solve in this particular sector, and this is really what the IGF, we are hoping the IGF can help tackle.
The Internet is the most successful information architecture in human history.  If we are looking at this broader question of environmental digitalization, digitalizing environmental sustain ability how do we harness the Internet as the economy moves from the analog state to the digital state.  We need to think about how do we harness this digital network, how do we benefit from this digital ecosystem and contribute to the digital ecosystem, and how do we develop a multistakeholder governance model for this new economy, that is really learning from and leveraging the IGF and some of the processes the IGF put in place over a number of years.
There are these two key questions we have to answer.  How can the IGF help harness Internet standards and digital infrastructure to drive this new era of digital environmental sustainability, and then how can the IGF contribute to the multistakeholder governance of this transition is it is inclusive, equitable and sustainable.
If we can bring the environment community together with the digital communities together, we have this historic opportunity now to hard code environmental sustainability norms and metrics into this new operating system of the digital economy.  If we can do this, there are four key goals we need to accomplish together.  The first is looking at the regulatory side of the digital economy, how do we enable regulators to transparently measure national and global progress against our environmental goals and commitments.  How many do that in a rapid and automated way.
The second is looking at investors, how do we help investors access data and analytics on environmental climate risks and opportunities to inform investment decision‑making.  The third is looking at the producers, production side of the economy, how can we enabling the measurement, the certification and sharing of data on the environmental performance of supply chains, of all products across our supply chains and across their value chains.  How do we empower consumers to adopt sustainable lifestyles and behaviors through algorithms, through nudgers, through sharing and other digital techniques.  How do we interconnect all of this through this digital ecosystem for the planet.  Ultimately, that is simply a combination of data, infrastructure, analytics, insights and a decentralized governance framework.  That has to then inform the core pillars of the economy and ensure the pillars have access to the data analytics that they need.
Finally, we stand at this pivotal moment in human history in terms of shaping the future governance of the Internet to help digitalize environmental sustainability.  The first step forward is for the IGF to adopt environmental digital cooperation as a key topic, which it seems to be doing, we are also inside the environment program adopting digital transformation for environmental sustainability as a key priority over the next four years.  We would like to work hand in hand with the IGF to address core topics.  I'll finish on these topics.
The first, how do we build this decentralized network of environmental data and analytics as a digital public good.  How can this environmental data be licensed, shared and quality controlled using the emerging API ecosystem, what are the business models we can use to pay for digital public goods, and how do we share revenues when digital public goods are monetized.  What are the key principles and key safeguards needed for public/private collaboration.  Finally how do we monitor and mitigate the environmental impacts of ICT in terms of energy and eWaste materials.  This was the issue from the previous session.
I think the IGF is a tremendous opportunity for stakeholders in both these domains to connect, collaborate, combine efforts, to harness data and digital transformation to save the planet and hope we can find a path to work on this together.  Thank you very much.
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you very much, David.  Pablo, if you are ready, over to you.
>> PABLO HINOJOSA: Good morning from Australia.  It's 3:00 a.m. here, so I hope I can make some sense.  The first thing I want to say is very warm welcome to you, David, to the IGF.  I think the IGF can help you with this challenge, that you well explained.  It is an honor for me to be here at this virtual IGF in 2020, which has four main themes, data, trust, inclusion and for the first time ever in 15 years environment.
This is a wonderful opportunity especially for the Internet technical community to take positive action and participate in this theme to improve the health of the planet.  Historically the organizations like mine, like APNIC were the ones originally doing Internet Governance consisting in coordinating technical elements of the Internet such as IP addresses and DNS.
In the early days of the IGF it was argued that Internet Governance was only about how this so called critical Internet resources should be managed.  APNIC participated in the discussions and supported multistakeholder model defending a qualitative approach where the technical community together with other stakeholders could agree on Internet Governance decisions.
Now I want to share a reflection, the efforts required to deploy the Internet around the world.  Still incomplete, but covering almost every corner and more than half of the world's population, the point I want to make is that these efforts have been as challenging as those required to solve collective action problems for its governance.
The cooperative model and the way of organizations that need to keep a single global open stable and secure Internet, this has not been a small undertaking, and the IGF has played an important role in building these multistakeholder model.  Over the years, Internet Governance has grown in terms of scope and complexity, David just talked about digital transformation, needed to understand the problem of climate change.
It's estimated that there is close to a 68 percent data gap needed to measure progress on 93 key environmental, indicators to achieve Sustainable Development Goals.  We need to build a data crunching platform to help save the planet to achieve this.  Here is where we want to make a concrete proposal which actually we discussed with David recently in a workshop at the Asia Pacific regional IGF meeting.
There is much to say about energy consumption of the ICT sector, eWaste is a big problem.  We don't think IGF would help solve 5G carbon impact but the IGF can support digital transformation, the one that David talked about through data governance and collective action.  Take this challenge, and I'm trying to translate David's concepts into the IGF, David talked about three elements of digital network which is Internet and information ecosystem which is a collaborative effort between the Internet environmental communities, and a governance model which the IGF is ideally suited to help develop.  This is all that it takes.
I cannot think of a better place than the IGF for Government officials, international and regional organizations, data scientists, space agencies, satellite companies, geospatial businesses, cloud computing platforms, Internet service providers, climate change organizations, science associations and Civil Society groups, to meet and work together in developing environmental data governance framework.
It is for this reason that we at APNIC support a initiative submitted to the IGF MAG to start the best practices following the governance of environmental data.  This initiative is a opportunity for IGF to shed light on its Government experience and apply it Government environmental data.  This is a collaborative opportunity where IGF can demonstrate one more time how it can be used for good, this time for the good of the planet.
I trust MAG will support this proposal for the Internet Governance environmental communities to use the IGF for what is best bringing people together.  You ask of course, community members, to join these Best Practices Forum with the IGF, to draft this digital transformation.  I will leave it there and thank you so much.
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you so much, Pablo, and thank you for being up so late, up so early, however you want to say it.  We appreciate you being here and appreciate all the work that you did to make sure that the session is included in the AP IGF as well.
Having said that, are there any questions for David and Pablo that we could address that are specifically related to this section?  Let me check in the Q&A.  There is a couple in the Q&A.
Tackling the climate crisis requires systemic changes which need to start yesterday.  What is the system component that ICTs are targeting towards this direction?  David, would you like to take that?  Or would you be able to?
>> DAVID JENSEN: I'm not sure I fully, I'm wondering if Luis might want to tackle this one from Jessie, in particular this is exactly what Jessie has been looking at and they have a new report on this particular issue.  I'm wondering if Luis might want to step in and answer this one.
From my side, we have to start fundamentally by bringing transparency to the current progress on where the emissions are coming from, and basically how close are we and how close are governments and companies on towards their targets.  It fundamentally begins with that transparency element.  That is a question of collecting sufficient amount of data and publishing that data and making sure that the performance of individual companies and individual products, of individual governments, is fully transparent.  That is certainly the first step from my side.  But I don't think I'm informed enough to know specifically how ICT companies are doing the targeting.  Maybe Luis can step in for that one.
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Luis, if you are still available, if you would like to come in, please do.  I would like to apologize quickly to Markus who is supposed to be leading this part of the section, so Markus, please at any point, please come in as well if you would like to answer, if you would like to facilitate, be my guest.
>> Thank you for your presentations.  I'm convinced we will be able to jump forward the perspectives in improving the digitization of the environment, and use digitization in the end in a way that we will see real progress in achieving environmental goal more in digitalization direct.  David showed us a clear way, and focus on this issue.  Very important also I think the public interest in these tools and standards that we need to go there is really big, and they should not leave this critical Internet resources to large private actors only.  IGF and other international actors like climate secretary and whatever can play a important role here.  So they also need to take into account the possibilities of digitization, of course.  So let's go and use all these networks to improve our environment.  Thank you very much.
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you, Markus.  We have time for questions.  There is a excellent question from Mark, and it's speaking to something that's become close to my heart, can public sector administration and large corporate enterprises do more through their procurement to drive reduction of environmental impacts of digital technologies.  This is separate from climate data per se but I do think, this very much aligns with that third point that you made, David, about how if we are looking at supply chains, looking at transparency, procurement involves a big aspect of that, in that process.
Would you, do you feel comfortable speaking about procurement or about what we can do as well in terms of facilitating that?
>> DAVID JENSEN: As you say in many companies Government procurement private sector procurement is more in terms of impact than consumers, can have a transformative shift in driving the adoption, technology is really driving demand.  Absolutely, procurement policy is a fundamental anchor upon which this digital transformation has to rest absolutely.  But of course that depends fundamentally on getting the metrics coming out of the supply chains, so procurement decisions can be made, and as Kara mentioned getting access to the certifications and making sense of those certifications so you can sustainably secure a product is difficult.  We need global standards on how to calculate these environment carbon footprints, how to communicate them, how to embed them into digital product passports, and how to connect that into procurement systems and procurement policies so we can have a mutually reinforcing cycle.
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you so much, David.  Pablo or Markus, were you raising your hand, Markus?
>> Markus:  Just supporting David 100 percent.  Thank you.  (chuckles).
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Good, now we can see you.  Pablo, I don't know if you have anything to add about procurement per se.  You are more than welcome to, especially as it relates to what the technical community can do.  I will keep that open for you, if you would like to address procurement.  I'd like to ask you a specific question, that is in terms of the IGF as a multistakeholder community, in addition to potentially joining the BPF, do you have any other concrete suggestions for what we as a community can do to support this topic and to support like I said cross sectorial pollination of ideas and discussions and knowledge, essentially.
>> PABLO HINOJOSA: I think what we have here is an opportunity to make a positive contribution to something that is very much needed, and the IGF has a community with expertise and a track record of aggregating different issues from different perspectives, issues such as procurement, many others.  So in order to develop this agenda of environment within the IGF, we need to think about whether we would like it to be in a general problem statement, or whether we can contribute with concrete actions towards a goal, and I think David's goal of the data ecosystem for the planet is a very relevant one, where the Internet technical community, among many other stakeholders have something to contribute particularly in the context of the IGF.  It is about fostering collective action in support of the digital ecosystem for the planet.
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Thank you.  I want to thank you and David very much for your interventions, Markus, as well for you for joining this part of the discussion.  To wrap this section up before I give it back to Krzysztof, I want to say two things.  One is that it's to me, I know I'm a bit biased in this, but it seems to me that it's incredibly clear that there is space for environmental subjects within our community, and there is a lot more work we need to do in terms of connecting the people that may not have otherwise been involved in these discussions.
If I can kind of close by saying on a very personal note, we have been working so, so hard over the past many many years to bring this topic to the discussion, it's such, I can't explain in words how amazing it is to see this happening, and it really fills me with a lot of joy and enthusiasm to continue pushing this forward.
So thank you, everyone, who made this happen.  And with that, Krzysztof, I'm happy to give the floor back to you.  Thank you very much.
>> KRZYSZTOF SZUBERT: Yes, thank you very much, Michael Oghia for your valuable contribution as well as to other panelists.  It is great discussion.  It shows both the public and private sector can work together in collecting confusing data in order to build a comprehensive digital ecosystem.
On a personal note if I may briefly share with you and my own experience as a policymaker in my capacity as deputy Minister for digital affairs in Poland a few years back, data sharing policies were then, 2016‑17, starting to hit the tables of the senior officials in the EU and Poland has for a long time understood the importance of sharing accessing and using data, and at that time my Government was the leader of so‑called like minded group of countries in the EU, it was approximately 16, 17 countries, and indicated the discussion formalized a paper on free flow of data which was later on the backbone of the biggest European digital strategy which was Digital Single Market strategy just to make comment of that.  Our efforts brought important policies about in the EU, and I'm personally happy to see a follow up to those policies in a number of European Commissions' initiatives that we are now, that are now taking place.
With this in mind, I want to share with you that on the 11th November, so in a couple of days, 11 November, 2020, the European Commission is planning to announce a legislative proposal for the data governance act.  This document aims to create the framework for the development of a secure data sharing infrastructure.  It will also generate the mechanism and requirements in order to facilitate the provision of data sharing services as well as access to public sector data within the EU.
This is just one of the examples of addressing this issue, but the very concrete and transparent one.  Before I wrap up the session, I try a little bit to summarize our today's discussion on the environmental issues with relation to digitalization.
We tried to address the impact of existing and emerging digital technologies on climate change from very different perspectives.  In this regard we have presented the current initiatives and ways of improving them.  Next we have analyzed possible solutions to reduce the carbon footprint of digital technologies and shown some lessons learned from different communities, which is great.
Then we have given you some hints on how every one of us can contribute in our everyday life, and finally we have touched open data governance, especially big data, to help us monitor the emission of greenhouse gases and climate risk which is extremely important.
Having this in mind, I wish to recall the G20 declaration from the last year, it recognized that improving resource efficiency through policies and approaches such as circular economy, sustainable materials management, the three Rs which is reduce, reuse, recycle, contribute to the SDGs.
It also stressed importance of energy transmission that realize the three E plus S standard which is energy, security, economic efficiency, environment and safety, in order to transform our energy systems into affordable, reliable, sustainable and low emission systems as soon as possible.
This declaration has also a role for data for the development, therefore we should take a closer look at the environment data as well.
For our last activity today during this session, we have prepared for you a small surprise, so called, which is a audience poll.  So in a minute, we will display for you the proposed key take‑aways from each of the session segments, asking for your vote on whether you agree with them.  This poll is for sure anonymous.  It will help us gather your views and put them forward for future discussions at the IGF level, which is a great contribution from the audience as well.  So please express your opinions as soon as the poll will show up on your screens.  And thank you very much in advance for your feedback.
I will leave it for a moment.  So we have the poll right now.  So we can spend a few moments and then vote.
Okay.  I've done the same.  We will see in a minute, hopefully the results from later on to be published on the IGF Web site.  So just to move a little bit into the closing area, so ladies and gentlemen, actually, we have reached the end of our session at this time.  On behalf of myself and my other colleagues, organizers, moderators, speakers, panelists, who have engaged themselves in preparing this session, I wish to express my deepest thanks for your active attendance as well.  This is extremely valuable for us.
Finally, I would like to kindly invite all of you next year for the IGF 2021, hopefully we will meet there in person, so that you will have the opportunity to experience the traditional Polish hospitality as well as the taste of the specialties of cuisine and learn about the tourist attraction of the region, so actually prepared a lot of the ideas for this year, but as you may know, we had to move it to the next year, so hopefully in December 2021 we will meet in Poland.  So thank you again for your time and see you all again next year in Poland.
>> Thank you for the great moderation and to our colleagues for their insights, and again to my MAG colleagues for the amazing help putting this session together, everybody, the Secretariat and to our Chair who has been pushing hard for us to have environment on the table.  I want to echo one of the take‑aways for today that this coming year from Michael's session with David and Pablo that we cannot solve the climate crisis at the IGF.  But I'm confident that we cannot solve the climate crisis without the IGF.  Let's carry on the discussions and see you all in Katowice, Poland next year.
>> See you.
>> Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-opening-session^^

 
>> Good morning.  Can we two a quick test for Excellency ECOSOC President.  Excellency.  And sound test for the Commissioner of industry and start‑up from Government of Germany.
>> It's Rudolf, can hear me?
>> Yes, can hear you.
>> Our camera is a little bit ‑‑ (overlapping speakers).
>> Mr. Akram, ECOSOC president, can we have someone from his office to advise us with audio and video.
>> I'm from the mission of Pakistan.  You have to probably put him as a panelist.  He is still the President of the ECOSOC, is not a panelist.  But he is there if you want to do the test.
>> Can you see the ECOSOC President's name?
>> I cannot see.
>> Check if he is in his own name or another name we should look out for.  We are going live in about 30 seconds.
>> I promoted Mr. Akram.
>> Ambassador Akram, can we test?  Yes, thank you, sir.
>> We can hear you well.  Thank you.  We are ready to roll.  Luis, stand by.  (pause)
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Hello, good afternoon.  I'm the mapping director of communications of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.  I was a foreign correspondent and presenter, and I'll be moderating the session.  I've been to physical IGFs, Internet Governance Forum.  Today of course we are meeting virtually.  This will be the Opening Session of the 15th annual Internet Governance Forum.  It's a great pleasure to be with you over the next 90 minutes or so.  We have a fantastic group of panelists, we will be hearing from them about the big issues, that really focus on the Internet today and of course we are speaking to you primarily and in many cases from our homes, not from offices, and this issue of the Internet Governance has never been more important during the COVID age, I'm speaking to you from London from my home where we are in lockdown.  That is why the Internet has become ever more important.
We will have a panel in a few minutes time, but we are going to start with opening speeches, and I'd like to invite the Under‑Secretary‑General for Economic and Social Affairs of the UN to take the stage.  Can you hear me, ZhenminLiu.  Under‑Secretary‑General, can you hear us?  Under‑Secretary‑General, are you there?
>> CHENGETAI MASANGO: Technical difficulties, we will try to get him on line.  Give us about 30 seconds.  Thanks.
>> ZHENMIN LIU:  I'm connected.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: It is over to you for you to start our speeches before we come to the panel.
>> ZHENMIN LIU:  Thank you for that introduction, Jonathan.  Excellencies, distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen, good morning, good afternoon, and good evening to all friends and colleagues from the world.  On behalf of the United Nations Secretary‑General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, I welcome you to this opening of the 15th Internet Governance Forum and high level leaders dialogue.  Due to a schedule conflict, the Secretary‑General is not able to join us at this Opening Session.  But we will have the honor of his address at the closing session next Tuesday.  Due to COVID‑19, this year's Internet Governance Forum is being convened online virtually together.  This virtual IGF is being hosted by the United Nations with the support of the UN family.  We have thousands of participants registered online, all around the world, in various channels.  For today's Opening Session, I have on the invite His Excellency Ambassador President of United Nations General Assembly to address IGF.
>> VOLKAN BOZKIR:  Mr. Antonio Guterres, Excellencies, distinguished guests, thank you for the opportunity to address the 15th annual meeting of the Internet Governance Forum.  I thank the Secretary‑General for convening this important and topical discussion (pause) His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres Secretary‑General of the United Nations, Excellencies, distinguished guests, thank you for the opportunity to address the 15th annual meeting of the Internet Governance Forum IGF.  I would like to thank the Secretary‑General for convening this important and topical discussion, ladies and gentlemen, allow me to be direct.  The SDG target of achieving universal connectivity by 2020 has not been met.  In fact, 3.6 billion people continue to lack access to the Internet.  Only 19 percent of people in least developed countries have access to Internet, in stark contrast to the 87 percent in developed countries.  The digital divide is exacerbating existing inequalities, more men use the Internet than women in two out of three months.  All of this is only complicated and compounded by COVID‑19 which has underscored the depth of this divide which is eroding development gains in countries and communities that are disconnected from the rest of the world.  Deprived from a important means of development, an adaptation to this pandemic, these countries and communities are at risk of losing an entire generation's worth of hard work, development gains.  While it can be argued that the decade of action and delivery has been derailed by the pandemic, quite the opposite can in fact be true.  We can use this moment and opportunity afforded by COVID recovery efforts to fast track progress globally, to invest in a sustainable recovery, that is guided by the SDGs.  Addressing the digital divide is a significant part of this, as a SDG accelerator, improved digital access will have dividends across the whole of the SDGs, expanding access to education and employment, and boosting progress in the areas of good governance and gender equality.  Likewise, increased connectivity has the potential to boost economic growth and create new markets in Fintech or mobile banking amongst others.  Another SDG accelerator and one that is directly linked to the increased connectivity is the need to address unequal access to reliable and renewable energy, with the UN high level dialogue on energy in September, 2021, the Internet Governance Forum provides opportune moment to explore the interlinkages between these issues and to chart a path forward.  Ladies and gentlemen, as you go through your deliberations, I ask that you consider these issues and to ask yourselves this.  What are the primary challenges impeding implementation at the multilateral, regional and local levels?  What kind of partnerships on digital issues have been most effective?
Before closing, allow me to say this, we cannot and should not be satisfied to live in a world where half of the population is more connected than at any time in history, while the other half is left out and disconnected.  I thank you for the opportunity to address the Forum, and I wish you the best in your deliberations.  Thank you very much.
>> ZHENMIN LIU:  Thank the President of the General Assembly for his opening remarks and for his strong support to IGF.  Now I have the honor to invite His Excellency the President of ECOSOC, President of Economic and Social Council, ECOSOC, His Excellency to address IGF, Ambassador, you have the floor.
>> AMBASSADOR AKRAM:  Thank you, Under‑Secretary‑General and thank you for the invitation to speak to this 2020 meeting of the Internet Governance Forum.  The fact that this virtual 15th session of the forum hosted by the United Nations is being held virtually is one indication of the power of digital technologies to bring people together and search for solutions to sustainable development in these most difficult times.  Digital technologies have made unprecedented progress possible.  Yet, this progress has been unequal.  Digital governance is critical.  The latest research shows the high levels of concentration of resources, skills and capacities needed to leverage digital transformation, and this research indicates the risk that further digitalization and data driven development will lead to widening digital divides and income inequalities.  We need stronger efforts so that national and international digital governance keeps up with accelerating technological change.  Gaps in digital governance could quickly become bottlenecks for the application of frontier technologies for Sustainable Development.  This is particularly visible if you see the megatrends in this sphere.  One, the explosive growth of data volumes and crossborder flows.  Second, the dominance of the ICT business environment by huge data management corporations.  Three, the fast pace and unprecedented change and unpredictable change in digital technologies.  And fourth, the ever stronger force with which digitalization drives and sets the course of economic, social and cultural change.  The private sector which owns 70 percent of the ICT infrastructure, has an important responsibility.  It is essential to address some of the policies and issues relating to the big technology companies, including tax policies, transfer pricing, free and fair trade, Cybersecurity, and cyber crimes, as well as the propagation of violence and hate over the Internet.
Ensuring privacy, security and responsible management of data is also fundamental, some other areas where truly inclusive international governance processes could bring significant benefits include financial inclusion and online health services.  The long standing challenge that should remain a critical focus for digital governance is the fight against the digital divides.  As the President of the assembly has mentioned, 87 percent of individuals in developed countries are connected, only 19 percent are so connected in the least developed countries.
The COVID‑19 crisis highlights the profound inequity of the digital divide, where half the world is using the Internet to stay connected, and continue business, while the other half is living literally in another world, disconnected and unempowered.  This is why I believe that we, the developing countries, must aim not only to catch up, but to leapfrog into the digital era, focusing on broadband, 5G, artificial intelligence, and getting on board the knowledge economy.  We should strive to ensure that the IGF continuously improves this space for developing countries to be heard and to be at the table in evolving digital governance.  Credible and effective digital governance cannot exist without truly inclusive and participatory approaches.  The participation of actors from developing countries is essential and must be better supported.  Economic and Social Council's commission on science and technology and development office, one indispensable space for inclusive consideration of digital governance issues, so does the SDI Forum which will be convened next year, again to consider digital and other technological advances.  Ladies and gentlemen, the development challenges of digitalization require a coordinated multilateral response that draws on the respective comparative advantages of each actor in the international Arena.  The UN Secretary‑General's roadmap offers a good pathway to bridge the digital divide.  I wish you all success in your consideration of this critical issue of the world today.  Thank you.
>> ZHENMIN LIU:  Thank you, Mr. President, we are going to report IGF discussion.  Thank you.  Excellencies, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen, allow me now to share some brief points about this year's IGF before we move to the high level staff.  The 2020 IGF is convened against a backdrop of COVID‑19, under the theme, Internet for human resilience and solidarity.  While digital technologies were available prior to the onset of the pandemic, the impact of COVID‑19 has laid bare the importance of Internet based technologies for our livelihoods.  Indeed, we have seen significant digital transformation over the past months, and this digital acceleration is likely to continue, last year in Berlin the Secretary‑General Antonio Guterres together with Chancellor Merkel called on us to build a IGF into a platform where all stakeholders can come together to share policy expertise, debate emerging technology issues, agree on some basic common principles, and take these ideas back to the appropriate Forum.  This year in the virtual world I'm happy to see that we are continuing to work together in transforming the IGF into the vision that the Secretary‑General laid out in Berlin.  This year's program includes more than 200 sessions that focus on four main thematic strikes, environment, inclusion, and trust, and data.  High level leaders track for this Opening Session, discussions will be centered around Internet Governance in age of uncertainty.  Tomorrow's parliamentary panel will be on building trust in age of COVID‑19 response and how the international community can recover better.
Last week, as part of the pre‑event programs, the IGF 2020 Global Youth Summit was successfully organized.  The IGF is providing a platform for youth to have their say in setting global Internet policy as the leaders of future generations.  As we continue with our dialogue, I encourage all participants to keep in mind four issues.
First, let us not lose sight of the digital divides.  In the least developed countries, only 19 percent individuals were online in 2020, in 2019, we are leaving a large majority behind.  We need solutions that help bridge the digital divide, so that the benefit of the digital technologies can reach those being left behind unconnected.  Second, let us eliminate the gender digital divide.  In all regions of the world, especially in LDC countries, more men than women are using the Internet.  Eliminating this divide should be mainstreamed into women's empowerment initiatives.
Third, let us make sure that the Internet is economically within reach for all, access is still a big challenge for many, even for this virtual IGF, there are participants who want to join, but are struggling to get connected.
Fourth, it is time to invest more in digital literacy and capacity development.  More people struggle to connect due to lack of digital skills, and some are missing relevant content in their local languages.  I'm aware that IGF community has been working together to find solutions to these problems.  Let me assure you that the UN family will intensify our efforts to make the positive impact in this endeavor.  The United Nations department of economic and social affairs UNDESA remains fully committed to digital cooperation and most importantly to work with IGF stakeholder in groups to continue strengthening IGF.  I wish you a productive meeting and successful session.  I thank you.  Now I'll give the floor back to our moderator, Jonathan.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Mr. Liu, thank you very much indeed, undersecretary general for economic and social affairs and apologies for the technical problems we had at the beginning, not just with your wi‑fi, my own as well, there is something ironic about talking about connectivity, but it does show there are many challenges left, of course to be faced in terms of having the Internet in a way that is accessible for everybody in many different ways, and we are now starting our high level discussion.  Let me introduce our panel.  We have with us Doris Leuthard, former President of Switzerland Chair of the Swiss Digital Initiative Foundation, the Commissioner for digital affairs and also start‑ups in the German, the Minister for economy, civil service and communications from Fiji, Houlin Zhao, international telecommunications Secretary‑General, if executive director, association for progressive communications, director for Sustainable Development at Colombia university, Victoria Grand, global policy and communication head of WhatsApp, Pamela Cretu, youth representative, Paul Tighe, Holy See, joining us from the Vatican.  Welcome to all of you.  We are going to be discussing this issue of how to improve Internet Governance and of course it comes at a critical time when the Internet has never been more important, with all of us working more digitally in the current COVID crisis.  What needs to be done?  I'd like to start by asking you all a simple question, which is in which areas of people's lives do you see the biggest impact of digital transformation and Sustainable Development.  Doris Leuthard, perhaps I can ask you first of all.
>> DORIS LEUTHARD: Thank you very much, I think every part of our lives will be changed by digital technologies.  But I think the biggest issue we will see in communication, the proof is our conference, which is virtual, which was not in the past a reality.  Communication from companies, within companies, from governments, between organizations, all these will change a lot our societal behavior and our way of communication and learning together.  We can come together easily from all over the planet.  That is I think a big change.  But also a big challenge.  Big thing is finances, I think cash is an old‑fashioned element.  We have today also due to COVID a lot of people using credit cards, using their mobile phone, especially also in developing countries, we see a lot of change, many people did not have a bank account before in the classical financial sectors.  Today with a lot of possibilities, we see small businesses evolving, we see a lot of people now can transfer money, can handle their bills, whatever it means, so this is very important also for global trades and for global economy.
Third, I think the world today is a shopping center, e‑commerce involved very large and here we see a lot of opportunities for developing countries, when they have access to these technologies, but this might change a lot of businesses we used in the past, and for this we need very well educated people, that they know the technologies and also in my age, my generation, we must also here, invest in new education so that we don't have a digital divide between young people who are used to use all these applications and our generation.
Actually now roadmap we have presented to the Secretary‑General last year at High Level Panel on Digital Cooperation, we mentioned a lot of this transformation, how we can build a more inclusive world and what should be done.  Actually, I'm very happy that the Secretary‑General presented this roadmap, how we can strengthen, develop the ecosystem of digital cooperation and governance in the spirit of IGF plus and in the spirit of the SDGs.  Perhaps we can later go in more details.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much indeed, Doris Leuthard, for kicking us off there.  Let me come to Thomas Jarzombek from the German Parliament, Commissioner for digital economy.  Where do you think the answer to this question lies about where we might see the biggest impact of digital transformation and Sustainable Development?
>> THOMAS JARZOMBEK:  Thank you for the opportunity to talk here, and also to stress that we are very thankful for the opportunity, last year, to organizing the IGF here in Berlin, and all of our team has good impressions about last year and I hope it was a good opportunity for the whole ecosystem to have a dialogue, and we truly believe that IGF has a very important role, and we truly believe in the multistakeholder approach that the IGF also stands for, and German Government even in the year after organizing the IGF will foster all these initiatives and we believe it's very important to have a worldwide, free and open Internet.  This is what I believe is the most relevant take out of COVID‑19, because we have seen that COVID‑19 is a boost for digitalization, especially for the more major economies in the world like ours, and all the European economies are, we can see that we have always huge debate about challenges and opportunities of the Internet.  We should look more on the opportunities, and not only on the challenges.  Before COVID‑19 we had a big dispute about is everybody included in all these technologies and is everybody capable of using that, and what about privacy and so on and so on.  We learned overnight with COVID‑19 that things are possible that seemed unimaginable before.  Despite all the down sides of COVID 19 to people that are harmed about that and businesses that are harmed through COVID‑19 I believe there are also big opportunities and digitalization is one of them.  As I said we believe in free and open Internet.  I believe this is also a big contributor from more sustainability, the opportunity to talk freely and open together, and we are concerned about some of these developments, about a fragmented Internet.  We believe a open Internet is key.
Therefore, we will bring in ourselves and in the whole way of enabling more opportunities here also in this format of this IGF, we have organized a digital strategy in the German Government, digitalization it values, and this is important for us.  No matter whether it's a question of competition or market access of handling personal data, freedom of opinion or any other field we need the best possible policy environment for all online lives.  A communication of nations companies, the IGF is the right Forum in which to discuss this in detail as cochampion and consultation process of the future, we have presented a options paper.  It is important for us and our aim is to stimulate and structure the debate for a evolution of the multistakeholder model towards a IGF plus.  I look forward to a inspiring discussion.  Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much.  One question before you go, you talked about transformation, and I wonder how much of a leap forward you thought we had made during this crisis, COVID crisis, people talk about a massive leap forward for the age of digital.
>> THOMAS JARZOMBEK:  We have seen a big push overnight.  I think this is a good development.  If you look at all these continents, I believe Europe has more potential on digitalization as it's realizing right now.  Therefore, our Government is trying to push that forward with the digital strategy.  We also fostered a start‑up ecosystem, we have a AI strategy.  We are focusing on blockchain, we believe quantum commuting is a need we are going to invest, there is innovation potential all over the world and Europe especially.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you.  We will come back to you for another question later on.  Let's move to Aiyaz Sayed‑Khaiyum, minister for economy, civil service and communications in Fiji.  Let me ask you, where do you see from where you are sitting there in the Pacific the biggest impact of digital transformation and Sustainable Development.
>> AIYAZ SAYED-KHAIYUM: On a couple fronts, the speaker mentioned about aspects of digital money wallets, that made a ... mainstream them, in particular bring them to access services that previously could not access.  You have to remember that we are about 330 islands, a hundred to 110 are inhabited.  We bring connectivity to them and the cost of connectively can be expensive, given the economies of scale.  Notwithstanding that, we have been able to focus on funding in those areas.  Government services, rolling it out to rural areas, social welfare payments, E ticketing for transportation, the pensioners, disabled persons, etcetera.  Also with COVID‑19, we have got now 202 days without any new COVID transmissions.  We have been very stringent, introducing digital platforms.  It is important for us because our economy depends on tourism.  Revenue streams have come down significantly.  As a result, we have to run technology, to roll out services, so people are more acutely aware about using those tools to be able to access services in that environment.  Last but not least is climate change.  Goal 13 talks about, under the SDGs, ability to demilitarize issues of climate change.  In terms of communications, particularly the out islands early warning systems, that is critically important for us.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: You mention the high cost of installing and making sure there is access around the islands.  What help could the international community give there?
>> AIYAZ SAYED-KHAIYUM: There is a number of ways that we could do that.  We have set up for example.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Can hear me?
>> AIYAZ SAYED-KHAIYUM: Yes, I can.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Maybe not.  Let's move on.  Let me move on to Houlin Zhao from the International Telecommunications Union.
>> HOULIN ZHAO: Can you hear me?  Yes, very good.  Thank you.  Dear friends, I'm pleased to join you at this panel discussion.  I really like IGF, what I have heard so far, is everything I want to communicate.  Now you communicated to the public.  So that instead of me and I heard many similar messages from all of you, that is wonderful.  I want to remind us, today we consider everything is granted like, without ICT, the society will become worse, very terrible.  But with ICT seem to be that we can manage our life facing this COVID‑19.  But don't forget, this ICT services and applications are available to us since 15 years or 20 years hard work of ICT workers and all of you.  IGF together with WSIS Forum are two consequences of what WSIS process, and I suggest to organize in Geneva, in Tunis, we try to incorporate, to do the best to build up Information Society, and people may not realize how important that should be, today, COVID‑19 force us to come to this society with ICT.  This is something that is important to remember.  Thanks to the hard work of everybody, we have this ICT infrastructure, we have this ICT applications.
But for example privacy, for example confidentiality, and security of our tools like Zoom, like Team, like Interprefy, all this telemedicine, is it safe or not.  Today we first ask it's possible for us to use or not.  Then you ask the security, quality of services.  But all this is available to those who are connected, we should not forget that, as Chairman of ECOSOC just mentioned, half the world not connected yet and how can we bring people be connected.  That is very big challenges.  Secretary‑General call for everybody to be connected by 2030 with affordable prices, and imagine half population not connected yet, we have only ten years to go.  If we do best like before you will never get it.  We have to do something, more smart and innovative.  Your high level digital panel can give us a lot of wonderful ideas.  This is absolutely very strategically important to all of us.  But I think that to do, let me give you an example, for each country, you have several Telecom operators, and Telecom operator invest in ICTs.  For you to get the children comfortable during this COVID‑19 with tele‑education, you need to have very good infrastructure for connecting to the family, you have to go for the education Minister to go to all the Telecom operators to have arrangement, and for the education like that, everybody do the same thing, so that is my message, we have to change our mind, if we continue to do business as before, you will never get the business done by 2030, to connect everybody.  You have to change your mind, to engage everybody, to work with the common strategy to put ICT really at the focal point to be supporter, to support development, not to leave this to each Ministry to do their business with their own project, to use ICT to improve their own efficiency, but if we put everybody together, I think that will be much efficient.
That was my message to the financial Minister, foreign ministers.  I put four Is as my priority since 2015, when we celebrate IGF 150th anniversary, and I put since that moment, infrastructure is absolutely important.  We have to extend to connect those who are not connected.  We have the upgrade with 5G, AI, all this, we need infrastructure and we need investment.  We need investment to improve capability of Africa, from current penetration, for one year we need at least one billion dollars, we have to find the money.  At the current rate the money is mainly coming from private sector.  The public needed to create good environment to attract investment and to encourage investment and create a good environment.  Then we need to have innovation.  Innovation, we have to get smarter policy environment with innovative ideas.  Innovation is not only for technologies, but also for this kind of policy environment.  We need good innovation.  Of course, last I is inclusiveness.  When I was in Geneva, I heard from Swiss television saying that the people in the mountains don't know how to use Internet, they are asking to stay at home, they cannot go out.  But the local community tried to bring them food, the vegetable to their door, but then they have to pay them and the senior citizen don't have money because they are used to going to the machine to get money, but they don't know how to use the Internet to order food.  This is also some kind of things that we only see under this COVID‑19 situation.  COVID‑19, we are asked to do a lot of things.  I think that we have opportunity.
This IGF meeting is absolutely critical for us, because that is, this is the platform we can invite everybody to come together to look at challenges, to look at ideas to move forward.  This year marks the 15th anniversary of IGF, of course it's 15 years of WSIS Forum.  We would like to continue to use this platform to encourage more investment in ICT infrastructure, innovation and then to bring the benefit of ICT to everybody, not leave anybody behind.  Sorry to take so much time.
Let me just stop here.  The last message, I know in my panelist I have one from Holy See.  I visited the Pope, the father told me, I visited him in his office in September, 2017, so he clearly supported the ICT to facilitate ICT infrastructure development, to facilitate the socioeconomic development.  He was so kind to give me strong message I delivered at the World Telecommunication Conference in Argentina in September, in October, that he support ICT.  He particularly pay attention to those disabled people, immigration, the people that suffer from this immigration, refugees.  We are very pleased with his message.  We have to work hard to mobilize every possible resources to focus on this ICT development, and IGF is the right place.  It's very good platform.  Thank you very much.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Houlin Zhao, thank you very much indeed.  You were talking about the need to invest in infrastructure, the issues that London is having today for example where I am show that with so many people working at home in lockdown, clearly the infrastructure struggles to cope with that.  You are seeing that in the drop outs I'm having, it's something many people experienced in various cities during this particular crisis.
Before I came to you, I was asking Aiyaz Sayed‑Khaiyum a question from Fiji, I hope you are still there, Minister, in Fiji which is about what you thought the international community might be able to do to help you in Fiji bearing in mind that you have hundreds of islands to roll out infrastructure to.
>> AIYAZ SAYED-KHAIYUM: Definitely.  For example, we have a project with the World Bank, the World Bank funded us our ability to be able to connect the largest island, there are a number of areas where you have unconnected people, particularly around coves and gullies up on various small islands.  Also there is a need to work with ITU in respect of frequencies and be able to roll out the frequencies.  On the other hand, we have had in terms of radio telecommunications we had the Japanese Government provide funding to roll out AM radio station in terms of better over water to get out to the remote islands.  Those types of collaboration can take place.  But I think it also falls within the ambit of climate change, the building of capacity to get people to be connected.  It's critically important.  There is a number of projects we have got, different agencies can work, depending on the area of expertise.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much.  I'm glad we heard that answer.  It is important in terms of emerging economies.  Let's move on, Houlin Zhao was talking about seeing the Pope.  Let's go to the Vatican.  Paul Tighe, in the Vatican of the Holy See, how is this question seen from there?
>> PAUL TIGHE: I speaks the Vatican itself is one thing but the Vatican as a center, like anybody else, we have been learning about digital transformations, as places of worship are closed and people try to keep communities alive, through the use of digital means of communication, and I suppose it's learning about that, it's not just about doing what you have done, put it on line, but digital transformation, there is a technological side to it.  We have to understand the technologies.  But more importantly, our interest is what is happening with digital transformations, are transforming societies, how we relate to each other, how we build a community.
I'll take three issues in particular.  One is everybody has been speaking for years about how important interdependence is, high level panel reporting on digital cooperation to the Secretary‑General, but interdependence we would say not just a statement of fact, COVID reminded us how interdependent we are.  But want to make a interdependence value, we see a value that exists between people, go beyond a mere tolerance of one another as we share the same space, but rather have a sense of the importance of expressing what it means to be one human family, one family that is sharing a common home and that has to work together to do that as fast as possible.  Two issues in the digital transformation we have all seen I'd like to raise questions about, what is the transformation of work, where suddenly so many people are working from home.
That raises questions for us about where do we draw the lines in between separation of work and family.  Within families, there has been a interesting question of how do we tease out the responsibilities for shared domestic responsibilities, when both partners are working from home.  We need to reflect on some of this, as more people work from home, we lose the sense of solidarity that exist between coworkers.  This is a sense in which we are all being put on to something like platform economy inadvertently.  As we look to the future with the reality of perhaps more work being displaced, we need to keep a eye on the sense that work is not just financial reward, but we express our dignity, our creativity, capacity to contribute to society.  In parallel with education, so much of education has moved on to online fora, the real issue, this is where the domestic digital divides between the haves and have not, those who have access to computing with wi‑fi connectivity, the distances are extenuated by what we are seeing in the field at the moment.  Specifically issues where children who have access and don't have access to education, also not just providers of education but in many places that feed and care for and look after the needs of those students, all of those issues need to be attended to.
The final one of concern, as to whether those that should come close to each other and sometimes inequalities is a concern.  See the photograph there, yes.
>> Is Jonathan online?
Apologies, we are aware there is connectivity issue.  That is the same for some of the families this morning.  Please with ask for patience for 30 seconds for moderator to get back on line.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much Paul Tighe.  Let's turn to Chat Garcia Ramilo, director of Association for Progressive Communications.
>> CHAT GARCIA RAMILO: Thank you, Jonathan.  One thing that we have seen in this pandemic is that we have very different contexts, however much we think that they call it inequalities that have been discussed, mentioned earlier, this is very different for everybody.  Acceleration of the digital transformation has exposed the very profound availabilities of those who suffer most and this is what we need to pay attention to, if we are to address inequalities in the digital age.  People and groups historically discriminated against and excluded on the base of race, class, religion, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability, is also a important thing that we need to look at.  It is not only about which areas are impacted by digital transformation but also by who are affected by them.  Digital technologies impacts most aspects of our lives now but in significantly different ways, because of this multiple forms of systemic and structure inequality and injustice.  I want to emphasize that if we are to really look at addressing a divide and inequalities that can be magnified as was mentioned earlier by the President of the General Assembly, so already the digital divide has been mentioned, a lot of the ones who are still not connected are those who live in least developed countries, those rural women, people who live in rural areas and women, the other areas as we know, the Internet has been a space to express, to associate with others and participate in public life, this has been really empowering for many.
But the power over a digitalization and therefore on our personal data and people's interactions, have been more and more concentrated in the hands of big tech and we have seen how much a lot of people have lost jobs in this pandemic, but we have also seen the massive, the massive profit of big tech, they are the ones who are profiting so much, from people who are using platforms, etcetera.  That is a reality that we I think must look at if we are to address inequality.
They also have then, with this concentration, they have a lot of power over deciding on content, on what is on expression and public space which is now more and more has become the online space, I think it is something to really look at, if we are to really address injustice and inequality.
I also would like to reinforce the environmental impact.  There are many useful uses of ICT for environmental sustainability.  But the pandemic has also propelled demand for digital technologies services and platforms.  This exponential production and deployment as well as ways of digital technology is a challenge for us and can contribute to climate environmental emergency.  It will spare few of us, but as we know for example in the Pacific, we have heard they really are the ones in more precarious situations.
I want to emphasize here that to avoid enforcing and magnifying inequalities, we really should pay a lot of attention to understanding how this impacts differently, and that this impacts then require specific responses.  It cannot be a general response, digital transformation is not necessarily all good.  It needs to be thought about carefully and should include public policy interventions that promote meaningful access, yes, preserve free and open Internet, as well as reinforce human rights and also mitigate climate crisis.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much indeed, Chat Garcia Ramilo.  How does all this play into development economics, let me turn to Jeffrey Sachs.  How do you see this playing out?
>> JEFFREY SACHS: Great, thank you so much.  What a wonderful discussion.  I think everybody agrees that we are in the digital age, the technologies are really extraordinarily effective potentially for healthcare, for education, for E finance, commerce, e‑governance, and many other areas of the economy, digital is utterly disruptive, and it's absolutely accelerated, of course, this year.
So we need to face up to two basic challenges at least, two to start.  One is universal access.  This is not so expensive.  But it can't be dragged on for the next ten or 20 years, because we can't actually expect any part of the economy to function without digital access now.  We can't expect people to be effective citizens if they are not online, they won't be receiving Government services, transfers, information, being able to register for many things, so we dramatically need to accelerate access.
Fortunately, this is the most scalable technology in human history.  So if we put a time line for universal coverage, within the next short number of years, we will achieve it.  Now, the questions are how to finance it.  First, thanks god we have Biden as President‑elect, because maybe we will have U.S. cooperation for the first time in a number of years.  I would put this as a challenge to the United States, the U.S. is still the world's digital leader.  It is still the controller of the most important platforms.  These are monopoly platforms, Amazon, Google, Facebook, Microsoft, are the portals that are the most important worldwide, they are generating unbelievable amounts of monopoly profits and wealth.  The United States has a responsibility that it of course did not meet under Trump.  Trump was the opposite of meeting any international obligations.  Now we have at least a chance we will see whether there is some decency there.  China is a wonderful investor and supplier in developing countries.  I really want to encourage this, by Huawei, stop letting the United States ‑‑ the Trump attacks on China slow the access to what is the lowest cost, most effective 5G systems in the world.  The U.S. was behind in this technology, so it tried to stop China from developing its partnerships, its monopoly, its investments, its diplomacy.
I hope this will stop now, because it was errant nonsense.  But we absolutely need to also have China as a major investor and sharer of digital technologies, because China is actually ahead in social applications, I would say, of any country, it's got the largest group of Internet users.  It's got very advanced systems for hundreds of millions of people, and it can share these effectively in the Belt and Road initiative and other places as well.
My basic point is let's set a time line not to 2030.  There are a few big players in the world, the Telecom sector and big tech, that have the responsibility, it's in their interest, though we also have to tax these companies and regulate them more effectively, but we need to get to universality.  Otherwise we are really going to entrench, not just an underclass but a nonclass, if you are not on line, you are not going to exist in this world, because you will not be able to function.  By the way, let me just close by saying that the amount of wealth as Chat said that has gone to the top should, allow us to focus on what we are really talking about, there are now 78 tech billionaires, that have a combined net worth of $1.9 trillion, just 78 people, 1.9 trillion.
This year, those 79 people have had capital gains of $612 billion.  When we say, where are we going to get the billion for Africa, this is 612 billion since January 1 for 78 people.  So Mr. Bezos, Mr. Zuckerberg, Mr. Gates, you made fortunes this year, tens of billions of dollars, this morning Mr. Bezos is worth $194 billion, 194 personally.  And I'm holding here the investigation of competition in digital markets of the house committee on the judiciary of the U.S., which shows how monopolized this sector is and how Amazon has used its monopoly power ruthlessly.  This is not something where we ask how can we get a billion dollars.  There is trillions out there, on just a few people.  We need to get smart and not just be taken over by 78 tech billionaires in the world, but actually run a society for everybody.
This technology is for everybody.  I'm not saying it's so easy.  It's easier now than it was before November 3.  But we are still facing real grim truths of power and wealth.  But we are also lucky inheritors of the most powerful scalable technology in human history, so if we want to get everyone covered in the next five years, no problem.  Absolutely no problem.  Indeed, what the Telecoms' heads tell me is it's not even infrastructure.  It's just who is going to pay for their household services, because the infrastructure already covers most of the world, but people aren't on line because they can't afford devices, and they can't afford the data costs.
So if we solve a few financing problems, by telling these companies that is your social license, sorry, you connect everybody.  You are common carrier, you must connect everybody, period.  Then we can get it done.  But I think it's a wonderful discussion, and everybody is completely oriented in the right way.  This is our best chance.  Let me just add one more point, which is that under any circumstances, a lot of jobs are going to be lost as well as gained by these technologies.  These are so efficient, they will let machines do the work of human beings.  There is no question, all over the economy, we are going to lose jobs.
So we are going to have to tax the profits from these companies to share with the whole society.  Otherwise, we are really going to end up with 78 people who own the whole world, which is not exactly what we want.  Thanks.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thought provoking and provocative as usual.  This is a good moment to hear from Victoria Grand of WhatsApp.
>> VICTORIA GRAND: Good morning, everybody.  Many thanks to our organizers for working so hard to bring us together in these unprecedented times.  There is no more important policy conversation today than ensuring that the Internet remains open, inclusive, secure and responsive to the needs of our time.  As others have noted, because of the coronavirus today's IGF conversation is happening digitally, just like so many other important conversations that are happening around the world right now.  Billions of people are turning to WhatsApp every day to have these important conversations, to talk with loved ones and friends, to work, to teach and to learn, to connect with their doctors, with therapists, to buy things from businesses during the pandemic to get what they need for their daily lives.
A survey in Indonesia found over 80 percent of consumers are using WhatsApp to shop or communicate with businesses during the pandemic to get what they need.  This is happening for free.  We are working hard to build new tools including the ability to make payments right in the app.  Something that we have just launched in India, and that we will soon bring to Brazil, to meet this moment and to support businesses and consumers during this critical time, especially the large populations of unbanked people in so many of the countries that WhatsApp serves.  Trusting that we can do all of these things and share the information that we share, the health information, the business information, the bank and credit card information, personal photos, this is all critical.  Traditional approaches to Internet Governance have long been rooted in values like free expression, privacy, transparency and the rights of individuals.  These values are at the heart of WhatsApp.  We believe in every person's right to have a truly private conversation.  We are more open and more free to express ourselves, when we know conversations aren't being recorded, collected or monitored, when what we say cannot be traced back to us.  As we live more of our lives on line without question being accelerated by COVID, we should match the security and privacy we have when we connect in person and not accept that it will be weaker because it's happening digitally.
That is why we use the best, most secure technology available, end‑to‑end encryption, to protect the privacy of the 100 bill conversations that happen on WhatsApp every single day.  We are proud to put this powerful technology into the hands of more than 2 billion people, again for free.  We are also proud to see that platforms that offer end‑to‑end encryption are now outpacing those that don't.  The vast majority of messages that are sent today are sent over end‑to‑end encryption, encrypted platforms and even platforms like Zoom are offering this technology given strong consumer demand that's arisen during COVID.
Despite this, a number of proposals have been advanced recently, very concerning proposals in liberal democracies to roll back this vital protection at precisely the time when we need it most, and make it something that you and I no longer have access to.  We are seeing this in the UK, in the U.S., in Brazil, and Australia and the EU as well as in India.  We are committed to fighting for encryption, it is our best front line defense for our personal security and our collective safety and security.
It is among the greatest benefits we can bring to an open, safe and free and secure Internet, because the more we connect, the more there is to protect.  Thank you.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much indeed, Victoria.  Finally let's hear from Pamela Cretu, our youth representative from Moldova.
>> PAMELA CRETU: Thank you for the invitation to the on the panel, it's a pleasure and honor.  Let me share a few reflections.  Digital transformation has had undoubtfully in the past decade a significant impact on our lives.  I want to specifically touch on a few of them.  Quality education which is Sustainable Development Goal number 4 has seen a tremendous transformation with the emergence of technology, from online tutorials, video lessons, eBooks, E libraries and distance learning.
All these have opened up programs to young learners from around the globe, who would otherwise be excluded.  Today ICTs are used by schools and other educational establishments both to develop ICT skills, and provide innovative teaching of mathematics or foreign languages.  I use interactive learning language applications to navigate in my new country.  Today the COVID‑19 pandemic has affected everyone, regardless of nationality and level of education and its consequences hit the most vulnerable the hardest.
Students from privileged backgrounds supported by their parents could find their way with schools doors closed by adjusting to, rapidly adjusting to distance and remote learning.  Teachers and educators from privileged backgrounds supported by their schools' administrations learned to adjust more rapidly to the new modus operandi.  Those from disadvantaged backgrounds are information out when schools shut down, and both about students and their teachers.  This COVID‑19 crisis has highlighted and intensified the many inequities in the education system around the globe, from access to the broadband and computer needed for online education, and supportive environments needed to focus on learning, up to the misalignment between resources and needs.  Children, students and parents have to rely more on their own resources to continue learning remotely through the Internet.  Teachers have to adapt to the new pedagogical concepts and modes of delivery of teaching, for which they may not have all been trained, which is significantly affecting the quality of the education provided.
However, learners in the most marginalized groups who don't have access to digital learning resources or lack the resilience and engagement to learn on their own, are at risk of falling behind.  Moving forward, I believe that key stakeholders should be looking at solutions to maximize participation of everyone in the education process so that no one is left behind including children and young people with special needs.  While we can acknowledge that not everyone could be provided with a laptop or computer during these difficult times, we have to ensure that communities bring together, come together to identify local solutions such as community libraries, local radios, and community support groups.  Thank you.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much indeed, Pamela.  Let's move on now to what is going to be a quick fire round, we have about 15, 20 minutes left.  We have something else to do after this quick fire round.  We want to leave time for that.  I'd like to ask you all, you might want to think about this, to explain shortly in a minute maximum to each of you, what is the one policy action that you would really like to see in order to help bridge the divide, digital divide in a post COVID world, what would be the one most important thing you think needs to be done?  Doris Leuthard, perhaps I could start with you.
>> DORIS LEUTHARD: I think analyze similar infrastructure is key, this means the ideas of Jeffrey Sachs might be provocative, but he is right, there are some people, some companies who earn a lot of money with our data.  This must be discussed at the level of 2020 because it's a political issue, we know that OECD has fiscal elements which are discussed.  Second, I think Switzerland is one of the countries, major donors for aid for development.  Here we need to change our instruments, because we are still in the classical effort with lot of classical instruments or maybe it's better invest in free wi‑fi than in bridges and roads.
Third, we need a idea of plus because infrastructure is one but the Government needs to be adapted to the digital world.  Multistakeholder, multidisciplinary approach, like we did today, and IGF must also open, must be more open to other experts to science and to the politicians, not a lot of ministers and Government people participate at these meetings, and governments don't like too much multistakeholder approach.  So this is a game changer, a change of our minds.  This is not easy for governments, but we made some recommendations, and this is a key element that it can bring a lot of people in.  The World Bank report states clearly what the world could profit by a lot of people have access to the Internet, how fast we could really bring wealth to the planet.  It's easily done, when you have infrastructure, governance, standards, here ITU could make a good job that you have some standards, and a lot of values, ethical values is important for this work, so far trust and ethical values we have in the analog world, most of these values are also valuable in the cyber world, but we must discuss it and perhaps also codify it, that we have some Charter, that we can rely on, and which could also help us that ethics is, we can rely on.  Fake news like we have seen in the last days is a good example how it should not work, and therefore the digital initiative I preside here, we are working exactly in this field of ethics in the Internet, and not only with analysis and new reports but concrete projects, so for the moment we are developing a digital trust label that users can rely on the application which is trustworthy.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Doris Leuthard, thank you very much.  You mention the ITU there.  Let me go to Houlin Zhao, one policy action that you think should be adopted.
>> HOULIN ZHAO: IGF talk about Cybersecurity and privacy, we have not made much progress, although we put this on table for many years.  One problem is unfortunately we do some business under the geopolitical debate.  If we could avoid the geopolitical debate, but do something, put the challenges, programs on the table, for good discussion, we may be able to make some progress, one.
Another thing as Jeffrey mentioned, on one side we don't have money, we need a lot of money.  On the other side, someone has a lot of money.  How can we make our society be some kind of positive to do the business.  We need a lot of good ideas.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much.  Thomas, one policy action.
>> First, not all governments are skeptical about multistakeholder approach.  We believe in that, to make that clear here, as Doris said something different.  Our idea would be a anti fragmentation initiative.  We believe in one net and one world and open and free speech.  This would be our initiative, and part of this anti fragmentation initiative would be a strong antitrust initiative because I believe despite of what all the governments are doing, it is important to keep also the commercial Internet open and that means we need to fight against some of these monopolies and make the doors and windows open for new players.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you.  Aiyaz Sayed‑Khaiyum, one policy action, in Fiji.
>> AIYAZ SAYED-KHAIYUM: For us it's important to get a level of connectivity.  We increase from 60 percent coverage to 95 percent the last five years.  We would like to go the last five percent.  I'd love to be part of what Jeffrey Sachs noted, we could be the guinea pig in getting people connected in Fiji.  Connectivity is critically important for us.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much.  I'll come to Jeffrey last in this round, because he can reflect on the policy actions he's heard.  Let me ask Paul Tighe in the Holy See, one policy action that you would like to see.
>> PAUL TIGHE: I think ultimately, we are looking for connectivity in order to face the possibility for communication and inclusion of people in a total platform communications.  The technical side is relatively easy, the economic side of that, but I'd be interested that we educate people to assure them they become fully informed in response to the technologies.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much.  Victoria Grand, one policy action the private sector might like to see.
>> VICTORIA GRAND: Encryption is under threat around the world.  One privacy action I'd like to see is ensure a more open and secure Internet by preserving the ability to operate encrypted platforms at scale.  I want to acknowledge that there are real concerns about the size and power of tech companies.  We understand that.  Certainly more people are turning to online platforms to connect than ever before and use of these platforms is surging to meet these fundamental needs.  Let's not forget though that these platforms are helping hundreds of thousands if not millions of small and microbusinesses all over the world quickly shift their business to online, being online is not just a trend but it's a matter of survival for so many of these businesses.  Many of these type platforms have enabled that abilities to grow.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Chat Garcia Ramilo, your policy action you would like to see pursued.
>> CHAT GARCIA RAMILO: I want to see support for community connectivity and resilience.  That is what I want to see.  We need complementary models for connectivity.  We cannot rely any longer on big telecommunications, because they will not go to where there is no profit.  We do have models now of community connectivity.  We do need policy and regulatory environments that enable these complementary models.  We need those unconnected to connect themselves, because they do have that ability.  We are a small organization, but we have supported and we built capacity of over a hundred community networks with other partners.  There are models out there.  There are regulators who are interested in these and this is what I'd like to ask, you said investment, innovation and inclusiveness, all three of these are in the community networks model for local operators based in the community.
>> HOULIN ZHAO: I highlight, the Telecom guys, there is a lot but nobody can have any success in any business if local SMEs will not support them.  Look at SMEs, lot of fantastic innovation ideas, and they know the need of local community, they know technologies.  They can contribute a lot.  We have to count on them.  Telecom, inside our business, Telecom guys has problem, they have industry fight among themselves.  For me, I agree with my friend.  But we have to create the environment that encourage people, that are not connected, where there is no profit, we have to create a environment to take this investment into those areas to help people.  Otherwise we cannot get business, that is clear.  Better ICT for better life, then we have to come together for better ideas to get ICTs.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: That is where Jeffrey Sachs's billions come in.  Pamela, one what one policy action you would like to see people take.
>> PAMELA CRETU: Thank you very much.  First of all, neither in Moldova or Austria have I seen youth involved in IGF discussions.  If they have, they are limited.  I could do more work at the UN headquarters here to bring more youth voices in the regional IGF discussions.  There is a need for a youth club on the future of online and remote learning and education.  That would bring together a group of youth from around the globe to discuss about the main challenges they face with the COVID‑19 pandemic and solutions they see or solutions they have tried within their communities.  Once in a while, we would share the ideas of decision‑makers across important global organizations and institutions such as the UN or the global partnership on education and many others.  Thank you.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Pamela, thank you very much.  Jeffrey Sachs, you go last, but you have made your policy suggestion in a way which is about the use of the wealth of some people.  What is the chance do you think of governments pursuing that?
>> JEFFREY SACHS: I think the issue is access, and I would recommend that within a year, every school and every clinic in the world should be connected.  This is absolutely practical, and within four years, everybody can be connected.  It's a matter of switching on the switches, it's a matter of basic devices, and it's a matter of basic financing.  With Chat, I want to say regulations can make companies do things.  Part of the problem is that Telecoms provide the data, but the big money is earned by we chat and by Facebook and Amazon and they have to step up.  So there are four people in the United States that have $540 billion of wealth including the owner of Victoria's company, four people, 540 billion of wealth.  This year they have increased their wealth 204 billion.  204 billion for four people.  I want Mark Zuckerberg to say what is Facebook going to do, what is his personal wealth going to do, for universal connectivity?  Because it's a very good question and a very important question, and what stops us from getting every school and clinic online right now?  We have hundreds of millions of kids who are not learning right now, because they have no device, they have no access, and the amounts of money we are talking about is a tiny fraction of what these people have made in the last few months, and they were already gazillionaires.  So we should not be suffering so much, when there is so much capacity to solve the problem.  But we have to understand where the capacity is.  And it is in big tech and Telecoms which lives on this sector, makes a fortune on this sector and as Victoria said, yes, small businesses all over the world come through your portal.  Exactly.  So let's get on with it, and get the universal access accomplished, which we need to do to save lives and to get kids back in school.
I know that Mark Zuckerberg is interested in kids in school, let him come forward with the incredible fortune that has just occurred and today the stock market is up another 1600, last time I checked.  So the fortunes are unbelievable.  Let's come up with some practical answers to get every child online and every clinic online within the next year.  Thanks.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much.  Victoria, ten seconds.
>> VICTORIA GRAND: To speak to Mark Zuckerberg's investment, when Facebook acquired WhatsApp we were able to do 3 things we hadn't been able to do before.  We were able to invest in bringing WhatsApp to everyone around the world for free.  It is easy to forget that calling and texting people used to be incredibly and often prohibitively expensive.  WhatsApp used to charge people, Facebook made it free.  Facebook helped WhatsApp make WhatsApp private.  It wasn't encrypted until we joined Facebook.  Mark supported this project to bring that level of privacy to two billion people.  Facebook invested so we could offer not just texting but voice and video calling world wide, and these have been the things that have surged most in terms of uses during the pandemic.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much.  Time is tight.
>> JEFFREY SACHS: I like your technologies.  They are a big solution for the world.  Since Mark has made a extra $32 billion this year and is at 111 billion net worth, you can use your technologies and we can figure out how to get those few billion to Africa.  It's not true that everyone has access to we chat, if you don't have an account and you don't have a device, you don't have access.  You do in principle, but I wouldn't keep saying that everybody has access to it.  That is what we are talking about today.  Not everyone has access to it.  Some kids are not in school this year at all, because they have no access at all.  Please, with some responsibility, let's get them to school.  It's possible.  Technology is wonderful.  No doubt.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much.  Order, order, as they say in the British Parliament.  Maybe some of these ideas will be taken up by the G20 which could be a important vehicle for this.  Italy has the presidency of the G20 from January, maybe they are watching this.  Maybe this is one for the G20 to move on and many of the other ideas we have heard.  We have five minutes left.  I'd like to ask all of you, what is your voluntary commitment that you are willing to make today to further this agenda, your personal commitment.  I will start with Houlin Zhao.
>> HOULIN ZHAO: Recognize everybody and every possible resource to invest in ICT, let me give you one small example, we are talking about connected schools.  Actually when 2003, 2005 WSIS finished, we set the goal to connect all the schools by 2015.  Now today 2020 we are still talking about connected school.  When I was close to Fiji in 2016, the two schools I visited, they had no Internet connection.  I visited two years ago where they started 5G pilot, a hundred kilometers away in the mountains there is no connection at all in the Internet.  This is unfortunate.  This is still unfortunate reality.  We have to work very hard.  Connect ability to these people is one, then to increase our capacity of quality of service to 5G, cloud computing, that is another thing.  ITU want to work with our industry, with our society on these important challenges.  Thank you.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you.  Thomas, your commitment.
>> THOMAS JARZOMBEK:  First let me repeat one thing to Facebook and WhatsApp.  I believe that this is for free, it's not the solution, that is the problem, because nobody else is able to compete and to bring a better alternative to WhatsApp because of this, and you are not coming for that with free.  You pay with all your data.  This is a high price.  I can only renew what I said to antitrust.  What have we done or are doing to enable the IGF so in last year, we made a significant amount of money, 650,000 U.S. dollars to have traveling for representatives from all regions and all stakeholders all over the world especially from the global south and on Day Zero the Minister underscored his commitment to the multistakeholder approach by providing 100 million U.S. dollars over the following three years.  Since then we have continued our involvement in the field of Internet Governance not least as cochampion on future architecture of the IGF and this year we have again provided logistical and substantive support towards the preparation of the parliamentary round table.  I believe it is good to enable more parliamentarians to be there, not only the governments.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much.  Aiyaz Sayed‑Khaiyum, Fiji, do you have a voluntary commitment you would like to make.
>> AIYAZ SAYED-KHAIYUM: We have talked about it, data is great equalizer, but if you don't have connection, people get left behind.  Connectivity is important.  I was watching everybody.  I think I'm the only one from the southern hemisphere, it's 2:30 a.m. in the morning here.  But it goes to demonstrate that there are many countries like ours that are small.  We are not big players.  We don't attract big boys and girls into our economy, as it is hard to get companies in to connect.  We have one or two companies here. you have to be innovative and set up trust funds, percentage of Telecom companies go towards setting up trust funds, we set up community telecenters.  We are trying to get infrastructure sharing between all the different Telecom and radio and television companies, to be able to reduce the capital cost, to get more focus on service delivery.  Connectivity is critical for us in that regard.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you very much.  You deserve your bed when you eventually get to it in a few minutes.  Monsignor Paul Tighe, voluntary commitment you would like to make?
>> PAUL TIGHE: One commitment, the Vatican would encourage churches locally, educational resources, promote digital literacy, people will be more crisply aware of the environment in which they are working and we become more committed to using those technologies to achieve growth in communication, we want to promote.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Chat Garcia Ramilo, your voluntary commitment.
>> CHAT GARCIA RAMILO: Continue to build capacity for community connectivity, that is where the growth will happen.  That is where we will definitely make a difference in the divide, and we hope that the investment, we can convince and continue to knock on doors of regulators and policymakers so that they can be, they can enact policies that help build this capacity and connectivity on the community level where there is no access.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Pamela Cretu, is there something you would like to commit to?
>> PAMELA CRETU: Yes, thank you.  Just to mention it again, we do need more youth voices into the original IGF related discussions, so a global youth club would be just the perfect thing.  We need to ensure that communities come together to identify local solutions, such as community libraries, for example, during the pandemic, there are just empty spaces that are not used and for the children and students that do not have the devices at home, and with the right opening the windows in the room, they can use all of the infrastructure, that is already there, and that is not used.  That would be all.  Thank you.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: While you were speaking someone messaged big thumbs up for youth voices.  Getting some support there.  Quite a few of you put questions on here.  Sorry we couldn't get to them due to time but they will be considered during the course of this IGF.  Victoria Grand, do you have a voluntary commitment without wanting to reopen the previous rambunctious argument?
>> VICTORIA GRAND: We will continue to provide a reliable service for personal communication that works even in areas where there is low and limited bandwidth.  We will fight to preserve our ability to operate on encrypted platforms to not allow anyone to listen in on WhatsApp messages.  We will continue to stand up against the trend of Government hacking.  We detected a attack from a NSO group that turned your phone into a surveillance device, turning on your camera without you knowing.  We shut it down and sued NSO.  We will continue to root out and fight governments attempts to use our platform to spy on critics, human right advocates and journalists.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Thank you.  Jeffrey Sachs.
>> JEFFREY SACHS: Leave no one behind.  Let's keep committing to the Sustainable Development Goals.  It is the basic principle of decency in the world.  I hope that we accomplish what we have all agreed needs to be done.
>> JONATHAN CHARLES: Seems like a very good phrase to end on.  Thank you very much.  Thank you to all of our panel.  Thank you to all of you who have taken part, watching this event as well.  I wish everybody a great IGF.  I'm sure it's going to be interesting, lots of fascinating panels.  But thank you to everyone who was involved today.  From my home here in locked down London to your homes, offices, wherever you may be.  Have a good rest of the day and enjoy this great Forum.  Thank you, good‑bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-ws105-designing-inclusion-policies-in-internet-governance^^

>> MODERATOR:  Hello, everyone. Thanks for joining us today in the session of the Designing Inclusion Policies in Internet Governance.  Designing Inclusion Policies is the name of the session.  The intention for this is learning inclusion policies in the Internet Governance.
At this session, we will analyze the differing access for inclusion, one, gender narratives, two, connect the unconnected communities, three, inclusion of people with disabilities, four, economic inequalities and, five, Governments and human rights, the role in Internet Governance.  During this session, we are going to have five speakers, each regional engagement, Latin American and Caribbean GRULAC, YCIG, a Steering Committee member, GRULAC representative.  
Mamadou Lo, her communication and information partners.  Mamadou Lo is with DIPLO.  Dr. Mohammad Azizi is a professor, policy maker, technology economist and social development expert, nominated by Government of Afghanistan, World Bank and candidate for the Deputy Secretary‑General.  From the Asia Pacific, he holds a Ph.D. from university and was a fellow at Stanford University.  Dr. Azizi was the Chairman and was announcer at Afghanistan Information Services and Skills Organisation.
Finally, (Garbled audio).  Human Rights attorney from Armenia focusing on human rights education and research, College of Pennsylvania Law School, U.S.A.  After we finalize the presentations, we will start the discussion where we can participate in chat, the Q and A box, taking the floor or being in a spot that we will be sharing with you at the moment we are going to have the discussion.
So after this introduction, our first speaker will be Eileen Cejas with a topic of gender.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Thank you very much.  I'm going to my slide.  Okay.  Here we are.  Hello, everyone. Good morning, afternoon, evening, depending on your time zone.  It is a pleasure to be here with you.
I am Eileen Cejas.  Juan presented me, I'm part of the Youth Observatory, Regional Engagement Director, and I'm part of the Youth Coalition, as a representative for the GRULAC region.
So today we are going to discuss as Juan said different aspects relating to policy drafting of inclusion matters.  So first of all, I'm going to address about the gender perspectives and the impact and the causes related to policy drafting.  So there are some key aspects to consider that one size does not fit all.
That means that a possible solution that we can think about couldn't be applied for all of the countries at the same time because we can see there are different multicultural backgrounds, so it's very important to consider that, and to be culturally sensitive.  Regarding these aspects, I would say it's very important to before applying for certain way to legislate on these matters about the different points of view of societies. Going back to what I have been saying about the metaphor of the rabbit and the turtle, you might know about this metaphor is very well known from the DIPLO's book the introduction to the Internet Governance.  First of all, we have the changes that start at Internet and then we have the laws, the legal frameworks in the different countries.
Following this idea, most of the changes as I was saying start as internal discussions on Forums like IGF and similar Forums and later it becomes law applicable to different countries.  However, we can see that generally the law is behind the changes implemented by the new technology.  Because implementation of these new technologies bring to us different challenges that when it was, for example, if we have let's say a law on copyright, the first thing that, the first policy maker thought what about how to protect intellectual property of a book, and then it becomes more changes with the Internet and other technologies so you can see that this is very important to take into consideration.
First, we have to build from these Internet discussions and then we can start discussing legal frameworks in our countries.  So I'm going also to bring to the table the VP of gender and access report, which was published, I think, a couple of days ago, and this report brings some examples of topics and their analysis.  For example, it analyzes about what has been happening from the IGF in past years and also this year when it seems that most of the discussions are being focused on the narrative sides rather than the positive sides of inclusion.
And also, which I think is very much a concern for us, is that there is a tendency to only address women and girls’ matters.  That's very, that is very pressure because there are few mentions to general diversity matters.  The possibility to be talking with you today, I think that that's something that we should work on, but only from this IGF.  We have the possibility to be together virtually that we don't have or at least we have less than our area to access because everyone can participate in almost equal possibilities.  We can say that it's important that we start discussing about this, you know, so to improve the IGF for the future.  This reflection is applicable to other places as I was saying on implementing legal framework that it's, it should focus on including more people representatives.
As I was saying, I see there is a need to amplify gender diverse voices.  As we can see in some countries, it's a very critical topic to be addressed and we have to address it urgently.  So some examples of a way to amplify this gender diverse voices is because they suffer discrimination, hate speech, death threats in the worst case scenarios.
Censorship of content and from that we can have a mention to bio algorithms.  Thinking of alternative norms which is very bad for gender-diverse people.  I'm not sure if I'm good for time, but in case, Juan, you can interrupt me, but I want to also bring to this little conversation these five minutes to discuss a lot of topics about a program that I'm part of which is called Youth for Digital Sustainability.  So this program was following what has been implemented from last year's youth IGF Summit.
So this year we are trying, well, we focus actually for Working Groups.  One of those Working Groups is called Internet for social cohesion, and in one of the topics that we discuss was about women and gender diverse.  So this is the message that we came from the discussion at our group that says women and gender diverse people are facing restrictions in accessing information on the Internet and participating meaningfully to establish healthy and equal societies, youth should urge Governments and societies to guarantee the rights to freedom, offline expression for discrimination.
>> MODERATOR:  You are about right on time.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Excellent.  Okay.  Well, going to pass the virtual microphone to you.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  It's a lot to cover, because gender is something that covers a lot of things.  Thank you for your presentation.  Now, we are going to pass the floor to Mamadou Lo.  He will be presenter that marks economic equality. Prices prevent people from being connected, Mamadou Lo, the floor is yours.  We are here to hear you.
>> MAMADOU LO:  (Technical difficulties.) 
>> MODERATOR:  We go to Debora.
>> DEBORA BARLETTA:  Yes, thank you. Juan, thank you all of the fellow speakers.  Please support sessions that are organized by young people.  It's important and it's really important the IGF is nice to have many sub sessions and also thank you for people who are assisting technically with captioning and all of this stuff.  Sometimes they are visible.  I'm here humbly trying to point out some of the main issues regarding inclusion of people from rural indigenous and remote areas when it comes to digital literacy in particular.  And I will start by trying to demystify some stereotypes regarding these areas because already when we are in rural, indigenous and remote areas in our mind there are images and if you Google, you find some peculiar images.  Kind of trying to figure these areas, which the main point is to be kind of unique actually.  Also within their national context.  Because when talking about these areas, these communities in global environments such as the IGF, we figure out only certain kinds of characteristics.
>> So we think about, of course, Africa or some parts of India or other realities that in certain environments are looks in kind of a vertical, but they are not really giving the idea of the uniqueness of these communities.
I come from south of Italy, and in Italy it's a rather small country, but there is a huge diversity of rural and remote areas that have their own characteristics.  So this is a huge problem, and I really like the expression, so one size doesn't fit all.  So when it comes to policies that should address the problems and the needs of those areas, we should take into account the diverse needs and have an intersectional approach when it comes to these communities, all of the differences and the irregularities they have which are also their huge rich resource and their kind of precious aspect.
Of course, it's also important to reflect what we mean with digital literacy, because, of course, there is the kind of framework of competencies that are being, that have been pointed out by UN, by UNESCO to which we think about digital literacy as something that, as a set of skills and competencies.  A framework to each country's areas and people should adhere.
But in my opinion, and when thinking about inclusion at large, we should think of literacy in general as something that should enable people to know how to act greater than being acted upon.  Because the approach that many policy makers for Government have regarding solving the issues of connectivity and digital literacy in this area, in these areas is the fact that it's becomes a problem when they try to reach these areas to propose some product or some innovation which, of course, is not negative as a thing per se, but it is the sole purpose for which enabled connectivity and digital literacy in in that area will look as sort of in position from up.
And this is one of the main challenges, because very often in these areas, there is not readiness to welcome such programmes, such initiatives, because they look as coming from outside, and they are not seen as internal need of the community.  So one of the main things that policy makers, organisations is to involve local people because community spirit as I tried to point out is one of the main resources in these areas because it means that the community is strong and each set of values and strong points.
So if we are involving people in the bottom up approach.  They will feel like every program, every policy belongs to them.  That's announcing their agency in program and their contribution to the success of them.
Also it's really important to point out that apart from being a very empowering process for these communities, this can be inclusive also for other parts of the nation that are usually excluded and marginalized, especially when it comes to connectivity, Eileen before mentioned women, but we also have the problem of elderly people.
So having this kind of approach could represent a good practice at large on all policy makers initiate programmes in certain areas designing them to respond to the needs of the people who are their targets.  Because in this way, people will really feel like they are part of this process, and there are people contributing to their success or it will only be something coming from outside and making them some sort of products that would not really benefit their communities at large.
But, again, I would like to stress how it's important to have an intersectional approach not only regarding the different part of the communities we are mentioning, but also, again, their relationship with the nation, the countries at large, and the fact that, you know, it to marginalize communities as well and implementing resources which are not only infrastructures and tools but also human resources, trying to increase the competencies of these communities and their sense of agency in this policy.
So I think I am finished, but as I said before, I'm encouraged to hear other inputs of my fellow speakers, so it's a really big topic so I'm really looking forward to hear also other experiences and practices on this point, so thank you very much, and, Juan, the floor is yours again.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you very much, Debora for your input about connectivity in rural areas.  And digital literacy.  So we are now going with ‑‑ she will be speaking about Government and guaranteeing our digital rights to include more voices connected.  So we have you know, Meri? 
  >> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  I would like to thank Debora and I'm thanking everyone helping to run this session.  My name is Meri, and I have the huge topic of Government and human rights and the overarching theme is how they can guarantee our rights and also ensure inclusion.  Well, this is a very big topic, and we also have the policy questions coming up, so I will try to keep my remark rather short to allow for more time to allow for policy discussions.  As this is a very big topic, I tried to brig break it down to three points.
The first one is access.  Well, this year especially we saw the role of Internet as no year before, because as a result of this pandemic, almost all aspects of our lives were dependent and are still dependent on Internet and this includes such areas as work, commerce, education, and many other fields, and this means that the Government in order to provide and guarantee our digital rights needs, the first step is to provide access to Internet.
And even using this point in time when we are in this global pandemic is not an excuse to shut down the Internet or do this for other, you know, political and other objectives that they may have.  Unfortunately, we have many different Governments all over the world and you know better than me that this is a big issue in itself.  So the message here is that Government needs ensure access to Internet to allow for further access to the digital rights.  In other words, they need to keep it on.
My second point is about the digital literacy.  I envision this as an underlying issue for all groups and this is a unique unwritten pre‑condition to full enjoyment of your digital rights and in my opinion, by enhancing the level of digital literacy, the Governments actually create a solely base for safeguarding various aspects of rights and also in a way they are actually preventing further issues.
And digital literacy should include understanding of digital rights in the first place starting from privacy and data protection so that people have more control over their data.  They understand what could be done and what aspects are still open to debate, and how can they better advocate for their rights.
Then we have the understanding of the importance of verifying your information.  We live in a very difficult time of finding out the truth and this means that every citizen regardless of their background, their age or citizenship, they need to understand how they can verify the information that they need, how they can check it to understand which information they can trust and share forward because a lot of people are simply not equipped with these skills, but I believe in this age, especially this year when we are also finding something already going this info Demic, we need to have this as mainstream thing happening all over the world and the Government as the ones providing especially the basic primary education and education going forward.
They need to implement sound policies in this regard.  And this also includes such topics as Internet health and hygiene, because now as I said, we are all online, and being aware of how you can protect yourselves online is also in a way part of digital literacy.  Therefore, as I said, measures should be undertaken to ensure better understanding and knowledge of digital literacy for all age groups.
And last but not least, we are at the IGF, and we see many different stakeholder groups, and a lot of issues as we already understand include very different but relevant actors, and I'm talking about Government and human rights.  Government are the only actors in this ecosystem that we as citizens of our countries elected.  Well, we can debate on everything was Democratic and legitimate or not, but that is a topic of another discussion.  In any way, they are our official representatives and in my opinion, they need to enhance and embrace in a way their role as Government in this ecosystem.
Because originally, if you take the example of speech online, originally everything was left to self‑regulation, but right now we are seeing the other extreme of Governments trying to regulate everything.  And this is also not something that we would like to see everywhere.
>> MODERATOR:  Sorry, Meri, you have one minute left, if you can wrap up.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  I was almost done.  So this is a topic that we are going to discuss later during our policy discussion.  So I will not talk about this for long, but my point is that Governments need to become more actively involved in the multi‑stakeholder processes and the dialogue because my personal feeling and also my research says that Governments are, especially some Governments are very active, but others are missing from this team and this is a huge problem for their citizens.  I will stop here and we will get back to this topic when we discuss our policy questions.  I look forward to our discussion.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you very much, Meri.
So now I ask to Mamadou Lo if he is ready to present his topic.  Hello, Mamadou.  We can't hear you.
>> MAMADOU LO:  It's good now.  I will go very fast because for my presentation, I am Mamadou Lo.  I am head of information department of Senegal.  I am also a fellow alumni and diplo alumnae and former IGF MAG member.  Also I am currently working with DiploFoundation as curator and also dealing with issues ever Internet and multilingualism.
Documentation platform aiming to provide information on Internet Governance.  Coming back to the information on the subject of biases ‑‑ National Initiatives to lower prices and taxes, I would like to bring back to this topic the discussion on the issue.  On national initiatives, I will say that as you know, the biggest barrier to Internet access right now today is the cost.  It is not affordable for many around the world, and as we know this applies to put data, which is too expensive for many, many people in low economic countries, low income countries, excuse me.
As you know, for those covered by the Internet connected devices, they are bringing down the cost of mobile devices is essential to get people online.  By now, I would like to talk about the COVID‑19 which has underlined the Internet divide.  These devices are mandatory for access and Governments should be setting policy accounting as many as possible can offer them.  And to avoid and a world where digital inequalities dive vied further inequalities in health, welfare and education.
In terms of wide Internet use of countries, Underdeveloped Countries face similar challenges including cost of data and use as I said earlier.  Now, challenges are still on policy and regulatory reform.  A really competitive digital market, I think this has to be answered by Government among all of the stakeholders and NGOs.  We need to have policy regulatory for work and filling market completion.  The second item, the second item I would like to bring out is international aspect relating to moratorium on tax for organisations.
Since 1998 organisation members have decreed to pose custom duties on guidelines.  This mortar rum has been extended since 1998, but how it works in Developing Countries.  The hand of this moratorium saying that the services are necessary to connect.  It is interesting to see how the moratorium of this activity, it is very interesting to be asked ‑‑ one minute, Juan, private business sector for not paying taxes, gaining more money or society as a whole benefiting from affordable Internet devices because of taxes.
I think the justifications are wide open and you need to see how we can tackle that to have more Internet.  That is all for me for now.  Waiting for your indication and contribution.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you Mamadou Lo.  Right now, we are going to start the second part of this discussion.  Its go is to be around like an open question and participation from all of you.  You can do it through the chat, asking for the floor, or writing in the chat.  Eileen, you just share the link.  It is on the chat.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Hello everyone again.  Now, at this part., I saw that you were commenting on the chat.  So if you want to speak up, share if you want, so at this part of the session we are going to discuss in three blocks.  So the first block we are going to speak about gender perspectives in Internet Governance standards and economic inequalities as Mamadou Lo just presented.  So to start, I'm going to ask you, and, of course, you can speak up, is how we can bring more tools for women and gender diverse people in order to ensure involvement in Internet Governance.  So you can type or speak up.  It's up to you.
I guess by now everyone is responding or not yet.
>> I can unmute people that have entries.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  So I have Yohan, the floor is yours.
>> Thank you.  I just want to mention.  That each and every stakeholder group that we want to be more active, first of all, they should understand the importance of their engagement, that their voice can be heard, and their voice can be taken into account, and can be crucial for the process.  So first of all, I think that it is very important for them to understand that they can make a change.  Their voice can make a change.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you very much for your input.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Thank you.  Those who are not speaking, you can close your mic and you can also write on this document.  So who wants to go next?  Innocent, you want to go. 
>> MODERATOR:  Anyone that has their mic open, please close..  I think everyone now closed their mic.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Okay.
>> MODERATOR:  Can you repeat the question, Eileen for everyone? 
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  We are addressing the first question, which is about how we can bring more women and gender diverse people in order to foster their involvement in the Internet Governance.  So we have a document for, and I'm going to read out loud, the UN Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.   
So we have Gustavo and I missed the other hand.
>> Hello.  I will write my point in the document in just a moment as soon as I can gather my thoughts fully.  But I have a point regarding not specifically women, but gender diverse people and people with noon traditional sexual orientation, so AKA not straight people.  I think that the IGF has this, the IGF and the UN system as a whole by virtue of being, let's say, the main bastion of protecting human rights in the world it conveys an image of accepting gender diversity and sexual orientation first.  
I think we have that, I think that's great.  To that extent it's easier bringing in these people, gender diverse people and sexual orientation diverse people into the IGF.  That said, when you are talking about us as the youth, perhaps passions speak louder than words.
Maybe this is a point for next year.  This is not something for now, but there could be some thought into bringing LGBT teen news a session next year.  That would be a way to convey very securely just our position about this issue.  And that would be an invite.  It would be a silent invite, and whenever we are trying or we want to bring in more people or we have someone who is in doubt whether they want to join or not because of sexual orientation points or gender diversity, some of these people are very shy.  They are used to being rejected or not being included or just being sidelined very quietly.
So when we do this silent invite, I think that would convey a lot to a lot of people, and it would do a lot to actually getting them to participate instead of just joining and sitting on the sidelines.  Thank you.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Thank you very much, Gustavo.  It was put very nicely.  I will give you the opportunity to write it.  Yes, sorry, Juan.
>> MODERATOR:  Actually, this year I asked for informal session for gender diverse people because it's a think we have to address here.  And I think there is no representation in pretty much anything.  That's why I decided this year to organize this working for women and gender diverse people and their future.
So if anyone wants to do that, well, you are all invited.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Thanks for the reminder, Juan.  Yes, if, please, if you want, you can share the link so everyone can save it on their agenda.
So I'm not sure how much time do we have for this segment, but however, I think we can go on the second question, which is related to economic aspects.
>> I'm aware of the time constraint to I don't want to take up too much time.  I just wanted to note, I think, Gustavo had a very good point about sort of organising sessions that sort of can accommodate diverse groups and the interest of diverse groups.  One thing I would say in terms of taking a step back is the importance of making sure that as we encourage people to join, we are aware of and have taken steps to mitigate maybe the problems that exist in those venues, those Forums that may have previously been causing people to feel uncomfortable, causing people to feel they couldn't participate.
So I work for the right NCC, which is Regional Internet Registry for Europe and Central Asia, and we work with the right community, which is an open technical community, and RIPE has been doing work recently on its diversity task force and part of the work has included looking at a code of conduct for how people behave in the community both in meetings physically, but even also on mailing lists so looking at what acceptable behavior language, et cetera, actually is.  And I think particularly in some of the more long‑standing venues and RIPE has been there since the 1980s, there are perhaps approaches or attitudes that really people may not be aware of the problems they cause for other people or the limitation they put on other people's participation.
So it's important for those groups to look at their own dynamics, their own processes, that's one point.  The other point is it's also important to share information about how we are doing that.  So I know the IETF are doing this.  I know other AR communities are doing this.  I'm sure there are others outside of my immediate realm of awareness also doing this.  So sharing that information in a discussion like this is really important as well.  Just to try and raise awareness that there may be issues there that you don't even see because you have been so deeply embedded in that system.  So, I'm sorry, that was long winded.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Thank you very much.  In thinking about this code of conduct and to work on policies which are think it was mentioned also at the BTF report that I mentioned.
I'm not sure if we any more hands or comments?
>> I have a comment.  I'm sorry, I didn't catch your name, but building on top of what the previous speaker was saying, I was reminded that there is a problem in, I'm not talking about the IGF or the UN, I'm talking all around the world.  There is a problem of tokenism.  This is something that we as youth, we have already faced in previous years, the idea of being included as this little token just to establish diversity.
When it comes to LGBT issues in particular, and also women, the inclusion of women.  It has become particularly egregious because it is so, often it is so overwhelmingly often that when LGBT topics are included, they are always the same three or four.  It's a very, very narrow understanding of LGBT issues and quite often it becomes a matter of posturing, of just not really advancing a discussion.  So maybe that is something we should include if we go along with the idea of making LGBT team sessions, make them meaningful, make them advance special issues that substantively like objectively affect LGBT and gender diverse people.
There is another comment here which I thought was very insightful from Peter Crosby just to say, I'm just going to read it, just to say there is a real crossover between gender diversity and cognitive disabilities.  In particular autism, many autistic people are gender diverse and or diverse sexual orientation, which once again comes back to questions of accessibility and in particular cognitive accessibility.
I have, I think that this is exceptionally insightful, Peter, and I have actual direct experience with this.  So I over the years I have created a group of people whom I consult whenever I have Internet Governance issues which are well beyond my spectrum of experience.  And I have two people in this small group who are in the spectrum, in the autism spectrum.
And I think that is, I have seen this firsthand.  Sometimes they have very insightful opinions about what should be done in Internet Governance, but because this is a field, a professional field that is so intense, it is so socially influence that they cannot directly participate or they could only do that at the cost of immense emotional distress.
So I really appreciate your comment, Peter.  Thank you.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Thank you very much, Gustavo.
We have ‑‑ it's very interesting the discussion.
>> Thank you, Eilee. Alita here.  If we want to have more gender-diverse voices in the discussions and the figure, and to build capacity, first of all, we need to make these spaces kind of secure to converse, which is important.  The other most important thing is, for example, even if you look at the IGF registration, is it that gender-diverse friendly, we have a Mr. and Mrs. but do we have for others who do not want to kind of align to Mr. and Mrs?  These are small steps that can help make people who are diverse more comfortable.  We need to understand their sensibility and based on that, as you mentioned the first line that one size does not fit all.
We need to understand their concerns.  We need to understand why they are not coming in in more mainstream and Internet Governance discussions and then design capacity building sessions, but firstly, we need to make them welcome.  We need to make them trust these platforms.  Thank you.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Great reflection.  Thank you.  We have Debora, if you want to go. 
>> DEBORA BARLETTA:  Really short, short, because I agree everything that's being said and the fact that, guarantee safe space for more people and there are small things that many people don't know about.  So in such a global and large community, something that should be pointed out to become kind of a new custom in such an interaction in such big fora.  And always I'm in mind intersectionality.  As the comment by Robert, there is intersection in diverse groups that really matters.
So the intersectional approach is really important, and also we should stop to expect certain groups, LGBT groups, people with disabilities, only to be present and conclusion on diversity, accessibility, but we should make safer spaces for them in AI, data governance and all of the other sessions or we, of course, we have participation, that we are always in session on youth participation, but maybe it's more difficult to access and to be actors in the other session.  Thank you, everyone, for the contributions.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Thank you very much, Debora.  Juan, you can tell me how we are with this.
>> MODERATOR:  We have to go into the second segment.  We are really beyond the time.  The conversation was so good that.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Okay.  For the second question of the first block, you can still write on the document, and now we are going to the second block, and I'm going to pass the floor to Meri.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Just briefly introducing the topic and I would love to hear from you.  As I said during my initial remarks, Governments need to play better role, a more active role and one of the topics that we are dealing with on a daily basis basically is about online content moderation.
As I said, we went from self‑regulation to more national regulation right now, and I do not believe that either is the best solution.  So how can we find a middle ground? And in the discussion I will just rephrase the policy question this way.  So what measure steps should Governments take to ensure digital rights protection while regulating harmful content online, in other words, what role do you envision the Government to play in this whole big topic of online topic moderation and how they can embrace the role better so I would like to hear from you, and I give the floor to Debora.
>> DEBORA BARLETTA:  Okay.  Then, and just one minute to give an example of things that Government can do with civil society when it comes to Internet and literacy access, especially for disadvantaged and rural areas.
For instance, this project that is called Wireless for Communities, that started empowerment measure and a community information resource centre.  So, you know, it started from the needs from the community, and then following on that, there were implementation of structures and policies from Governments to follow up on these proposals.
So my question, policy question is really easy, so, you know, just brainstorm and include on the floor whatever is on your mind, so what should Government do to guarantee fair access to media literacy in these areas so the floor is yours and let's try to use this time to the best possible way.  Thank you.
And, of course, you can raise your hand if you have something to say, like we did before, we gather a block, so if you want to contribute orally with the discussion, asking questions to me or Meri or if you want to share other good practices regarding inclusion or regulations, you are welcome.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  We have a raised hand.  You can go.
>> Thank you.  I'm from India.  Content regulation, as Meri pointed out, we have situations from self‑regulation to the other extreme of very micro management.  And the middle part I think would be for the Government or for the Forum like IGF to have a certain principles, you know, dos and don'ts of the content.  Because, again, one size may not fit to all.
In Europe or many other parts, there may be content which may be offensive to the other parts of the world.  So there should be a principle‑based approach in the sense that dos and don'ts appear in each country, and how they will implement should be left onto the entity, the Internet entity to kind of do that.
But if they violate, there should be some threat to or some sanction to back it up.  So I'm not saying that Government should micro manage.  One way could be to form an association of such content providing platform, and within that association, they should come out with an ombudsman, but at the same time, I have seen that relying totally on self‑regulation may not always work.  So principles, yes, ombudsman can serve, but there should be some sanction for violating such dos and don'ts.  Thank you.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much.  Anyone else has any comments as Debora mentioned for digital literacy.  These topics or wide and challenging, but this is why it's more important to have more discussions on these topics.  So we invite you to just raise your hand or contribute to in the chat.  We would like to hear from you.
>> MAMADOU LO:  Hi, everybody.
>> MODERATOR:  We hear you.
>> MAMADOU LO:  I would like to bring out here the debate happening right now between big tech live Facebook, Twitter, and the Government, big tech asking for more regulation, more state regulation for them though do more on content.  It is actually a debate.  I do not know how that applies to our discussion, but I think it's an interesting question that we have to see.  Thank you.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  The topics are too challenging.
>> I see there are contributions to the first block, to people are still writing.  Timing is not the best.  We just leave the room when time is up.  So we understand it's not ideal.  But, you know, if you have suggests or something on this topic about media literacy or about other Government measures, please feel free to contribute.  It doesn't have to be written perfectly, just, you know, bullet points, main ideas.  A few words works well.
And I see that ‑‑
>> I'm sorry, guys, I don't know how to raise my hand from the mobile app.  Just a very quick comment.  I'm calling from Peru, Internet leader.  Actually, this is a very challenging matter because many proposals to regulation online content run the risk of unintentionally creating more harm than the initial harms they try to cot bam.  Here in Peru, we have two bills that try to regulate content, but actually policy makers do not understand which is the role of the social media platform.  So in my opinion, I believe that a legitimate intervention must, first of all, and from a minimum level of intervention, it needs to be in accordance with the principles of necessity in International Human Rights Law and here Meri is the expert, but what I believe policy makers must do is require more transparency from the platforms in regards of their algorithms on how they will manage the content because we need to preserve freedom of expression.
I believe that this is my two cents and thank you all for all of your insights and this conversation.
>> MERI BAGHDASARYAN:  Thank you very much, Paula, for a very important intervention.  And we have also Shrata.
>> Hi, I hope you can hear me.  So I think Paula's point is very important, and we are seeing the implementation of that in India.  I am an ISOC youth Ambassador from India, and the issue with what happened when Paula raised the point, it actually resonated closely because that is sort of what the Government is doing with respect to personal data protection bill that India seeks to implement in the upcoming session of the Parliament in the winter which will be in December or January, very soon.
So I think the minimal intervention aspect should be stressed upon, and with respect to digital literacy, I would like to add one point, and that is the implementation of certain programmes that are carried out by small and medium‑scale enterprises or companies, what they do is that they train engineers from rural or indigenous communities and then soon after their training they assimilate them within the company itself.
So it's called bare foot engineering and it's gaining popularity these days, but it's still in its very nascent stage and the awareness regarding the same is very low.  So I think that should be stressed upon and maybe popularized a little bit and should be seen as where it can lead to because it's helping the youth of the community a lot in this regard.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  We are now moving to the third block.  Thank you for those inputs.  Yes.  We are going to the third block.  Don't forget, you can still write in to respond to the questions.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  I'm going to allow to share the screen.
>> If we have a minute, there is a comment from Ruth I would like to comment for a moment.
>> MODERATOR:  Yes.
>> So may I proceed?
>> MODERATOR:  Yes, you can.
>> Thank you.  So, Ruth responding to Peter, she said I wonder if part of the issue that sessions are put together by Working Groups who are to some extent designing sessions for people like themselves in organising in the Working Groups, which is not really accessible.  I think you are on the point, Ruth.  I think that this is just how I frame this issue.  There are people who make a, a lot of people ‑‑ there are sessions that talk about inclusion within the community of Internet Governance.  So these are sessions, let's say, about how to make a workshop inclusive, how to make a workshop, let's say, the necessity of bringing in a translator for sign language.
This is inclusion inside Internet Governance.  And there is a different approach, which is inclusion in the Internet, which often, it may talk let's say about how to add inclusive features to a platform.  Let's say that.  I think that's what happens, so like way too often, perhaps excessively often, we focus on how to make Internet Governance more inclusive, which is good, but we cannot forget that perhaps our main goal or thing here is for everyone else.
We shouldn't be adding inclusion only for us.  We should be adding inclusion to the whole world.  Perhaps that is what I would say.  This goes back to what we discussed in the previous manual about youth matters, which I think I said something along the lines of way too often we defended the points, the points that we as youth care about and not necessarily the points that youth worldwide need or are asking for.  So maybe, maybe these very, this set of issues, they have a common root is what I'm trying to say.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Yes.  The conversation that you are having on the chat has to do a lot with the point that we are going to discuss here, because we are going to discuss how to include disabled people, people with disabilities, and how this kind of session, and talking about inclusion, but it's not inclusion for everyone.  So thanks for sharing that.
So now we are going to share.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  So all of the discussion we have been addressing more than 40 minutes is to have different aspects of inclusion we should consider the input from Peter and Ruth, I think.  They are very valuable because in order to make this online campaign, we need to consider other aspects that are very important.
In case you are fine, we can later if there are things that we have need, and also people who are attending here and they can keep, continue writing on the document and have more input.
So when you are ready, you can share.  That's good.
>> Hello, can you hear me.  This, to many moment, we have the goal about gender perspective impact on Internet matters related to policy drafting.  The people assist in this session.  (ABDIAS ZAMBRANO).  Awareness to specific groups, more or all women panel or events, crossover gender diverse, communities with disabilities and talk about intersectionality.  And the secondhand, we had a great discussion about markets, economic inequalities where prices and taxes preventing people from being connected.  People mentioned about half do, don't, have ombudsman, minimally necessary intervention, transparency, necessary and proportionally intervention.
So this is what I have to this moment.
>> MODERATOR:  Okay, thank you, Abdias.  So now we move into the last part, the online campaign, right, Eileen.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  This is part of the online campaign, so there is a part that says additional ideas, so taking into account that we can add some points that you think it would be important to have on line not only on the topic but on the format we are going to have this campaign in the, I guess next two weeks or three weeks depending how much time it would take.  So anyone who wants to speak, the floor is yours.
  We have Mamadou Lo.  Yes, you can go.
>> MAMADOU LO:  I would like just to know if we have raised the question of multilingualism, and communication.  I do the no see that in the, on the box, multilingualism and communication as was raised earlier.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  We couldn't get your question, because you mentioned there are a lot of topics within inclusion.  So maybe we can work on them on the mind map.  So if you have input or ideas, you can go.
>> DEBORA BARLETTA:  Just one request, because in the chat, there were Gustavo and Peter having a really good conversation when it was coming, so it's I think Juan posted again the link, so please, if possible, right now, we know it's been really difficult to find the right platform to ensure that, you know, the process here is participatory and also inclusive for people with different needs.  But if you can ‑‑ we are going to copy paste your comment in the third block, and if you have more comments you have when it comes to these issues especially for people with disabilities can be part of the campaign too.
So I don't know if something or what someone want to add anything on this point, because it is really relevant and we are going to copy paste what is in the chat box but I think it's an opportunity for people who wrote this point to pick up if they feel confident, of course, to do it.
But just to say that, you know, I really appreciate that discussion and something that should be taken into account in the best possible way, even though especially when you use resource tool it's not really easy.
>> GUSTAVO PAIVA:  I have a few thoughts about issues on accessibility.  I could try and compile a proper document for future use or even perhaps to make a session.  I think this is something, the diaper we go, we could make a session about just picking two points that Peter raised, we could ‑‑ I'm fully confident we could make a session exclusively about online features, features for platforms or services which are friendly to people on the spectrum.  Or we could do the same thing, the same thing for people with dyslexia.
This would be a substantive session that would leave the private sector with objective standards to try and achieve.  This could be like really important for a lot of people and going back to the dichotomies I posited that inclusion in Internet Governance and inclusion in the Internet, this would be the case of let's try and do something that is inclusion for the Internet.
We could do something, I don't know if you guys are aware of the project from ICANN, universal acceptance.  So there are many, many services nowadays that never included non‑standard characters.  So if you are Chinese and you want to write an email address with Chinese characters for many services that would be impossible.  Why does it have to be that way?  It isn't too complicated to change it.  So ICANN did a whole project on bringing universal acceptance.
We could do something similar, not with universal acceptance, but with these diversity friendly features for people with dyslexia or people on the spectrum.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Juan, we cannot hear you.
>> MODERATOR:  I'm sorry, I didn't realize I was muted.  So if anyone else has something to say now is the moment.  We are reaching the hour that wither finished this session.  So if someone has something to say, please do it now.
Okay.  Well, it seems that anyone want to say anything ‑‑ doesn't want to say anything right now.  So before we close the session, we are going to ask you to turn on your cameras so we can make a picture for all of us.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you very much to all of you, it was a very insightful conversation in this topic.  Now we know inclusion is more than we think and accessibility is something we need to talk about, so thank you very much for being here with us today.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  Thanks to the IGF technical team and the captioner and to everyone for being with us here.
>> Excellent session.  Thank you very much.
>> DEBORA BARLETTA:  Keep in touch with your comments.
>> Bye.
>> EILEEN CEJAS:  I will put our emails in the chat.  Maybe the rest of you can help so we can keep continuing on the discussion for the online campaign.
  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-ws128-global-crises-and-socially-responsible-data-responses^^

>> MODERATOR: We're at the top of the hour.  Just checking that we're broadcasting live. 
>> Yes.  
>> TIMEA SUTO:  Thank you very much.
Hello, good morning, good afternoon, good evening everyone, wherever you may be.  Welcome to the WS #128 Global crises and socially responsible data responses.  This session is organized by ICC basis, in partnership with the European Telecommunication Network Operators Associations and with great support from Telefonica.  We're lucky to have our session preceded by the main session of data, and it was a rich discussion on how data is used and how it was used before the pandemic and how the pandemic has changed that situation.
I hope that many of you have engaged in that conversation already this morning.  If you have any questions, you would like to introduce yourself, please feel free to use the chat and the Q&A functions as explained by my colleague Victor just earlier, the chat for social discussion, the Q&A for anything that you would like to direct at the speakers and before we start and passing on to the moderator, I would like to have a quick question with the audience to see how you feel about your data.  I ask my colleague Victor from the IGF technical team to launch the poll we have for you. 
One, how to you feel on sharing data and how do you think, two, what barrier there is are for you to share your data.  Victor, if you could launch that poll for the audience please.  Question one, we'll leave a couple of minutes.  
I don't see responses.  I hope they're coming in.  I will just count to 6 silently.  I'll ask strict tore share the results for the first question..
There we go.  Thank you all who responded.
It looks like most of you are somewhat willing if there are special circumstances like the COVID‑19 pandemic crisis and 11% of you are not willing at all and about a third, a little less than a third is mostly getting to share your data regardless of the circumstances and nobody is very open to sharing their data, very, very interesting.
Let's go to the second question, and I will ask you to let us know why is it that you think that you're not so willing to share your data, what are the barriers that makes you think that way?
I think we need the second question.  This is the same question again.  Let's do the second one, after the introduction one.
We'll close the poll now.  We'll see the results.
Okay.  An overwhelming 92% thinks that there are trust and security barriers to take the obstacles and the barriers in the data sharing process.  A lot of people, they're policy barriers and some of you have mentioned capacity and technical barriers as well.  That's a little bit of information to our speakers and our panelists here today, but for all of you as well to discuss in the chat while the discussion is going on.  Good food for thought, thank you for your responses.  Without further ado, I will hand over to our moderator Mila Romanoff to formally start this session.  Before I hand over, there is a slight change in our plans that I have been informed you of, one of our speakers cannot make the session this morning, so Christoph Steck will be replaced by his colleague Gonzalo Lopez‑Barajas from Telefonica.  Thank you for being here, jumping in at the last moment.
Without further review, let me introduce you to the moderator for the session today, Mila Romanoff who is a privacy specialist on data privacy and governance and global pulse specializing in the United Nations Director General responsible for establishing enabled mechanisms for public private data partnerships and leads to data protection and risk program across the global cross network including in Asia and Africa.  On behalf of the UN global post as she leads work on ethics as part of the high‑level panel of digital cooperation and was part of drafting of the UN data strategy and coordinates the global expert group on the governance of data.  Thank you so much for being here with us, especially that early in the morning in morning.
Please, take it away. 
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you.
Good morning, everyone.  Good morning to our speakers and to our ‑‑ to all attend why is and participants, it is a pleasure to be with you here today.
I'm very happy to introduce our session on global crisis and social responsible data responses and with that, I would like to make a few remarks that indeed the polling has shown that we do need to make sure that we can share data and that ‑‑ and the trust and lack of trust and the policy especially ‑‑ and the policy barriers as shown in the poll, they're one of the key components to ensure that we do have access to data.  In line with the work that we have been doing in the UN global pulse, that seems to be a barrier along with the technical ones.  Today was a really rich panel of the speakers that we have had, we'll try to tackle some of these issues and answer some of these questions and potentially even provide some of the recommendations on solutions on how we can build trust, on how we can address the challenges with regard to data access and build a future where we all feel more comfortable in sharing data on a regular basis to benefit the public good, to benefit and be more prepared for the future crisis like COVID‑19 today the experience showed we were not prepared with data access and the use of AI, so let's try to dive into the discussion today with the help of our speakers, with the audience, to try to understand what are the mechanisms we can build and the policy frameworks to have so that in the future we can have a more responsible, trustworthy access to data to address crisis like COVID‑19 pandemic.  I would like to introduce our first speaker, head of internet governance for the Federal Minister of Economic Affairs in Germany and he'll discuss policy perspectives how governments work to harness the power of data for good and protect the data and privacy of citizens.  
Rudolph Gridl, on to you. 
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Let's go to our next speaker if this is not resolved in 5 seconds.  We'll come back to Rudolph Gridl.
Okay.  So with that, I would like to introduce our second speaker.  Rudolph Gridl will certainly come back to right away.  
Carolyn Nguyen, Director and Technology Policy Lead at Microsoft, and she will discuss private sector on private public partnerships to provide evidence for informed policymaking and data for scientific research.
>> CAROLYN NGUYEN: Thank you so much, Mila.
Good morning, good afternoon, good evening.  It is good see everyone and to see everyone doing well.  Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this discussion.
As stated by Mila, COVID‑19 has demonstrated data and moreover the need to share data responsibly and globally in collaboration with governments and organizations from public, private, non‑profit sectors globally have been critical in enabling rapid and informed responses and I'll describe some of the ways in which data is being used to address COVID‑19, some of the gaps that are exacerbated by COVID‑19 and some learnings and recommendations.  
Firstly, we know that information about infection and spread combined with other available data can help really to inform plans and actions by governments, for example, the data presented by Johns Hopkins University in its interactive dashboard, they are accessed more than a billion times each day to do just that, this data, it is helping the public and the government as well as optimizing provisioning of medical resources, especially critical resources such as ICs, doctor, beds, et cetera, shared data is needed to calculate when it is safe to reopen schools, shops, restaurants, offices and other facilities when they need ‑‑ and also when they need to be closed.  Another way in which data is being used is to speed up research related to the virus the open research dataset of COVID‑19 is a growing, extensive resource of scientific papers on COVID‑19 and related coronavirus history is available for data and text mining.  GitHub is hosting a range of collaborative COVID‑19 projects including software, hardware design and datasets that are made available by governments, researchers and the global developer communities of interest as an opensource operator.  
When Microsoft launched out the iHealth initiative in January, a vision was to look at AI resource data scientists and shared data available to medical researchers and organizations to accelerate research that improves the health of people and communities around the world and an example project is the data discovery initiative which aims to collaborate cancer research by developing a robust regional data sharing ecosystem and the challenge to overcome, as shown in a poll question, includes regulatory, social, technical, licensing barriers to limit the cross sectional resources and data and research and technology.    The aim of the initiative, it is to share Best Practices and data governance framework in cross institutional data governance.  Since its launch, AI for health has now been mobilized to help fight void COVID, to focus on area where is data analytics has the greatest impact, for example, the institute for health metrics and evaluation, it releases a set of COVID‑19 data visualizations and forecasts that are used by U.S. governs and administrators to mobilize resources.  This dataset contains highly individual data for each patient such as data of symptom onset, laboratory confirmation and more.  Another project is the Washington State Department of health effort to develop a dashboard for timely, accurate, reporting to the public so the notion of private public partnership is incredibly important.  The foundation for any data sharing is trust and we believe that privacy is a fundamental Human Rights.  We're also developing privacy preserving technologies including an open toolkit for differential privacy, a technology which enables insights to be extracted from personal datasets while still protecting individual privacy we released principles for governments and other organizations to consider when collecting and using data to address COVID‑19.
In June we launched a global skill initiative to bring digital skills to 25 million people worldwide.  This is launched based on data from linked in economic graphs that are used to identify what are the top jobs in demand, the skills needed to fill them and what are the learning paths.  We're pledging to make this data available to governments so that they can better assess local economic needs.
Another gap that's been amplified is connectivity.  In 2018 our analytics of data in the U.S., it showed that the number of people who have access to broadband speeds is much lower than that reflected in official statistics.  This data has now enabled governments to better identify communities that are even more challenged by COVID‑19 and enable governments to provide appropriate incentives and beliefs.  The data sharing is critical, we have found that a data sharing culture is lacking in most organizations.  Tangible short‑term challenge cans help to make people more comfortable with data sharing and put in place necessary data practices and investments necessary to readying data for sharing, organizations also need better understanding of policy issues as well as instruments to address them as was shown by the poll response.  This includes technical resources such as differential privacy and other instruments such as data sharing principles and data use agreements.  To address this, we launched our open data campaign to build learning and in October launched a call for participation in a new peer learning network for data collaboration in conjunction with the open data institute.  This is to encourage sharing of Best Practices and trusted collaboration.
COVID‑19 has clearly demonstrated the need for a global digital infrastructure developed through collaboration between governments and organizations from public, private, non‑profit from around the world.  We can discuss later about the developments, the necessary elements of such infrastructure to share personal and non‑personal data and we need data from public, private, non‑profit sectors in a trusted manner across national borders and deploy in a perfect computing infrastructure and we hope that the learning from COVID‑19 can provide the impetus and collaborative environment that leads to the development of such infrastructure so that we can all be ready for the next global crisis.
Thank you very much.
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you.  Thank you very much.
As you were speaking, one of the questions came in and I'm just going to ask you as we go through it, what do you think ‑‑ given and considering the overall lack of data literacy, the fact that data breach is more of a cross‑border problem, would you agree that one of the most effective ways to enhance trust can be increased in the role of national data protection authorities when it comes down to cross‑border data transfer, processers in order to provide or for additional verification in data protection.
>> CAROLYN NGUYEN: This is a complex issue that I don't think I can answer in 2 minutes.
I think what it is, it is that we really need to take a look at a risk‑based approach in terms of how the data should be used, what kind of data.  We often talk about data as a monolithic but there are really different types of data and we really need to preserve and protect privacy but also consider national security considerations and I think that in 2019 the Government of Japan put forth this initiative, data free flow with trust and I believe that really is a global dialogue where we need all stakeholders to be at the table, to discuss, share evidence, and some of the work that we're doing, we're hoping can bring some evidence in terms of, you know what, are the appropriate context for sharing data, what needs to be in place, we talk about differential privacy, you know, data governance, et cetera.
I look really forward to working with everyone to try to address this.  Thank you.
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you.  Thank you for the questions.
I will then go on to our next speaker, we'll try.
>> RUDOLF GRIDL: Once again.
It looks like you're muted on the phone. 
>> RUDOLF GRIDL: Can you hear me now? 
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Perfect.
>> RUDOLF GRIDL: Thank you.
I'm sorry for this.
I wanted to say one thing, that of course as the government in Germany, also Europe, for a very long time data was not a major issue in our thinking and we were very much ‑‑ we were very much concentrated on privacy, on personal data, privacy protection, but data is a holistic concept, economically, socially, opportunities and also risk.  That's something that's been developed in the last two years or so and so it started already before the COVID crisis.  
For instance, in Germany, the data strategy, in November last year, the permission adopted ‑‑ the commission adopted a data strategy in February this year and so there was already a COVID crisis when it struck, there was a mindset ready for this and for not yet all of the actions.  I think that what we have in the strategic results, a major element that we have in the strategies, it is the guiding principles of how governments reacted and I just want to perhaps show you one example.  In Germany, during the COVID crisis we started to develop this coronavirus ‑‑ it is an app that you can download on your smartphone and if you downloaded it and you had registered, you will be warned if you have been in contact with a person that is positive.  This is something that sounds simple, but it took us a long time to develop this app because data protection issues were at the forefront and there comes the issue that's been called the trust issue, there have been many issues with the population in Germany, they all said I don't want the state to know where I am, whom I'm in contact with, and who has COVID and who has not COVID.
That was the basic, normal affects.  Up until now ‑‑ and then we developed a system where all of the data is anonymized and the changes, you don't have the profiles and all of these things and we have 18 million times the app has been downloaded with a population of 0 million, so 80.  Is it a success, not a success, I would say we're trying to improve the system and to reprogram it.
It is very clear that if everybody in Germany had the app, would use it, it is beneficial for all of the pandemic situation but the trust is not there, even though we have introduced all of the measures so we're trying to build on it, to have something that is one of the elements in our strategy, data literacy so, data literacy, data autonomy, people have to be aware of what is possible and what are they able to agree to because up until now, you have the people that say I don't care, I give everything away, big platforms, I don't care, or you have people saying I give nothing, my personal data, nobody has a right to know anything and there is a middle ground between that.  That's something that we're trying to achieve with the information contained and therefore.  That's one thing.  The other thing we learned in the crisis, already before that, it is accelerated in the cries, it is the issue of not private data, but machine data or data that's not personalized so we have so many in eastern Germany so, many companies, they're producing machineries, from the ecos, whatever, and all of these pros generate data.  That's something that we're not very much aware of and so now we're trying to write the awareness and to tell them we're a small company, you have to work together.
Perhaps that would be best to work together on a European basis and that's why we initiated this project already before the crisis, but now it has been accelerated as a priority which is the idea of a European network of Clouds and of data where everyone can feed in the data, every organization, company, research center, and then obtain the rights to use the data that other high school also put in and that's the basic idea of it.
And, of course, this would be located in Europe, it would be according to the regulations of data protection regulation and so forth and so there is a certain certainty for people, legal and moral security for companies, for those using it, and we're hoping and we're confident actually that we have managed to hit this critical mark.
The last point I wanted to mention, it is also the state.  The state as a data actor, there is so much data, communities, the federal government, regional government, there are so many, they have the parliaments and the parliament, they're the data for personalized nature but not only of the personalized nature, this is something that's also in our strategy and that will now ‑‑ I think that even now it is more crucial, the state must be at the forefront of the open data debate.  And they must put to the availability of everybody so that the data, so that new business models are created so that data gets the use that the researchers have access it and we hope and think that the data sharing from the state will generate some kind of a chain reaction with other actors that will be able to also put aside the storage, all of the negative thinking and also take part in data in dev that we're working on.  These are the three points I wanted to mention.
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you for your remarks.  I would like to ask you a question, how do governments work together with other stakeholders on these types of topics?
>> RUDOLF GRIDL: I think a very good example, it is ‑‑ we're working very, very intensively together with the private sector, of course and also with the research and scientific community.  That truly is an example where we as a state are very much aware of the fact that he has not the knowledge, not the human resources, not the insights that all of these scientific communities, all of the private actors have, so from the outset, the whole ‑‑ the whole project was, if you wish, a multistakeholder project, for everyone, they were on board, not only in the thinking, but in the design, in the economic implication, in the social indication, so that's something which we also have normally already in the German system very much but this was really an outstanding example.
Also, what we think is very important to work with Civil Society and consumer protection and data protection organization, not only authorities, but also organizations.  That's ‑‑ in Germany, it is ‑‑ data protection, it is very high in the mindset of people so if you have them on board, it is guaranteed that people will be more trustful to the product you produce.  I hope that answers the question to an extent.
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you.  As you weren't responding to this question, one more came in ‑‑ as you were responding to this question, another came in, we'll go to the next speaker.  It is an interesting one.
The anonymization methods used in the mentioned app, that's the tracing app I presume, considering global practices, you said that you were able to reach 18 million ‑‑ if I understood correctly ‑‑ correct me ‑‑ but what were the methods that were used to guarantee that privacy?
>> RUDOLF GRIDL: To affect the privacy?
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Through the anonymization methods. 
>> RUDOLF GRIDL: I could explain technically, I cannot go into those technical details here.  It creates a personal identifier, I don't know, every few minutes for every app.  This goes inside of the poll, but the poll cannot retrace after 5 minutes the person that goes with the identifier.  You get on your phone the information, I was in contact with someone who was COVID positive, you get the information, but not the poll.  I think that's technical ‑‑ I could not explain it to you more in detail how it is being programmed.  I'm a humble lawyer.
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you very much.  That was ‑‑ that was great.  I think that was covered in the response.
I would like with this to introduce our next speaker, I'm going to ‑‑ Christoph Steck is not with us today, instead we have Gonzalo Lopez from Telefonica and I'll talk about the data sharing frameworks in the private sector.  On to you.
>> GONZALO LOPEZ‑BARAJAS: I'll do my best.
First of all, I would like to say hello to the community, good morning, good evening, good night depending where you are and I'm very happy to be here with you.
So just to start, I will basically try to explain to you what we are, we're a telecommunication company provider and we have more than 340 million clients and we're providing the services in countries and that's giving you the scope of the company that I'm working for.
Going to the specific cases, during the pandemic, we have seen governments were forced to impose the strict lockdown measures to tackle it, this has impacted people's mobility and the economy and their society.  In this context, the availability of tools to effective modeling, to monitor and quantify this, it has been key for private institutions to decide which policies to implement and for how long to keep these confinement measures.
To that, it has been helping them to deal with this analysis, it is a use of an aggregated data from cellphone tracing to characterize the mobility and the spread of the virus.  This is not the first time this is used, in fact, this is also used since, for example, in 2011 during the epidemic in Mexico, H1N1.
Basically we have helped governments to analyze and our main focus with this agreement with governments has always meant the protection of privacy.  Our Chairman has recently presented the company proposal for a detailed deal to a sustainable cost of recovery to rebuild societies and economies and our response was to create trust and confidence in the digital data, it has been one of the most driven pillars of the digital deal and to create confidence and trusting the use of data, privacy is clear, basically all of the agreements that we had to comply with the following guidelines, first we used data from  and we used segregated data so that instead of having data referring to specific experiences, we had data referring to group of individuals and in a location, there was a certain minimum number of cases, for example, if there was less than 10 individuals in the region, we would not open the data, it would be easy to identify those individuals and also in addition, we have not shared the data itself.  We have shared insights on the data.  Maybe the best approach to a better understanding is to give you an example of one of the use cases, it would be in Argentina, we started public private collaboration, including the National University of St. Martin and we signed an agreement with the national government and others to use the tool that we implemented.
Basically, the objective was to measure the mobility of citizens through the Argentina territory to supervise the movement of the solution measures and in order to be able to monitor the reopenings.
For this, what we implemented here, it was the mobility indicator index that was built and indicated from 0 to 1 the level of mobility in each location of the country relative to the prepandemic mobility levels.  The information we shared, it was compared to the mobility before the pandemic and that's basically the insight that we share.  We do not share the specific data itself.  We just share what the insight is.
Basically, all the use cases that would have been implemented, it may different a little bit from country to country, the basic principle, we have respected and protected the privacy, complying with all privacy policies and legislations, you know, in our countries, we have data with measures to avoid over identification of personal data and we have not shared the data itself, but the insights as I just commented.
I'm going to the learnings.  Basically the learning that we have gone through after the implementation of the status, it is that in some cases there is a trust, a lack of trust in the use of mobility data, we have seen in a position of parts of the political opinion in introducing this kind of data and what we have seen, it is one of the main problem, the lack of understanding of the data that we're using and the first approach in this case, it is to be open and transparent and to be sharing publicly how we are doing things and informing people and raising awareness campaigns on how we're contributing to provide ‑‑ to help governments with this kind of data.
One of the additional learnings, it is that the coalition between public and private partnerships, it is complex, as every partnership follows a different approach, interestingly in all cases, government stakeholders, and the country, the particular area of data has completely different infrastructures.  In the case of emergency situation, when there is an urgent need, it takes a lot of time in order to define the legal structures and compliance and all of the issues to address this.  Maybe a potential solution that could be interesting, it would be to investigate a predefinition of the partnership templates in order to have more accelerated developments of such partnerships.
Also, relevant barrier that we found, it is the data readiness, by governments and public administrations changed significant barriers from country to country.  I think it would be good to a significant effort to fully prepare administrations on both the infrastructure side and on the skills for the data driven society.  And another difficulty that we have found, it is about the business model of sustainability.  In all of these cases that we have agreed with the governments, due to the urgency and the enforcing interest context, it was based on a proponent, we don't receive any payment for that and though I think this approach, they are the way to go in this crisis moment, looking at a more longer term, it would be needed, different approach, we have to look at the cost and investment required.  So it is difficult to sustain this service in a medium to long‑term.  It is essential that governments and companies could assign business models that guarantee the immediate and sustainable availability of the tools in anticipation of this.
I think those are the main learnings that we have.  I think I would leave it here.  Thank you. 
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you very much.
Just a follow‑up question, and especially since ‑‑ I know Telefonica is active in the data strategy and the policies on the data sharing, it was brought up by Rudolf prior to your presentation that's made now of the announcement of the data strategy made in February of 2020 and you touched on the pro bono relationship in time of crisis and of course thinking of sustainable ways in going in the future the European Commission has the expert group on implementations on how data could be shared more sustainably and not only for humanitarian response, although this is the most general topic right now, but in your opinion, coming from the private sector assessment, not just from Telefonica, but a private sector representative, would you consider as a question is coming in, that in order to accelerate the process more and one, I would like to ‑‑ one of the recommendations of the E.U. commissions policy recommendations and business to government data sharing, it was actually lack of technological solutions at the government level to protect data and to ensure trust.
Do you think that let's say the third party intermediaries, or concepts like the promoted by MIT on data Unions, data cooperatives, data trusts, companies that actually do analysis on behalf of the telecommunication companies or only on behalf of other company, it would be one of the potential solutions to ensure that data could work better rather than just ensure that we have regulations and sharing on a bilateral basis?  Do you think that could enhance the process for data sharing?
>> Having trusted parties could be an interesting approach.  It would depend on the use cases.  As we have seen, there is a lack of trust in this corporation works and how the data is used.  If you have a third party that's trusted by all and has all of the legal ‑‑ you have the ‑‑ you have the acceptance, I think that would be good.  We would have to do a deep dive in its case to decide what data is going to be used for and how long they will be keeping the data, but it could a good way forward to accelerate data.
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you very much.
I would like to go to our next speaker, Nnenna Nwakanma, the Chief Web Advocate from the Worldwide Web Foundation and she will discuss insight on responsibly harnessing data to bridge digital divides, especially the digital gender divide.
On to you.
>> NNENNA NWAKANMA: I home you can hear me very well.  Greetings from West Africa!.
So I have listened very closely to my colleagues from government and from the industry.  It was quite interesting to hear the word trust, trust, trust, trust and trust again.  I do acknowledge that there is a number of initiatives coming from most of us across our areas of engagement.
I would like to speak to you briefly, also looking at the time, about three principles in the concept of the web.  I have seen government responsibility, but the question, it is always what is the responsibility for users so I'm going to briefly speak on principles 3, 5, 8 for the contract for the web and then I'll add the global cooperation and the gender perspective.  Principle 3 has the government to establish and enforce comprehensive data protection laws and frameworks.  This is really, very, very important because if government is speaking about trust we need to understand what is the rules of trust and it needs to be defined within a specific law and then monitoring needs, it is also very important.  On the part of the government, it is really regulation, clear regulation so that the industry can understand it.  
On the part of the industry, that's principle 5, what the web puts across, it is giving people control of their data.  That is the main barrier in trust with users and to support and the accountability, the reports of the accountability, and making the rules understandable, equally available to everyone.
I think that's the responsibility from industry partners.  Everyone talks about trust.  Yes.  Trust may mean different things to different people.  I will come back to that.
On the part of the citizens, the contract of the web principle 8, us people like myself, the web foundation, it is to commit to raising data for those whose voices have been heard because one of the things that we are looking at security, trust, we also are looking at those whose voices are not heard every day.  This is the IGF, let's not forget we're all in different frameworks of the Sustainable Development Goals, we're saying leave no one behind, when talking about data sharing, data trust, data security, this may not be people just online, only half of the world is online.  We also give citizens like myself, it will help to connect data from unconnected people to the mainstream data so that all of that will form our decisions.
People like myself, user, contributor, cocreators, we should all also take a step to do our part, to protect ourselves, read through the end user licenses and make wise choices.  Overall, the web foundation, what's on the table, it does show that in 9 principles, sub principles how government can be responsible, how industry can be responsible and how users have been responsible.  It has been exactly two years when the principles were launched in Lisbon and exactly a year ago we launched it at IGF in Berlin.  Coming to the gender part, recently we launched our women rights online report and it is an in-depth study of countries across Africa, Asia, Europe and I would just like to share a key piece of data for you, from us to you, there is less trust in companies online.  The women that we studied, we are skeptical on tech companies using their data responsibly, 54% of our female respondents said that they would not allow companies to use any of the data at all.  Of course we ran the poll earlier on.  You saw how 63% were like, yeah, maybe, I can give my data if everything is fine, and then the other 92% is like trust is the issue.  Clearly trust is the issue.  The government, whether it is Civil Society, industry, trust is the issue and women every day who are lesson line than even within the 50% group, women are lesson line, our study shows that men are 21% more likely to be online than women.
The issue of security, the issue of trust, it is one that is everybody's issue.
As the Worldwide Web Foundation, we have been collaborating with the Office of The Secretary‑General of the United Nations implement the roadmap for digital accomplishment and that's where I would like to end.
The digital cooperation, it is the framework that has been built across multistakeholder corporations and now we have a roadmap.  One of the very key things in the roadmap, it is trust and security because everyone knows now that this is our collective problem, you recall when we were starting IGF, we said that we would not take any decision, we were just going to come here, talk and exchange requests and go home.  We have done that for 15 Goodyear, can you recall someone who was born when we had IGF 1, that person is 15 years today and we still are not making global decisions on issues that concern us, how the world population is online and we don't have platform for all of us to sit down and say this is a common understanding of trust and security.
This digital cooperation, the roadmap of digital cooperation, it gives us that opportunity and the United Nations Secretary‑General has engaged to do it.  Now, there is action point 6, we have a global statement on trust and security.  Why haven't we started it?  We have written a letter during the UN 75th Anniversary, the last General Assembly, we sent this letter to the incoming President of the UN General Assembly and it was copied to the Secretary‑General because for us, it is critical, it is critical that we sit and speak and agree on the global statement.  We're not calling it a treaty, we're not calling it any other thing, but a global statement of understanding because to understand from the right perspective, you understand it from the security perspective, you have to understand it from regulation and we all know in IGF that no one person can solve the problem.  So the web foundation, on behalf of others, the inventor of the worldwide web, the billions online, I'm here today to make a call, we need to serve as global community, we have to say what's COVID taught us?  There is only one global community.  There are not two of us.  So the digital community, the data community, it is one and we owe it to ourselves to sit and agree on trust and security within the framework of the digital cooperation.
Boys and girls, ladies and gentlemen, cats and dog, everyone watching!  Thank you! 
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you very much!  Thank you for bringing up the work of the Secretary‑General and thank you for that contribution to the panel and the implementation of further implementation of it.
In overall, as a follow‑up to your presentation, I would like to ask whether you concentrated a lot on trust and this is a key component I think prior to the discussion, policy and trust, we received a few comments also in the chat box and one of the comments said that trust is not the only component.  Do you believe that trust is an enabler of all other components, or do you think that there are other key elements that would promote and enable a better data share, a better access to data to ensure that we can better address crisis like COVID in the future knowing it is not the last one.
>> NNENNA NWAKANMA: It is not the only one.  You do recall during COVID that ‑‑ I live in West Africa, there were actually Africans who believed that it was a lie, it was a hoax.  Until the data started to come in.  I think was it Carolyn that talked about the dashboard, the daily maintaining of the dashboards helped us to build the trust that we needed and it helped us bring people to order, it helped us to convince people.
I think that it is as much as talking about data, inasmuch as you want to talk about open data and available, immediate data, from the foundation, you know us, you know we know data, inasmuch one talks about putting data in good format and all of that, but trust is still the bedrock.  Citizens need to trust the companies and the companies need to trust the government and the government needs to trust citizens and citizens need to trust government not shut down the internet at this time.
I mean, COVID has shown us that it is either we trust each other or we die with each other.
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you.  A very strong note to end your intervention.
Given that we have only 5 minutes left.  I would ask one general question to all of the panelists if possible to keep your ‑‑ you have 3 minutes left, to keep your response to maybe the key points of 30 seconds, 45 seconds, main touching on the questions of is there discussions occurring within government bodies, tech companies in considering the data gathered by COVID‑19 tracing apps could be repurposed for other purposes rather than COVID?  A key component of trust, why we don't have security to believe that data is used for COVID‑19, it could be repurposed for other use, without the knowledge.  Maybe in your closing remark, each one of you, again, 30 seconds, could reflect on this question and also make the final point and then I'll pass on to you.  Thank you. 
>> RUDOLF GRIDL: Can you hear me?
In 30 seconds, it is not that easy.  I will try to say that COVID‑19 and data collected by the app, other mechanism, it has opened a door, it has opened a door technically but also the mindset of people and I think that we'll be able in the future, not in the crisis situation but also in other situations, to have a much more open and positively ‑‑ a positive population when it comes to the collection of data and processing of data for the common good.  That's what I wanted to say.
>> CAROLYN NGUYEN: Thank you so much.
Quickly, trust, it is contextual and as everybody said, COVID provided us an opportunity to start working together on very, very concrete problems, it is how much trust state parties, others can bring together, we need that evidence to understand what is trust.  Thank you.
>> MILA ROMANOFF: Thank you very much.
>> GONZALO LOPEZ‑BARAJAS: On the first question you made, the purpose of limitation, it is a basic principle already included in the GDPR in Europe.  Even though there are some exceptions into which data can be produced for sampling the cases of the coronavirus crisis, this limitation, it has to be abided with. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-ws147-building-digital-bridges-engaging-young-women-online^^

 
>> MODERATOR:  We are going to start now. I would like to thank you all for making the time and joining us in our session today. Welcome, everyone, to our session, Building Digital Bridges.  Today we are going to hear an amazing presentation from amazing fierce women who are trying their best to build bridges, and I know by the end of the session you will be familiar with the concept.
I am Nesmah Mansoor. I will be your moderator for the session.  My colleague, Anna, she will be helping me with the chat and Q and A.
  For myself, I am from Yemen, and my background is in the feminist peace building.  I'm sure it's not your first IGF session nor your first Zoom session.  We have been stuck with Zoom since the beginning of the pandemic, so you know that if you have any questions, please put them in the Q and A.  And if you have any comments, put them in the chat.  My colleague, Anna, will be monitoring the chat and she will be capturing all of your comments.
Now, I would like to start presenting the organisations our speakers come from.  So today we are going to hear from three different organisations.  They have different approaches, but they all do work in building bridges and trying to engage women.  First, we will hear from TechSoup.  It is a nonprofit intercessional network that is trying to build dynamic bridges between civil society, change agents, to give them the tools and the resources to be able to use technology to create more equal world.
Second, we will hear from RNW media.  It's headquarters is in the Netherlands.  RNW media is working on creating online community, and through all of these communities they also design the content, engagement and moderation.  RNW media has two thematic programmes, the first is citizen voice, which is more into citizenship and governance and all of the topics that stem around it.  The second is love matters, which covers the topics of sexual and reproductive rights.  RNW media works in 12 countries around the world including the Middle East and North Africa.
We are going finally to hear from Huna Libya. It's based in Libya, and it aims to create a safe and healthy space for all young Libyan people from different ethnic backgrounds, intellectual backgrounds, to just have a respectful dialogue.  As you may know, in a foreign country the media is polarized and Huna Libya is a safe space for those young people who don't find themselves between the polarized media to have the dialogue.  It encourages young change makers and influencers to share stories to inspire other young people in the country.  And now after introducing the organisations our speakers come from, I'm happy to introduce our first speaker, Ms. Anna Kuliberda.
She is an independent consultant of TechSoup.  If you first sit with Anna, you would think she is a technical person, because she is all about tech, but believe me, she is not.  She is a fierce feminist who is trying to create this bridge between the complicated tech world that activists like you, like me, do not understand, and the complex activism world that tech people do not understand.
Please welcome Anna.  Anna, the floor is yours to start your presentation.
>> ANNA KULIBERDA:  Thank you so much, Nesmah. This is the best introduction I have ever heard about myself.  I will record it and listen if I am in doubt any time.  Thank you so much.
Welcome, everybody.  It's so great to be able to talk with you about building bridges for tech for good innovation, and this is what I'm going to tell you.  Let me share my screen.  This should work.  Yes.  I think I'm sharing my screen now.  Great.
So as Nesmah said, I work with TechSoup Europe to be precise, and I am working mostly in central and Eastern Europe, which is a lot of countries, a lot of languages and different types of activism, a lot of really mission‑driven people.  And TechSoup really turns into innovation.  How can we support innovation for activists?
And let's go here.  Yes, so what I want to say is we have two key assumptions in our project and those are based in data, in statistics but also from what we knew.  And one assumption is about activists that in general they are not tech savvy as Nesmah she isn't tech savvy and tech empowered.  On the ground we can see mostly women so on the C level we can meet men but on the project coordinate E. compliant builders are mostly women working hard with communities.
And women in general, not even only activists are discouraged from STEAM from the early age.  So they are not really happy to be creative and innovative in technology.  They do the job with the means they have, but technology is say bit scary if not discouraging them from just going and looking at it.  And then we have this human part, the that learning takes time and requires safe space.
So we took into account while building our bridges and projects.  And then develop real thing that my colleagues will tell you more about women in tech, including are not really safe.  It's not say safe space in general to be a woman, to ask questions, to have opinions.  It requires attention to build this safe space.  And on the other hand, we have amazing tech experts to are full of goodwill and they are lacking the teaching capacity and understanding how it works when people are being taught, and they are not good in communication outside of the tech genre as well.
So they need translators.  Tech for Good volunteers are usually coming with a basket of solutions, and sometimes the solutions, they are ‑‑ so it's like the organisations need to adjust to the solution, not the other way.  So that makes the solution not really feasible and not sustainable.  And the pile of many tech solutions that didn't work is growing, and in general members of organisations are discouraged from trying again because, well, it's a waste of time.  Because it never works.
And then you can see this is working with activists in Serbia.  And teaching about open data.  And you can see there is this glare of super hero.  He helps women in building, in building capacity.  So we want to change it.  We want to have this not one superhero, but be a community working.  For better world.  And tech experts are mostly men.  That's statistics.  We can't avoid it for now.  We want to change it, but for now.  So in the end, those are not sustainable solutions.  Someone comes here with algorithms, but I remember social media, open data, probably soon something else is going to come and then a few months later this smart person says this problem is more difficult than I thought.  I can't solve it with just one solution.  So we want to act against it, and how do we do that?
In our community projects, we wanted to build bridges, which are proactive processes for connecting the cultures.  We wanted horizontally to make sure that all process are counted and then when it comes to empowering women to make sure that those that we know that are not really heard, they will be amplified.  So to keep the balance, and this is the role of project coordinator or bridge person or a translator to make sure that this balance is kept.
And I want to tell you about especially one project, but as you can see, we learn from the goal, and there are many different projects.  And I want to show you how did we build bridges in transparency this TCEE, which is Transparency Central in Eastern Europe.  And we propose activities for many different groups, experts, beginners, activists more, technologists more so they can meet and actually some initiatives and innovation can be cooked.
Otherwise, those are different silos and we wanted them to meet.  You can see those are hands‑on work.  There are educational activities like workshops, and there are also resources that you can, that you can learn from in your own pace.  And inspiration as much as we could.
Online and offline.  And we served this platform for people to meet and if they have an idea to come to us and to say like, hey, we need your support and we want to build something specific.  And this is the building bridges.  It needs to be 360 degrees because somehow different people have different needs and this is what we wanted to cover here.
And this can be kind of gender blind, but what we always added is making all voices count.  So supporting non, not technological voices, amplifying the concerns, trying to show what does it mean when you are an activist, what are your assets and what do you work with?  What is your content?  Because sometimes technical people don't see the other side, like to be able to understand the jargon, to be able to understand the potential, to be excited about technology, not only scared.  Making, so bridging the gaps in communication.  That was one of my, it is still one of my most favorite things, like to translate one to another, sometimes giving me, asking the serious questions for other people to feel free to ask something smarter but never feel like it's a stupid question. So I ask them all beforehand.
And this balance between interest of activists and tech experts so not the solution pushing organisation to do something, but rather organisation asking for something that they can work with.  And in the end, supporting women leadership, and empowering women.  This was one of the things that we never explicitly put in our policies, but it was always done, mostly because the whole team was female.
So our team understood the issues of feminism from our own perspective, and this is what we wanted for all of the women that were participating in our projects as well to feel safe with us and also to grow technologically and in terms of innovation.
So we wanted to show to the women activists that it's not their individual issue that they don't feel safe.  It's a common issue.  There are statistics, women in STEAM, women in technology, it's a big problem.  So the change needs to happen on the organizational level as well.  So they don't feel lonely, they don't feel like they are not good enough.
So this is a very common understanding of empowerment through showing the system.  We were proactively acting against sexism in terms of like we were not organising, we were really working hard on men Splaining when teaching tech experts, saying this is men Splaining, can you be more inclusive.  And especially in central and Eastern Europe we are promoting women tech experts.
She is at the reach of our hand and she most probably speaks your language.  It's not only English.  And in the end, we are very strong for supporting changing organizational culture from the more competitive culture into more collaboration and listening to each other.  We want to avoid this.  Women extremely bored when being men Splained, this is me and my friend at the Conference and when a man that I remember but I will not say who that was, really explained to us something that we really knew.  Thank you so much.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you so much for this Anna presentation.  A wick reminder, please do not forget to put your questions in the Q and A answers.  And so we can have the conversation going.  Now, I'm going to introduce our next speaker, Jahou Nyan.  She is focusing on her work in the citizen voice project.  Through her work, Ms. gentleman Jahou is focusing on gender and how to bring women into the communities RNW media is create.  She has a very long experience in West Africa when she was working on development media, she was trying to build the bridge between the ordinary people and the mass media.  Let's welcome Jahou.  The floor is yours to amaze us with your presentation.  You are muted.
>> JAHOU NYAN:  Thank you very much for that introduction, and thank you, Anna, for your presentation.  I will just sort of try and continue from where you left off and talk more about RNW media's gender inclusion approach.  So for us our objective is to ensure that young men and women in all of their diversities in the different countries we work in have the tools they need, the resources they need to fully participate in their social, economic, political life both online and offline.  So to do that, we build inclusive, effective and efficient platforms for online interaction and we always complement that with offline activities, which is also part of our inclusion strategy.  We will talk more about how we do that in this presentation.
Now, our inclusive approach is built on five pillars, and the five pillars we talk about are building inclusive teams, making sure that both men and women feel comfortable and are part of our teams, are producing content and moderating platforms, and actually completely streamlined within our organisation.
We also brought inclusive communities, inclusive partnerships are important to support our work when it comes to certain contexts and also we produce inclusive content and we make sure that the technology we use is inclusive, as inclusive as possible, and as you know, there is always an ongoing iterative process where we try to improve on what we are doing.  So let's go straight into the pillar one, inclusive teams.
When it comes to gender we make sure we are actively recruiting women and men to ensure gender balance in our teams, and we don't just recruit in terms of the gender balance, but also in terms of demographic, socioeconomic class, political and religious ideas. These are the different variables or the different touch points that we use to ensure that not just one type of woman is on our platforms.  We also encourage women to, for instance, write under pseudonyms if needed and that's also included in our approach to ensure that our platforms are safe, creating safe spaces.  Being a woman online is not always the safest thing.
And we also have targeted capacity building for women, because they face peculiar challenges when working especially in online spaces and they need that capacity to meet those challenges.  Inclusive tech, in a lot of countries we work in data is a luxury and women are usually at the bottom of the pile when did it comes to socioeconomic indicators.  How do we ensure we have women starting the conversation, how do we ensure that the women on the streets in Burkina Faso actually has access to platforms we have.
We do this by making sure our platforms are as data light as possible, fast and efficient.  In Africa, for instance, usually a standard work page takes 30 seconds to load, and it costs 3 megabytes.  They charge per megabyte for data.  For our RNW media we cut that down to 3.5 seconds and 0.3 megabytes to load.  You can also get free access to information without using a lot of data.  So that's our contribution to ensuring access to the information that women need.
Inclusive partnerships, now, there are two ways we do this.  The first I will mention is online and offline links.  RNW media focuses on online interaction.  We all know that you don't live just online.  You live in the real world so we need to create the links and close the feedback loop.  So we partner with CSOs and NGOs that have a specific gender focus to complete our work.  That way they can complement our work.  That way if a conversation is gaining traction online, we can organize offline interactions and debates with women involved so that those who do not have access to online world can feel part of the conversation and understand what a viral hashtag is all about.
Another way we partner is to make sure we have an Omni channel approach where we are producing content not just for web sites but for social media, we have interactive videos, podcasting, we are always experimenting to make sure that different audiences have access to different kinds of information.  Inclusive content, for us, content is key.  Without the content, a lot of the work we do would be (?) and I'm just going to mention, we have ten principles for producing gender‑sensitive content.
I'm just going to highlight five.  The first thing is voice.  You need to make sure that the woman's voice is heard in your content.  If you have men writing, always writing or always producing the content, that will become the dominant voice in the content.  So it's also related to inclusive teams.  We need to challenge gender norms and make sure that traditional ways or exclusion airy ways of talking about women, we actually challenge them on our content and say what if we try to look at this from a different perspective, what happens.
Language is important, gender-neutral language.  You don't only sort of box women within a certain, a certain narrative just because of the language they are using.  The last thing I will talk about is topic.  So you need to cover topics on the nexus of gender and the thematic area of the project and program.  So if you are not talking about issues that deal with gender, then there is something a little bit missing in your content.  You need to look at that.
And finally, engagement in voice.  You always have to have engagement in voice.  And Reema will tell you why you always must engage in boys, you cannot just engage women and girls.  Inclusive media, we have a wide variety of people with different kinds of literacy skills.  We try to make it as visual as possible.  We use simple, straight forward language.  We have online, we use website, we use infographics, all of these are part of our gender inclusive strategies when it comes to producing inclusive content.
One of them is smart targeting.  A lot of times we put a piece of content online and you see the men come and take over the conversation.  And once the tone has been set it's hard to wrest that control.  Where we have specific content where we are looking to service the needs of young women, we target them first, let them set the tone.  Let them start the conversation and then we open up to a wider community to now come and contribute and see where the tensions are, where the challenges are, and also where the points of agreement are.
Usually those points of agreement that you can use to make the biggest inroads when it comes to challenge and social norms.  So Reema again will talk about the practicalities.  Moderation is important for safe spaces, we don't claim to stop all of the trolls at the door.  We can't stop them all.  What we do is we have trained moderators that can actually recognize certain reactions or certain comments and have actually got sort of a guide book on how to react to those things, and women feel safer in our space than somewhere else or on social media or somewhere else on the Internet.  We also encourage sometimes women to get into private messages, for instance, direct messages we try not to ban people because the whole point is to get diverse voices.  Heard.  There should be a certain level of respect and decorum when talking on our platforms.  So this moderation is also very important.
It creates an inclusive and gender-friendly space.  Our moderators are usually 50/50 men and women to ensure that certain things that can fly under the radar, who may not see it or recognize that this is a certain form of maybe harassment according to social norms and a female moderator can step in and say, listen, hold on, this conversation is going out of hand. Let's try and bring it back within the set remits of community guidelines and how we treat each other in communities online.  So just to summarize what we do when it comes to gender inclusion.
We make our websites lean.  We need to make sure that women can access it and that as much as possible, finances is not a barrier to access.  We use mobile first because we are targeting and we know that it's mostly on the mobile phone.  Mobile strategy is important.  It's included in terms of trying to find young women where they are.  In a lot of countries we work in, WhatsApp and Facebook are very big and TikTok is gaining traction.  We are doing a lot of work when we are young women on WhatsApp or Facebook, but if we want to talk to duty bearers, we go and Tweet because that's where they are.
Gender-neutral language is important.  Complementing offline with online is very important.  We encourage women to join our teams and we train them.  We use visuals and videos to reach illiterate people or people with disabilities.  We make sure everything is as accessible as possible.
And it looks as if strategies are working.  Next, I'm taking a little bit, one of the, one of our colleagues will tell you how much they are working.  If you look at this chart here, you can see that the engagement rates, the average engagement rates for Facebook pages for women in 2019 is much lower than what we have on our platforms which shows that us trying to get more women to actually come out and to speak and to own and challenge and create a voice in our spaces, those strategies are actually working.  And thank you very much for your attention, and if you have any questions, I will be staying on to answer them.  Thank you.  Is.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks a lot.  You basically set the tone for our next speaker, Ms. Reema Hamidan, she is the project coordinator for Huna Libya.  She started off as a contributor and now as a young woman she is leading a very big team of members and more than 100 contributors Libya has and Huna Libya is one of the largest youth networks in the country with more than 35,000 followers and this is not something new for Reema.  She has also been heavily involved before joining Huna Libya team in the development sector and from this simple introduction, we are going to see an amazing representation.  Reema, the floor is yours.  Please start your presentation.
>> REEMA HAMIDAN:  Thank you, Nesmah.  And thank you, Jahou for presenting.  My presentation will be about Libya's experience with effective and gender‑neutral digital engaging content, and gender inclusiveness.  So as a start, the main key takeaways is that you can take from this presentation is the benefits of smart targeting, dealing with online polarization, steps of smart targeting with examples and the results that we found during one of our campaigns.
So how is smart targeting for Huna Libya platform.  With one of our examples of using smart targeting tool is during one of our campaigns we had this year which is about gender equality.  Its name was same.  The campaign reached 970,000 Facebook page.  It was talking about the gender equality challenges in Libyan society.  I will show you examples of how we use smart targeting in this campaign.
The goal of the campaign was to spread awareness of gender equality, highlighting facts, rights and laws that aim to support gender equality in Libya that focus on economic and socioeconomic changes.  But what we noticed at the beginning of the campaign that most of the dominated discussion makers were men and women who were against gender equality accusing the content of delivering western agenda.
In general, women were less encouraged in the discussions why and the content was relevant social examples they can rely on.  And as Jahou mentioned women's voices were very important for us to show, so we were prepared with smart targeting strategy.  When was the smart targeting strategy used in our platform is, it was used for both moderation and content to decrease the polarization of the discussions and prevent shifting to a black hash and into the campaign.  And most important to open this page for more women and men to discuss how they define equality and where they need to see it in the society.
So the main steps that we have taken into this campaign was mainly three steps with a targeted promotion using Facebook as to engage more women in discussions, creating an audience‑based content to help more women see examples of other commentaries, and gender inclusive language as the era quick language has two lines for both females and males.
As a start, well, using promotion for micro targeted groups, at the start of the campaign we found that Facebook as we were targeting more men than women within our platform.  So we found that women were reached before using smart targeting micro target groups of females 18‑35 was 7.5,000, but after a promotion of a target audience of females we reach the 12,000 women which encouraged more women to see the content.
We created content from women's comments and we shared it in our platform.  On the left we saw one of the womb's comments was a question to Libya audience saying which you ask the women on the page what is missing for women in Libya to be equal to men.  We published it during the campaign.  It created a diverse discussions and encouraged people, women to share views on gender equality.
As a result one of the women were shedding the right, you can find the women's comment about what is missing is appreciation on the basis of gender.  That he/she is a human being with rights.
Sharing a photo of a woman influencer supporting gender equality.  She is an activist female with a confident smile about women empowerment and gender equality.  This will help more women to be more comfortable to talk about rights and gender equality in their lives while at the same time making comments safe for them to communicate with moderation strategy for, to avoid any harassment or bullying in the comments so they can find a very safe space for them to interact.
One of the results we found that more women were encouraged even in our private messages, bun female shared a story of her daily life, discrimination with house work and she found that it's always been looked at her role.  She shares her story and we published it in our platform in Facebook, and we have many women commenting that this happens the same for them in their daily lives.
Also we used a gender inclusive language as was said it's important to have a gender neutral language visually and verbally, not just by wording but by using visuals that contain both females and males in the content to help more see that this matter and this issue is for both genders, not only for specific targeted group.
And they found that, we found that more women and men are engaging in the discussions with very positive approach.  As a result of this campaign, we have a really successful results.  We found out that more women are requesting legal rights.  They wanted, they shared part of the Libyan laws which are against women's rights and they wanted to change.  We found that there was a support from the influencer and activists online sharing their content, our content and sharing voices.
We found out that men's voices are very important in the matter of gender equality as they might have a different perspective and they always should be included in the discussions about gender equality as to men and boys' voices matter because they also support or have different perspectives of the topics that we are talking about.
So that's the main results of what we found in our campaign about gender equality Libya using smart targeting.  You can follow us on Facebook and check our website if you want to find more about the content we are producing and thank you for listening to this discussion and I thank you all for presenting today.
>> CHAIR:  Thank you, Reema for such an amazing presentation.  I can say nothing about the presentation, but amazing, eye opening, we just heard three different stories, but they are all interlinked.  We heard from Anna how we should bridge the gap between the tech people and the activist from Jahou that gender inclusion is not a term but more of an inclusive approach that needs more work and Reema just told us how contextualizing any strategy is important.  So we can invite more women to talk.  Thank you, ladies for the amazing presentations.  I salute you.
And now our audience, we want to go to you.  You have heard three amazing, three amazing presentations and we have a question for you.  We are going to give you one minute to think about an answer and you can put the answer in the chat.  And Anna will also put the question in the chat, but our question to you is in your context, what are the main challenges and differences for women to have their voice heard in the tech/digital space in comparison to men?  We would love to hear stories from your own local communities and from the experiences that you have about women, women's inclusion in the tech world.
I can give you kind of an idea from my example in Yemen one of the main challenges women do not own Smart Phones.  Many women are not allowed.  If they had Smart Phones and if they were allowed to join social media they are not allowed to have usernames.  Their social media platform is always under the radar of the family, so it is just a very complicated and we would love to hear from you.
While waiting for your answers, we are going to start with the Q and A.  We have got some very good questions from you, and I will start with the first question we have from our colleague who is joining us from Uganda.  I think Anna and Jahou we are going to, the one who would love to answer it, she is asking that we are about to start implementing a project in Uganda which will bring women and provide them with basic digital and mobile skills through public and community libraries.
Do you have any recommendation how to make it successful?  Please, Anna, you can start.
>> ANNA KULIBERDA:  It's a brilliant question.  So my educator experience is saying make it as handsome as possible as soon as possible.  Because overcoming the first fear is, it takes time.  Sometimes we, so I have my experiences with building big programmes and showing people different possibilities, and they never actually touched the tool.  And that is a failure that I was really not happy with the result.  So we started to push into the usage of the tools whatever tools it was.
And so this is one.  And the second, making the content relevant, and this is definitely Jahou will speak to that.  So making the content relevant, and if you are building kind of political capacities so speaking your own voice, ask questions that will be friendly in a way, like I can understand what you are asking for.  But from my educator experience, make them use the tools.
So otherwise, it's like just wasting this time when they are just reading about tools.
>> JAHOU NYAN:  I agree completely, Anna, make them use the tools and if possible if you can see how they can apply the tools in their day‑to‑day life so it doesn't get siloed in their mind that I only use this for this.  You want them to become fully digitally literate.  You said you are going to do it in public and community libraries, so I would say you should have a very good understanding of the social norms.  You should be comfortable to sit in a public library and be seen on the computer.  Is there possibly going to be a challenge there.
Sometimes it's the little things what, time do you set up this thing in the public library?  Is it a time when they are cooking or watching for kids and you start seeing after an initial start of everyone being on board, you start seeing absenteeism and lateness because it's not fitting within their time.
So these are the little, little things that come within your context, so make sure you have a very thorough understanding of the context you are working with of the responsibilities of the social forms and try and make the tools as practical as possible even in their day‑to‑day life, even in things like, I don't know, you are teaching them a digital tool for civic voice, but you show them how you can use the same tool or same approach to get a recipe, just to make them more, I know this is kind, this ‑‑ what's the word I'm looking for, stereotype, maybe they are not cooking, I don't know, whatever it is, whatever target it is.
If your target group is seamstresses, something that would be useful in daily life as well so you can see the benefit of using digital tools outside of your own specific goal for your project.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you, Jahou and Anna for the answers.  I think I have a question for Reema.  She asks about you mentioned smart targeting.  Does this include the intersectionality between gender and race?
>> REEMA HAMIDAN:  So smart targeting is maybe not only about one specific target group, not only about men and women is part of my example, but it's about targeting a specific group of people that you are interested to engage during the content, whether it's, whether you find it's not that much engaged or the messages that you are using is important for them.  So this tool had the word and your voice or your message to reach these groups to be more engaged in the content and encouraging their voices to be more included in the discussions online and digital spaces.
So this is a tool to use it, to empower more people from different backgrounds in the digital discussions online.  So I hope this answers your questions and maybe and someone else will also add.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you Reema.  Did either of you want to add to this question?
>> JAHOU NYAN:  Yes, basically just as Reema said, it depends who you are trying to target and what variables or what measures you are using to target.  Smart targeting tool is usually also kind of dependent on what the social media platforms give to you.  So if they are not tracking certain points like they are looking for, for instance, if they are not tracking race and you want to smart target on race, then you have to look for more imaginative ways of doing the smart targeting.  By targeting groups to you know have got a certain racial profile that you are targeting.
So it does include different intersectionalities, gender, race, ache, it includes geographic location as well.  And you can just set it according to the kind of audience that you are looking for or your targeting, yes.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks a lot, Jahou, and you basically also gave us an opening for our next question from, from one of our participate ands.  She asks that, she mentioned the recruit in a way that has different religions and social, socioeconomic status representing.  How do you ensure that this is not something that people put on their CV or are likely to discuss during interviews?
>> JAHOU NYAN:  In some of the countries we work in, it's pretty much straight forward process because some of these demographics are actually divided geographically as well.  I will give you an example of let's say a country like Nigeria where you have the southern states being predominantly Christian and the northern being predominantly Muslim.
If you make sure you have bloggers both from the south and from the north, even if the bloggers themselves may not be Christian or Muslim based on the geographic location they live in, they do have enhanced appreciation of the social norms based on the different religions and different areas they work in.  For a lot of countries we work in especially in Sub‑Saharan Africa it's a straight forward process.
In other cases where we actually see that this is a gap within our team and we need to bridge it, for instance, when we put certain content online and you have a lot of backlash, people saying that, for instance, this content is not sensitive based on my X or based on my social class or based on my economic status or my political ideology and we get that feedback, then we have to recruit someone who can help us understand where our audience is coming from especially if we do not recognize ourselves that this is a gap that perhaps we have on the team.
Crucial partnerships become important.  We have a wide network of partners both from traditional media, journalists, blogging associations from NGOs and CSOs and if you have a CSO who has worked within that particular niche who have targeted that particular audience in the past, this he can help us to bridge the gap and do the recruitment.  The recruitment is not just based on cities, it is once you have a wide geographic spread, in some countries we work in we are guaranteed to have the inclusiveness showing up when you look at your staffing.
Other thing is when we are doing recruitment, to make sure that we make it as attractive as possible.  Sometimes people might feel intimidated that I don't have a Master's Degree.  There is no way I can write on this platform.  Or I don't have a Bachelor's Degree.  So we make sure that in advertisements we try and make it simple and say, listen, this is something that if you have the drive and if you have the knowledge, we can give you the training and you can still come on board and do it.  So that's another way we try and get diverse people on board.  I hope that answers the question.
>> MODERATOR:  Yes.  Thank you, sand now I have a question to Anna.  Anna, I would like you to explain to us what should be done to ensure that Digital Inclusion efforts actually respond to the local needs of women?
>> ANNA KULIBERDA:  It's about more than just gender inclusion.  It's seeing the intersections of where we come from and not only seeing but having our ears open and to listen what are the knees, not to have too many assumptions and to actually listen.  It's kind of basics of activist that we are working with our communities, so trying to ‑‑ if you come from outside of the given community, listen more than talk, and always involve more people than just you in actual actions.
It requires enormous humidity, like to really be able ‑‑ humility to be able to overcome the privilege of like I will come and help you, and rather believing that people can solve their own problems.  So I, as a kind of working with communities as a coach, like I cheer for you more than you might believe in yourself right now, but I will not make the work for you.  I will help wherever I can.  And I think a lot of development initial initiatives are kind of like I will tell you what to do, while on the other hand we need to actually listen in order for the solutions to be sustainable.
That's exactly like this comic strip, like this looks simple, why aren't you doing this?  You should be doing that for a long time.  And six months later, it's really more complicated than that, so learning about how complicated it is beforehand and making all of the experts involved being as humble.
So it's simple, but very complicated.  It's not easy.  And that's why we are where we are right now, because if it was so easy to implement, it would be, but being aware of their own bias, of our own biases, that helps, but it's a constant work also on ourselves when we are trying to help.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you, thanks a lot, Anna, we have questions about a participant from South Korea, and he mentioned that the divide between men and women, is not that much and considering about participation into Internet Governance, most of them, most of the members of the Internet Governance group were men, and he is asking how or he or she is asking how could I empower women to participate in Internet Governance.
Would you like to answer the question,.
>> ANNA KULIBERDA:  I can very quickly, not to take the spot from our brilliant panelists, I can ‑‑ it's a huge problem.  Under the open data community, I can totally welcome open heroines community who are women who got fed up with men leading the open data world saying it's gender neutral and net people were facing difficulties all of the time.
So the women in open heroines, you can find them, they can help if you are a woman.  Join open heroines, I totally can recommend it.  I'm a member and I love it.  And also call for old community, it's bringing technology and activists and this community is really working hard on empowering women so they can take more space in their own respective countries.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks a lot, Anna, unfortunately I am running out of time, I know there are many great questions and many great stories in the chat, but unfortunately we need to wrap up.  Thanks a lot, everyone, for your active participation and for the questions, and I want to take the time just to give you the key takeaways from our session that maybe we have, maybe we have, many people have strategies but these strategies need to be tailored to the communities and they need to encourage people, encourage women mainly to speak in a men‑dominated world, which is the digital world as well.
We have, we have heard about the importance of having both online and offline activities to build the bridges between women and the online communities, and I want to take these last few moments to give us, for my respected speakers to give us, one, their final remarks and commitments as the IGF community states.  We can start with you, Reema.
>> REEMA HAMIDAN:    I think it will be very important for you to focus more on engaging more women in content creating visually within our platforms as it is, the rate of participants in this section is not equivalent.  This is a goal for Libya to maintain, and in general it's important to include women in creating content for social media to be more, to have a wider perspective for gender inclusiveness goals for these spaces.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you, Reema.
>> JAHOU NYAN:  Thank you for a very, very interactive session, and the questions were also very interesting and trying to understand the different perspectives.  We will try and get the questions we didn't get by typing in some answers for you as well.  And in terms of commitment, I am going to work hard to make sure by December 2020 we will improve the digital literacy skills of at least 100 young women between 15 and 30 years old who live and work in Sub‑Saharan Africa.  Getting these digital literacy skills are crucial especially since we have seen what has happened during the COVID‑19 pandemic where those without have been greatly even more disadvantaged and we need to continue to build those bridges together to ensure that that digital gender divide is finally closed.  Thanks.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks.  Now, Anna.
>> ANNA KULIBERDA:  So commitment ‑‑ in the community‑oriented innovation capacity building project is working also on the organizational culture, not only on technology, but digging deeper into understanding the culture and adjusting technology and innovation, so it can be more sustainable and more people will be able to take advantage of the innovation.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks a lot, Anna, thank a lot, everyone, for taking the time and joining our session.  We really appreciate your participation.  We really appreciate all of the comments you have given us.
As you saw in the chat, our colleague, Anna, has put the links for the organisations, and if you have any questions, please don't hesitate to reach out.  I wish you have a very pleasant event with us, and you have learned a lot about the concept of building bridges.
, personally, I have been learning a lot working with these amazing ladies and I hope we see more women involved in the tech world that they think they are technicians and they are tech experts while they are not, so, again, thanks a lot, and let's, and let's keep in touch and we will see you in other events.  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-ws163-access-challenges-among-rural-communities-local-solutions^^

 
>> MODERATOR: By my watch, it is now 12:20 which is the official starting time for this event.  I would like to welcome you to the workshop on Access Challenges among Rural Communities & Local Solutions.  I'm Christopher Yoo from the University of Pennsylvania.  I'll be the moderator.  As is the case for all events, I want to confirm everyone's understanding that this will be conducted under the IGF rules of participation.  I'm making sure we're all aware of these issues or concerns about privacy and accessibility.
Most importantly, we're here, the reason we're convening this event is on a meeting one rural connected, it was determined to gather empirical information and evidence about innovative ways to bring the benefits of the internet to more people around the globe.  It is a labor of love that yielded a database of over 1100 entities and case studies which are published on our website of more than 125 now.  If you're interested in that, please consult 1worldconnected.org, one being the number 1, not spelled out in letters and you can see the write‑ups on today's projects led by today's speakers and others.  We're could go an event on Thursday on data gaps for measuring progress which we invite you to attend as well.
The reason why we put today's panel together, it is that we became convinced that the more authentic and most important voices that are often left out of the conversations are the founders and the leaders of the projects who are actually doing the work on the ground.  I think there's important work done by different people in all levels of the enterprise that serve the goals we all share, but I have some concerns about it can be that the people who have the insights, the on‑the‑ground real world insights of the opportunities, the challenge, the realities of bringing these projects to life can be not given the prominence or the opportunities to showcase the fantastic work.
This is to bring together three ‑‑ was originally scheduled to bring together throw outstanding examples of this.  We have with us today Mary Olushuga, founder of the African women power network and Michael Spencer, founder of smart money international that will share their experiences in bringing in this case‑based initiatives to rural areas and we look forward to that very much.
The third speaker it had who was to be had a last minute conflict and won't be able to attend.  We're delighted to have both Mary and Michael here today to share with us their experiences.
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Thank you for having us.  Thank you!
>> MODERATOR: Since you're off mute, we'll start with you.
A first thing we would love to do is start with a basic introduction to your initiative about what you are doing, what the goals are, how you are doing it?
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Hello, earn.  Welcome to this incredible session.  Thank you so much for putting it together.
I'm Mary Olushuga and I'm founder of a WP network, I founded a WP network in 2012 and one of our first initiatives was working with Nigeria, I'm from Nigeria, helping the young students there put together their business plans.  We received funding at that time and we sort of evolved over time where I was able to secure funding from planet earth institute, the organization planet earth institute, it no longer exist, it is morphing into something else, a different organization.  
The initiative here, what this conversation will mostly be about, it was working with women farmers in three rural communities, trying to help them to improve on their agricultural practices to improve their yields and also to help them improve their crop productivity.  That's basically what that project was about.
It is currently an ongoing product that's morphed to something else which I would love to talk about as well.
I started that project in 2014, two years after starting the AWP Network and currently it has morphed into basically working with women cooperatives and farmer, women, helping them to create sort of products that they can put on the shelves and we have been able to establish a collaboration with Shoprite Nigeria.  It is our goal to continue to build upon relationships with larger retailers so that a lot of the farmers have somewhere to sell their crops.
>> MODERATOR: As I understand it though, you have expanded beyond just the agricultural education into some other aspects.  I wondered if you could share those with us as well?
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Of course.
Like I said, we have currently ‑‑ we're currently building one of the largest vender databases in Nigeria, our focus definitely is women in Africa, specifically women in Nigeria.  So we're working with women entrepreneurs in Nigeria who manufacture products, women farmer, those that own farms and have created an end product.  If someone has a fish farm, for example, they probably plan to sell smoked fish or smoked cat fish, they have packaged it properly, everything like that so what we have done currently is built a relationship with Shoprite Nigeria, currently one of the largest retailers in Nigeria so that a lot of these women can put their products on the shelves.  It is our goal and intention to build one of the largest vender databases in Nigeria and so far that's going well, actually first cohort of women will be pitching to Shoprite on Thursday and that's exciting and we're looking forward to that.
I think you're on mute, Christopher. 
>> MODERATOR: Occupational hazard.  I wish I could say that's the first time that's ever happened.
Michael, let's bring you in, smart money is doing fantastic work in the world of financial inclusion.  We would love to hear about it.
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: Thank you.  
Thank you to you and the team for being such terrific champions of this kind of grassroots work.
I think you're quite correct, unfortunately the implementers don't have much of a voice in the global conversation and there are so many learning that I think are important for others to hear.  I'm very excited to hear about Mary's experience with her training on the ground, her rural empowerment, I'm sure we have very similar experiences and it will be interesting to see those patterns come out.
Smart money is a digital banking solution that is focused on rural communities.  We started our business in about 2010 in rural Tanzania and expanded now in rural Uganda and that's really where we focus our operations today, rural Uganda.
We promote savings as a pathway to prosperity and we do this by providing a digital wallet, combined with a very unusual form of grassroots financial education and that's really the area of our business that is our greatest focus, it is the educational component.  We're a for‑profit business and we generate revenue by investing our customer deposits and also by charging fees to larger institutional customers.  We take an ecosystem approach so there are many different stakeholder groups in our community, including farmer, villagers, teachers, church member, but also larger institution, agriculture companies such as cotton and coffee, makers, churches and communities and schools.  A community‑wide approach to the solution.  We have gone 200,000 digital wallet holders in Uganda and through our education program we helped them to save money that they ultimately invest in new‑income generation, this includes investment in children education, expanding farms, buying inputs for farming, so forth, the goal being, of course, more income.  We believe more income is the necessary component of poverty reduction.
Along this journey, we pivot many times as it sound like Mary has as well as we encountered realities on the ground, looking forward to sharing some of that information with everybody.
>> MODERATOR: Let me draw out a little bit as you're talking this.
I know from our previous conversation, including a podcast interview we did with you before that there is at least two separate components, part of it, it is marketing to promote the take‑up both with the individuals but also the merchants and also trading.  Can you tell us about that, with marketing, you have done innovative things.
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: Thank you for that.  Right.
We don't speak so much about the marketing component any more.  We focus much more on the training.  You're absolutely right.  The marketing, it is key.  Let me try to frame what we're doing here.
Whether it is marketing or training, the goal, of course, it is customer acquisitions.  I don't care how great your fintech is, your business model is, if you can't acquire customers, you don't have a business, it is that simple.
Now, in the west customer acquisitions for a company like Facebook is relatively easy, they don't have to advertise, word of mouth, people sign up, it is free, they love it.  Right.  People assume that it is that easy in Africa.  Of course, it absolutely is not.  For a whole variety of reasons, the first challenge, of course, awareness.  Your customers in rural communities aren't on Facebook, they probably lack internet access, they probably don't have a television so they're not able to see any television‑based advertising.  There is no billboards at the top of mountain, you can't use traditional display advertising.  How exactly do you communicate to your target market what the brand is and who you are?  It is very, very difficult!  Actually have to go to the top of the mountain and you have to sit down and talk with people.  If you are doing this over a vast geography, it becomes extremely expensive very, very quickly.  So we found that from a marketing point of view it was necessary to gain efficiencies in this sort of brand awareness building by aggregating the population.  We found the best way to do that, the most efficient way to do that was through road shows.  You see this being done already by large Telecom companies and politicians, you know, they'll go into a community, organize a football match, maybe put on some music and draw out a crowd.  We have experimented with all of these different possibilities, large music festivals, smaller festival, football matches, we have tried every combination of event that we can stage to bring a crowd together.  Ultimately what we found, relatively small scale and nimble road shows are super effective, you know, you use small truck, you move around villages, you target the markets so you have to know when the markets are occurring in different towns, you have to create a very, very efficient schedule to move your trucks to the markets at exactly the right time so you don't waste fuel which is ultimately one of the biggest costs in doing this type of marketing.  You have to really get hyper local and understand exactly where the people are, when they are there, and you find aggregations at church, people are coming together at churches and we'll do small road shows at churches on Sunday and schools, of course, they're great places to do this kind of awareness building as well.
It has to be recurring so we mapped out all of the markets in the area where we serve and we created a rigorous schedule to move our marketers in the locations.  At each location, you have to be again very, very efficient, you can't waist time.  You have to train the local marketing teams to set up tents, conduct musical event, bring crowds, register them, it is very, very intense ground operational work and as you can see, very little of this has to do with technology.  It is really about mobilizing local teams to build awareness and to build trust.
The reason we have shifted our focus now towards training, it is because now that we have conquered customer acquisition from awareness‑raising point of view, we found it is not enough to sign up a customer, we signed up 200,000 customers in six months, which is pretty phenomenal to be able to acquire that many new accounts.  If the customers aren't using the service, you don't really have a service!  Right.  You don't have revenue coming in, the customers are not benefiting.  You have a bunch of dormant accounts, and that's the reality we have encountered and many other service providers have also encountered.  As you start to wade into that reality, we discovered education is the essential part of this, only way to drive adoption.  
Ultimately, you distill it down to trust building.  If a customer is not trusting your service, they won't use it, and clearly if they don't it, they're not going to trust it.  So you need to figure out the best, most efficient way to deliver that understanding and ultimately gain that trust in order to drive adoption which ultimately drives revenue, which makes all of this possible.
>> MODERATOR: Mary, I'll come back to you.  I would love to hear about the challenges that you have faced in terms of making your work possible.
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Yeah.  Before I even discuss the challenges, I want to also add to the point that Michael stressed on, training is very important.  I'll give you, for example ‑‑ I'll give you an example.
For instance, a lot of the farmer, we have trained easily over 500 women farmers, like I said, in the three area, and a lot of the farmers use the broadcast seeding methods to sort of grow their crops.  One of the interventions we sort of ‑‑ the approach that we took, it was trying to help them implement or understand the transplant method so they sort of grow their crop in a very small nursery and they move the plant to the actual farms.  For instance, you know, when they use the seeding method they only grow 2 tons of rice, they focus on rice, cassava and maize, with this transplant method, it goes up to 4 tons, there is an improvement we see in terms of the yield that they're about to get from the crops.
I would say that there are three challenges that we faced.  Obviously we built relationships with local partners who were able to speak the local languages, the training was conducted in English, also in a local language as well.  Another method that we used was we purchased a farm so that we can show them the demos on that farm so that they can actually experience, see, touch, feel sort of the interventions that we were planning to conduct.
Another challenge that came up definitely, or that we have seen over time has been security as well.  When I check in with the farmers ‑‑ I believe it was before this presentation A week ago I checked in with a farmer, kidnappings have increased exponentially, a lot of farmers are very afraid to go to their farms because people are being kidnapped and insecurity is a major issue.
Another thing too, data.
One of the reasons why we also got the grant from planet earth institute, it is because we plan to ‑‑ we're building a database of farmers, the types of crops they're grow, getting information about the size of their farms and other details.  I would say those are the three main challenge, data, insecurity as a challenge, definitely the language barrier.  As you can see, we're sort of able to overcome the challenges because of our relationship with our partners on ground.
>> MODERATOR: To tease out a little bit of this, in terms of language, is the real challenge ‑‑ is it the number of the languages, the translation?  Can you tell us more about that?
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Yeah.  Sure.
I mean, language, we found language to be a barrier because it is a rural community.  Right.  The educational background first of all is not really ‑‑ they're not like people with master's degree, undergraduate degrees, sometimes they have the SSC or a contractor from junior or junior high school, but they're very good farmer.  They're productive farmers, I feel if the government had invested more in ‑‑ more farming initiative, they would definitely be having more success stories coming out of those particular states in Nigeria.
In terms of languages, ensuring that, you know, the content and the training that we're sort of teaching, passing off to some of these farmer, it is very relatable in a way that they understand it.  I know that the thing we also taught them, it is the importance of record keeping.  So we're not going to go and start teaching them accounting practices because that would be way over their heads.  Simple record keeping, so that they can track, if the farms are making money, they can track the timing of when they should plant specific seeds and they can track, for example, when had he should be selling particular crop, the seasons and different types of things.  Basically simplifying the educational content that we were relaying to them.
>> MODERATOR: So Michael, would you share some of the challenges that you have faced in deploying ‑‑ you hit some of them.  We would love to hear more, if there are others that come to mind?  To prompt you a little bit, one of the things ‑‑ I know you faced, it is getting acceptance from the local farmers to be willing to engage with smart money as a different way of doing business.  It is obviously hard to change habits.  I would love hear more about how you confronted that and the things you tried to overcome it.
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: Amazing, Mary, we're living parallel lives.  It is quite astonishing.
All of the points you touched on are equally relevant to what we do.
What we discovered first of all in terms of the training, bringing understanding into the community, it is that it has to be delivered by local people.  It is not just that the language is an issue but it is also trust.  The customers you're trying to address, they really need to be trained by their own people, people from the community, from the same tribe, people they can really relate to where we work in Western Uganda on the border with Congo, people are speaking a derivative from the Congolese side of the border, it is an extremely unusual language and even people in neighboring districts in Uganda cannot understand it.  What it means, you cannot bring a trainer from Campela across the country to train in rural Casazi and you can't parachute in foreigners from London, New York City, it does not work.
So it means that you have to hire local people to do this training.  The sad reality is, very few people have professional experience as trainers and in fact, most don't have any type of real formalized education beyond high school level.  Before you send people up the mountain, out to the village to train the community you have to recruit and train the trainers and that alone is an enormously challenging thing, there is an enormous amount of people that want to work, when we pose positions people travel across the country in Uganda to interview for our job, lines of people standing outside of our office.  The skill level, sadly is really, really low.  We have to pick the best people we can and we have to train them extensively and the training we found is also quite interesting.
If you see how much development organizations operate around where we are at least, we have save the children, USAID, Catholic relief services, all of the organizations are passing through the community and conducting some type of training, invariably it is workshop‑based training, so they set up a workshop, invite the local community to come, give them a free lunch, a transportation refund, and then basically lecture them for a day and maybe handout some printed materials.  Naturally, we tried the same approach with thousands of customers and achieved absolutely no result at all.  It was as if we have never done anything, there was no comprehension, it was incredible.  This is being delivered by local people, speaking their local language, it wasn't a language issue.
In the end, we abandoned the entire workshop approach and we tried printed materials, handing out small pamphlets, that also proved completely ineffective, even though they're using illustrations made by local people, it was picture based and didn't work at all.  In the end, we're about to give up honestly, and we found that there was one method that really does work and that's practical.  It has to be hands on, high‑touch, sitting right next to the person, holding their hand with the phone or the shovel or whatever you're trying to train on and it has to be repetitive.  It is not enough to just show up once, you have to come back week after week after week after week, and we found it takes three months of weekly trainings before people really, really start to exhibit sustainable behavior change.  I'm proud to say if we do that, if we bring that weekly training for three months, 50% of our customers remain sustainable savers for up to at least two years, and it has now been two years since we started training our initial group of customers and they're continuing to save and it is really exciting to see that.
I would also add too, there has to be a lasting presence in the community.  If you just train and then leave they assume the intervention is over and they just stop.
This is very difficult to achieve.  You're talking about vast geographies, people are spread out, isolated, very, very remote places and how do you keep a permanent presence in their community when you're a for‑profit company, where is the revenue coming to sustain that kind of footprint?  The answer is, it is not.  You need to build localized solutions within the community itself to sustain and carry forward the knowledge in the community.  The way we achieve this, we created smart money saving clubs and these are organized at the institutional partners that we work with.  I mentioned before we work with agriculture company, schools, churches, each one of these institutions, we set up a club, we give them an agenda, they set up Steering Committee, and they meet every week.  Through the clubs they Chair knowledge, veterans share knowledge with the newer member, a sustainable knowledge base in the community, the community also services each other and we can talk a little bit about what that means in our model.  Essentially they support each other for depositing and withdrawing in their digital wallets.  We have an innovative method of could go that, not requiring any types of agents to be present in the community.
The saving club selves as a gathering point where the community can service each other.  Of course, then it maintains trust.  The community always knows that there is a place I can go at least once a week to answer questions and get the services I need.
This is really what we do, we build an ecosystem throughout the entire community of the clubs, supplemented by the digital wallet service that we offer and the training that bootstraps the whole ecosystem.
I also wanted to touch on the data point, which think is key as well.
A little story here.  We first started working with these institutional customer, I said to my cofounder on the ground in Casasa, run out, grab me a list of all of the schools, churches, agricultural companies, we'll systematically schedule meetings and I expected her bomb back with a lot of lists in a couple of days.  She says, wow, there is not a single list of all of the schools in our district.  I said that can't possibly be true!  Go talk to the government!.
Sure enough, they don't even know ‑‑ we knew more schools than they did.  It was incredible.
I said, okay, go up to the Catholic church, you know, you have contacts there, go over there to the Protestant church, they didn't though their own churches!  Unbelievable!  In the end, we sent our team out to talk to all of the local village officials and we compiled our own database and found in a single district in Uganda, just to give you a sense, there is 112 districts in Uganda, in a single district we had a database of 5,000 institutions.  500 Catholic church, Protestant church, schools, farmer groups, so we now have the only directory as far as I'm aware that exists of all of these institutions.  Look, we didn't do it for fun.  We did it because as you heard, we needed to be efficient about our operation and how can you be efficient if you don't even know your customers?
>> MODERATOR: Mary, I'm sure you have your own experiences.  You are doing this type of work as well trying to do this, trying to recruit trainers, sustained contact with unity, I would love to hear about the efforts and how experiences are working in that regard.
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Yeah.  No.  I think ‑‑ you know, I talked about it earlier in terms of we worked with a local business owner who is very familiar with the community and we worked with local community leaders who helped us to bring together women farmers across these three different states that we worked in and actually the time we started the initiative, you know, there was a lot of activities in terms of terrorism and all of that.  It was really at the height.  Trust was very, very important and I totally agree with Michael.
The other point to that, Michael stressed upon that ensuring that the training that we were do, it was actually hands on.  Like I said, we purchased the farm so that we could actually teach the farmers in person what that transplanting method looked like and what that experience was.
So definitely.  Yeah.
I think at the end of the day it is really about collaboration.  It is about transparency, it is about accountability.  And how ‑‑ what ways can we continue to support these very rural communities?  Part of the things we also did with planet earth was to develop a mobile app for the farmers to keep in touch with them, stay engaged with them, provide them with the lessons on the agricultural practices.  It was multifaceted but very, very productive.  Like I said, it is sort of transforming into this experience whereby some of the women farmers are working in cooperatives and will be able to supply, you know, some of their food products to Shoprite in Nigeria.
It is ongoing, but we're still pushing. 
>> MODERATOR: Mary, I would like to bring up a slightly different topic, sustainability.
I know you were founded by a grant, you have some plans to experiment with different models where the people you train again provides some support on a going‑forward basis.  Can you tell us more about your vision and about AWP network becomes a sustainable self‑funding organization or at least defraying the need for the outside support?
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: That's a really, really good question.
Especially a question we have had to think about, my team and I have had to think about especially during COVID‑19.  As you know, you know, so many things have been effected, you know, COVID, Nigeria, in addition to that, we had protests and even in the middle of our training, you know, for some of our program participants, for this initiative, you know, Shoprite was looted and some store, they were burnt to the ground.  There are all of these circumstances beyond your control, insecurity is an issue beyond our control.
Our goal, it is definitely to keep establishing partnership, that's very important.  Like I said, we're working with Shoprite Nigeria.  So some of the goods that will be sold, a percentage will come to the AWP network, it is our goal ‑‑ it is our sort of intention to ensure that in our training, for example, with the Shoprite project we touched on everything from understanding the supply chain, to keeping records, finances, all of that, because if the women develop their businesses they understand, you know, some of the issue, some of the concerns or understand some of the things that are needed to keep their businesses sustainable and then they can supply their Shoprite.  
A portion of the sales through Shoprite will definitely go to the AWP network.  In addition to us, you know, applying for different grants, definitely pitching to different partners, hopefully also working in collaboration with different state governments as well.  Those opportunities have come up.  We're pushing. 
It is not perfect but a thing that COVID‑19 did or, you know, the experiences, it forces you to sort of think outside of the box.  When I thought about this idea for Shoprite Nigeria, it was my intention I would be in Nigeria, you know, there giving and working with people to conduct this training and then COVID‑19 happened and then we couldn't travel for a while and so everyone needed to come online and I remember I was a bit nervous because internet is not so great in Nigeria, I was like goodness, how will I, you know, conduct these trainings online.  You know, to my surprise, a lot of the women, they were in these trainings online using Zoom, paid for oil for the generator to be on because electricity is not so constant for three full hours because they're invested in building their businesses.  There are challenges but I feel what happened with COVID‑19 has sort of forced us to be more innovative, to be more efficient and to really think outside of the box.
>> MODERATOR: That's fantastic.
Michael, you have already talked a little bit about sustainability, charging on the customer side some of the larger institutional customer fees, taking percentage on the merchant side.
Tell me, have you ‑‑ are you feeling confident that the smart money is on its way to find that sustainable place?  From my understanding, you still continue to receive some degree of grant funding.  Tell me about where you are in that journey because you made the point, you're a for‑profit company.  How is this panning out.
We can't hear you.
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Sorry.  I forgot to hit the unmute button there.
We're a for‑profit company and have been from the outset.  Sustainability I think is a really fundamental issue to all of these types of social enterprises in Africa.  I think there are some structural systematic issues that need to be brought to the surface.  What do I mean by that?  The reality in rural communities is that the revenue opportunities are extremely limited and the reason for that, it is just the fundamentals of the market conditions, people don't have discretionary income to be spending on anything that is beyond their basic needs and so if you come along with even the most attractive business opportunities, if they can do the same thing in a cheaper way, even if the cheaper way is perhaps more dangerous, less secure in some way, they will always go with a cheaper way.  This is extremely relevant in the case of fintech, it is our sector.  For now, how many years, 15 years we have seen mobile money spreading throughout Africa and it has, you know, taken off in certain isolated places like Kenya, South Africa, and it is dominant in urban locations.  What you don't see, you don't see it so widely used.  I think one of the most fundamental reasons is the cost.  Right, the fees that are charged on these mobile money transactions, it is prohibitively expensive.  For example, if you go in a local shop and buy a Coke‑Cola in Uganda, you're paying 30‑cents for that Coke‑Cola.  If you pay in cash, it costs 30 cents, if you pay with mobile money, the Coke‑Cola costs 30 cents plus 30 cents of MTM mobile money fees.  You just doubled the cost of the Coke‑Cola, nobody will do that.  This is a perfect example of how the market does not allow for that type of revenue in this type of use case.  As a consequence, in rural communities, people are not using traditional mobile money for consumer purchases.  It is just too expensive.  Ultimately you run into this problem as a business person where there are so, so few revenue opportunities so how do you possibly build a sustainable business.
If revenue is low, costs must be lower, that's how it works in business.  Ultimately, what it mean, if you put it altogether, it is that you need to run an extremely lean, efficient ground operation.  We have already talked about the critical need for a ground operation for marketing purposes, customer acquisitions and training.  That's a necessity to operating a business.  If it is also a necessity to dramatically minimize cost to generate sustainable profits, then you need to figure out how to deliver education at the lowest possible cost.  That's the game.  It is really not about technology, it is all about organizing extremely efficient ground operations.  Now, of course, when I talk about this with any investor their eyes immediately glaze over, they imagine thousands of people on the ground, truck, vehicles moving, huge security problems as Mary mentioned, and they immediately run in the opposite direction.
You know, the first thing I have to do, persuade the investors that, in fact, all of this is necessary, that there is no other way, there is no shortcut.  You can't just put up a Facebook page and imagine that your customers will flock to your service, it doesn't work.
It just doesn't work.
So you have to commit to this idea that if you're going to capture the rural market for whatever service you're offering, you need to field a ground force and that ground force has to be very efficient if you're going to realize profits.
Even if you achieve all of that, it is going to take some time.
This is where the structural issues come in.  Our experiences and investor, they have a limited amount of time to return profits.  So if you look at a typical impact fund, they're going to, you know, want to hear from you very quickly in your pitch how much money do you need, when do I get it back, how much do I get back and why should I believe you.
Ultimately, what they want it hear, it is that it will take no more than throw years for them to get a 30% return.  All right, first of all, our profit margins as you have just heard, they're relatively small, we have to overcome all of these enormous obstacles in access become experts in this ground game in an extremely difficult market environment and we have three years do this, achieve break even and return 0% to you, the investor, good luck.
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Are you a magician!
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: It is just not happening!  You end up with these two situations both of which are terrible.
You have the entrepreneurs like Mary and I who, you know, either don't know the realities yet because we're new to the game, we think that build it, they'll come, we don't understand the name for the ground force, we project these amazingly profitable business models and investors look at it and say that's great, yeah, we'll commit money to that.  Three years down the road everybody is disappointed, founders are kicked out of the company and it is a bad situation.  That's one situation.
The other situation, you have veterans like Mary and I, we have been on the ground a long time, we know it can't be done in three years, we're not magicians and most likely you're looking at 5 to 6 years realistically to return 30% if you're lucky enough to get that far.
Often if we're truthful we'll present the reality that exists on the ground to the investor and they say no, we need a faster return than that.  They find other opportunities and other places where they can get those returns.  So what is this all adding up to?  A critical shortage of funding for early stage innovation in Africa and we have encountered this first happened, it is difficult.  We're doing our best, we're bootstrapping what we can and we have been lucky in terms of raising early capital for friends and family, we have had good support from donors, MasterCard Foundation, USAID, Mercy Corps, things like that we need an institutional partner that has an understanding of the market conditions we're addressing, is willing to commit patient capital and put it at risk and bridge us through this sort of next stage of growth until we're a mature company and at that point, there is gobs of money out there, we can get money from development finance corporation, you know, plenty of companies that are at a mature stage getting financing.  Unfortunately, most companies don't get there because there is not enough capital to bridge them to that point.   .
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: We have received interests from the IFC, that's very exciting, with this project in collaboration with Shoprite and I should add that we have gotten some major funding from Shoprite as well to sort of implement our project with women.
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: That's terrific.
>> MODERATOR: This is one place where I can share with you the perspective of the work that we're doing with 1 World Connected, you're ahead of the game.  We discovered two‑thirds of all initiatives have no revenue whatsoever.  There was no plan in place, there was ‑‑ these are idealistic, well‑intentioned initiatives and when there is no plan of how you can transition into the self‑sustaining you will only survive as long as the funding source continues to support you.  What we have talked through with a lot of people, the funding sources, you should insist as part of the evaluation process that there be at least a plan, understanding how difficult the plans don't often turn into reality, before you fund it, there should be a plan to turn into the self-sustaining, otherwise you're validating technology or something.
We also encourage them to think about this as validating business models that you learn from that case, a little seed money to figure out if this will work which means that you have to satisfy a little effort, is that something that I know you two would love to do, pressed time to do, evaluation, monitoring to do this, I know you like ‑‑ you're doing some of it, but we would love to do more and you have got a business to run.  Doing that sort of information gathering, it is a challenge.  To me, that's a role for the internet governance community to play, to find a grant for evaluation, so it doesn't have to come out of what you're doing to validate ideas so that we can learn from case to case instead of scrambling every time we start up a new enterprise to figure out, to reinvent the wheel over and over and over again.
We have been going for about 40 minutes.  I'll just let all of the people who are attending, we will entertain questions.  Post them in the Q&A session or in the chat.  Before we get to the question part, I would like to go back to Mary and Michael and say, okay, we need to give a voice to the people that have been on the ground, you talked about some of the challenge, some of the realities.  What advice would you give to a person who is attempting to start a new venture to try to bring the benefits of the internet to these rural communities that are struggling.  You have learned difficult lessons and paid for them in blood.  I would love to let you share them with others who are listen, wondering how decide do this.
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Yeah.  No.  That's a terrific question actually.
Even though I was born in any Gloria, until my project I had not been to the northern part of Nigeria.  Like I said, when I started the initiative in 2014, you know, it was at the height of a lot of violence, all of that, and so, you know, for example, in my family, they heard I was going north, I traveled there several times oh, no, don't go!  Don't be afraid!  That's the first thing I would say.
When I went there, because I was with a lot of the local leaders, the local communities, it is a great fit.  The farmer, they're excited to see who is helping out with this project, funding it, initiating it, and it was a really great experience.  The first thing I would say is definitely do not be afraid.  You know, some news can sound really scary and sometimes you go to a lot of the regions and it is just business as usual for a lot of people unfortunately and then I would say also, be willing to try different things, you know, like you have said, you always have to keep trying different models, you have to be willing to pivot, you can't be so stuck to one idea and I knew I wanted the network to be a training platform, AWP network, who and what we wanted to train, I had no idea.  
We started to train students at colleges, helping them to figure out how to put together business plans and different things like that because they have never done it before, and then here am I receiving a significant grant from the Planet Earth Institute in the U.K. who had learned about my work, working with women farmers.  So I never would have connected the dots..  Now I'm working with the cooperative, the women to get on the shelve, they can be sustainable, grow the businesses, access more customers and increase sales.  Don't be stuck to an idea, be willing to move, innovate, pivot and also learning, you know, it is important to sort of be that student again.  I'm always ready to learn from everyone, from the farmers, you know, all the way to policy leaders and reading a lot of new innovations and things like that, learning about policy documents and things like that.  One, don't be afraid, be willing to learn and definitely, you know, move and meet people as you go along.  The sky is the limit.
>> MODERATOR: Michael.
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: Again, I echo everything that you have said there, Mary.
Absolutely.  You need to be curious, adaptable, you also I would say have to have some thick skin and be very determined.  You will have a lot of failure, a lot of setbacks, and honestly, depending how you look at this, if you are turned off by failure, it is maybe not the best thing to do.  If you find failure exciting because it is a discovery process, and you believe that you can get over the failure, then it is an addictive activity.  You are constantly problem solving and just when you think that you're summit, you realize there is even a bigger mountain behind that one.
That kind of challenge can be very exhilarating.  In terms of how I got started, I think this is something that I could share with people.  People often ask how do people go from Goldman Sachs to this area, how did that happen exactly?  Completely random.  It was never part of the plan.  I was dating a Kenyan lady in Nairobi and she invited me to come out to meet her family in Kenya, that was my first exposure to Africa.  You know, it all fell in place after that.  You know, what really got it started for me, after that initial contact with Africa, it was that I was lucky enough to have colleagues, business colleague, friends in the York area who already had connections in that part of the world in East Africa and I was able to leverage the trust in the relationships that they already had to gain entry into their network so they made introductions for me to different people and, you know, through that I was able to slowly build my own local network and that's absolutely essential.  It is all about getting to know the local people, figuring out how ‑‑ who you can rely on, who can help you, and just being as social as you possibly can.  You know, being open to wherever that leads you really as Mary said, if you're fixed on one idea you might get yourself a bit trapped and you really have to be able to move as opportunities present themselves.  I would also add to, I think it is essential that you have access to some kind of funding network of your own before you embark on this.  One of the very hard lessons I have learned, it’s the incredible financial hardship that it takes to get something like this off the ground.  You really do need access to early stage capital from your own network because, you know, getting donor fund, Mary can attest, it is not an easy process.  You know, it can take years of email, interactions before a donor may come around to supporting you in some way.
You need to survive through that, however you're going to do it.
I think it is key to become as a ‑‑ as elastic as possible, funding will come and you will get excited and ramp up the business and hire a bunch of people, get equipment and then the funding stops.  Now, you know, if that happened in the west, you would close.  If you're going to continue on, you have to adapt to that reality and quickly scale back the business and keep the lights on, keep the business going while the pilot light is on while you raise new capital and then you grow again.  It is an extremely inefficient process because customers wonder why they're big and then small and then big, then small, team members lose motivation, but you have to go through that.  That's a reality.  The funding just is not continuous, you have to learn how to be elastic like that.
>> MODERATOR: That's terrific.
We have a question in the queue, it is for Mary.
Mare Y you mentioned the app created in or the order to stay in touch with farmer, why did you create a new app instead of existing tools?  Do you plan to make it available for a wider audience?
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: A great question.  We created the app because we received funding for creating the app and so that's why, that's why we created the app.
Will it be available for a wider audience, currently no because as I said before, we have shifted what we're doing so yes, we're still going to trainings, so we just changed it so that we're creating a supply chain right now and it is our goal to sign up retailers.  So other supermarkets in Nigeria, so ‑‑ but the initial reason why we created the app is because we received funding to do so versus using existing tools which I know ‑‑ I totally understand.  Yeah.
>> MODERATOR: What I'm fascinating about, you both ‑‑ obviously, the purpose of this, it is to continue engagement.
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Yes.
>> MODERATOR: This is an efficient way to do this.  We have a very different model coming out of smart money.  I would love to hear you talk about how you made the decisions, you know, how you make these trade‑offs and maybe it is different for the dinner domains you're in just because of the nature of it, but you're taking ‑‑ I think everyone agrees ongoing engagement is critical, the two organization, they have taken very different approaches.  I would love to hear you talk more about that.
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Michael, you want to go first?
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: No.  Why don't you go ahead. 
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: No.  You go ahead! 
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: You know, I want to clarify the question first, Christopher.
Are you talking about the ongoing engagement with customers specifically?
>> MODERATOR: I'm thinking about customers although you could be talking about ongoing engagement with merchants, other partners, we have not spent a lot of time talking about other partners as well.
I did have in mind the end users, but if you like to talk about other aspects, it is showing deeper knowledge in this issue than mine, I think the audience would benefit from that as well.
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: Sure.  Right.
Well, where to start?  When we started Smart Money, other focus was on rural and we were interested in using digital money technology, this is ten years ago mind you.
To address use cases of relevance to the rural community.  We quickly discovered that pricing, as I described earlier was prohibitive for consumer purchases.  We realized that in order to compete with cash, our service had to be free of charge.
You know, we built our own app, as Mary did, we had to do that for a variety of reasons which I'm happy to share.  But we also had to make the service free of charge, otherwise it simply wouldn't compete with cash and so we started to work with agriculture companies with the idea that the agriculture companies would use our service to pay our farmer force the crops.  This is how Smart Money got started.  The idea was these ag companies are paying now with cash, they literally are dropping bales of cash out of planes on to the fields with guys running around with AK47s distributing the cash out to the buying posts.  It is hugely expensive, a lot of theft, no accountability.  We said, hey, look, stop with all of that cash.  You know, let's set up digital wallets for all of the farmers and you can pay them electronically and you can then pay us fees to remove the cash out of your payment operations, much more secure, lower cost, so forth.  That's how we got started and we had to keep this engagement going with the agriculture company, very expensive.  
I was spending my life out in rural Uganda, Tanzania, developing and maintaining the relationships. we found the farmer rejected the solution.  Although it was free of charge, the digital money was not equivalent to cash for them and they couldn't buy it with any of the local shops, they couldn't buy things with digital money.  We had to expand our scope on the ground and begin training the merchants on how to accept this digital money.  That dramatically increased the scope.  The merchants themselves, again, you have to have this regular repeat visit or they would just stop using it.  You can imagine, going to every single shop on a regular basis, it is ‑‑ it is completely prohibitively expensive.
Frankly, this is the major reason why the innovations don't really take hold on a scalable basis.  It is just impossible to keep this presence locally in the community.
So we started to really evolve the model in many different ways by trying to push as much of the training and the marketing and the servicing into the community itself so that we won't continuously have to stroke the community with our team, we couldn't afford do it.  That's the concept of the Smart Money saving club, how it got started.  We found that we were relying too much on the shopkeepers to provide the critical service of facilitating depositing and withdrawing for our customers.  Digital wallet is only useful if you can deposit cash into it and withdraw cash out of it.  Most conventional mobile money solutions rely on having agents present in all of these villages.  The problem they always run into, there is not enough agents.  The distances are huge.  It is not a highly profitable business.  Even the agents they recruit end up closing businesses frequently, very, very expensive, it is known as a liquidity challenge in mobile money circles.
We said what if we don't need agents?  That's a cool solution.  The way we achieve that had, leveraging our free of charge pricing.  If you have digital money and I have cash, I wanted to deposit smart cash ‑‑ cash on to my Smart Money digital wallet and you want to withdraw digital money into cash, we come together, we exchange two equal forms of value.  You give me your cash, and I give you my digital money and you have done a withdraw and I have done a deposit.  The other way around, you have done a deposit, I have done a withdraw.
That's pretty much how the model works.  The community ends up sort of embracing this ecosystem change as sort of a communication technology within the community and of course that's what commerce is, it is a form of communication.  In the end, the way we look at it, it is the digital wallet is little more than a communication tool for exchanging value between two people and storing value during that intermediary period.  When they accumulate money for the investment purposes and the education is nothing more than a customer acquisitions strategy, it is a way of driving adoption of the communication platform.  So the way that our business model looks, the way we present it to investor, we have a high up‑front cost when we move to a new market and we have to build this ecosystem with the training I have described, so forth, but the understanding, it is kind of implanted in the community and then we can reduce the training that we do, we have the community servicing themselves, and our costs dramatically fall off, the revenue continues to grow as a deposit base gross and the fees grow that we're charging to the institutions.  It is a very long winded answer, I don't know if we answered the question.
>> MODERATOR: Mary.
>> MINDA MOREIRA: In terms of how the AWP network started, in terms of how the farmer project started, for example, the AWP network agriculture farming project, it was actually presented to me by a member of a community.  I had been writing a lot about why women  ‑‑ before I started this specific project, I had been writing a lot in a lot of Nigerian publications on why women were very crucial and important to sort of any Gloria's economic development and growth and so I think it was on Facebook, someone reached out to me, they said, okay, you love to work with women, you want to make an impact there, you know, I got this great idea and when they pitched me, I was like wow, I would love to do it!  I flew to the U.K. and pitched to ‑‑ it came off as a grant but sort of ‑‑ he was ‑‑ I would consider him an investor but he didn't expect the money back.  I went to the U.K., he took me to the U.K., I presented the idea and that's how it sort of took off.
In terms of, you know, how it has gone so far, once again, I'll just stress that the importance of collaboration, the importance of accountability, the importance of transparency, it is a great journey, you have to be willing sort of to move along despite the challenges.  Yeah.  I'm not sure I have much to add.  I think Michael explained a lot of what I would like to say.
>> MODERATOR: We have one question remaining in the Q&A queue and given the way that time is, that's probably our last question, what contributions each ‑‑ should each stakeholder group bring to face these challenges?  We have been talking about your part of it as the entrepreneur, the leader that's doing it, IGF is well‑known to have a stakeholder, multiple stakeholder groups, that is government, Civil Society, technical community, I had mentioned it in passing but I think that the question you asked, it really brings it home, what can the rest of us do?  What are the opportunities that you are wishing that people would be stepping up to help make the fantastic work that you're both doing   go even better?
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: In terms of what I'm doing, definitely more funding towards the work, more focus on farming communities in rural areas.
I mean, like I said, in securities, it is a major issue ‑‑ insecurity, it is a major issue in Nigeria, you know, trying to resolve that is another issue.  A lot of issues related to farmers have been highly politicalized in Nigeria.  There is this report that came out whereby the central Bank Of Nigeria I think gave about ‑‑ I want to say 500 million to farmer, people they thought were farmers and apparently none of people they dispersed the money to were farmers and, you know, one of my community leaders actually told me a story before I came on because I was just hoping to make sure I captured all of the points, and he said, you know, government officials came to his home saying that he had received the central bank lone but he never did so there was no documentation, no data on anyone ‑‑ there was no verification process so people received millions of Nira with fake addresses on there, and so my community, you know, my community partner, you know, basically said, you know, government officials showed up at the house and I didn't even get any of these ‑‑ any of the money.  I think less politicization of issues relating to farming communities in any category would be useful and supporting the actual farmers.  It is a combination, I agree, of Civil Society, a combination of government officials, it is a combination of partner, you know, whether it is the IFC, funding partners, and also we have a responsibility as entrepreneurs and proactive leaders in the community to bring all of these entities together.  
For example, there is Shoprite project, you know, we were able to ‑‑ I was able to pitch Shoprite and they loved the idea.  You know, and so they have come in now as a very strong founding partner, and the IFC, they're very interested in helping to build this sort of vender database that could really help with the supply chain in terms of helping more women to become, you know, suppliers on a large basis which could definitely help their sales, definitely help their businesses, and hopefully as we do that, the strengthening of their business, they could hire more people, support their communities at the local level and definitely, you know, I have pitched the idea to so many people who have loved it, supported it, in one way or another, if people support it, they're introducing me to other people that you just have to be vocal and believe in the idea, the initiative.  I think that people definitely buy into the story telling.
In terms of stakeholders, what challenge, you know, I think we have talked about everything.  If security could be resolved, less politicization of farming related issues, and definitely, you know, bringing in more funding partners and more strategic partners.
>> MODERATOR: Fantastic.  Michael?
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: Again, I will echo what you said, Mary.
Our experience, like I said before, it is that, you know, it is one thing to raise your early stage capital and get some minimal viable product into the market, get customers and a bit of revenue.
The challenge is when you get to that point.    the value why have death, if you're lucky enough to get, there you peer over the valley and nobody is available to fund you, you know, beyond that.  And why is this?  Why is that?  It is considered still high‑risk.  You haven't reached profitability.  Commercial investors will look at you, wow, that's a high‑risk, I need this massive return to offset the risk and, of course, the market doesn't allow the returns to be created as we have discussed before.
I think there are other problems too.  This is really where some of the stakeholder groups can really help.
There's just a lack of understanding in our experience of the rural market in Africa.  You know, there is so many studies being published by so many dinner groups and most of the discussions sort of conflates urban and rural Africa as it is one big thing.  I say in my experience at least, it is that rural Africa is about as different from urban Africa as urban Africa is from New York City.  It is a radically different market with completely different dynamics and there is very little attention paid to that.  I couldn't see conversation around those differences.  They're fundamental important differences.  What you see inevitably, the funding available, it goes into, you know, start‑ups that are operating in urban environments where it is much, much easier to acquire customer, providing service, the population is denser, they are more sophisticated, they have income, I could go on all day.  You could advertise online, you could advertise on billboards.  There are so many reasons why an urban market is easier to dap churr.  When it is captured, they didn't agree, it is so profitable, let's replicate this in the rural market.  It doesn't work!  It doesn't because the market is fundamentally different, you have to go back to the blank piece of paper and reinvent the business.  Most companies, they don't do that, they tinker with the urban model and they get penetration and really not much.
Again, the stakeholders could really help to populous size how different the rural market is and the importance of really starting your business in rural if not urban.  The 60% of the market at least in Africa is rural.  If you're not building the business for rural, you're missing out on a massive market opportunity.  I would like to see more funding to target early stage innovation, you know, beyond seed stage but not mature businesses.
You know, Jacquelyn Novengrat wrote a paper on this, From Blueprint to Scale, talking about exactly this.  She identifies the missing middle.  If you have not read it, I encourage you to read it, it is a fantastic Article.  Her solution is this is where philanthropy should step in, this is where the donor organizations should step in, to derisk the commercial capital, reduce the risk on the commercial capital to help these pioneers get over that valley of death from blueprint to a scalable business.
You know, since we're on this topic, the other challenge we have with donor organizations, of which we have worked with many, many of them, you know, over the years, it is that the people that are in the decision making positions in the donor organization, they're not really coming from business backgrounds, they're not entrepreneur, they haven't really spent a great deal of time on the ground like building actually sustainable businesses.  They're not really attune to the challenges that the entrepreneurs are facing.  Your story, Mary, I built it, the app because that's what the donor wanted.  That's exactly, right!.
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: I'm active in the Nigeria tech space and when you read pitch documents, people say Nigeria is the most populous, my product will be used by 200 million people, when you look at the actually data, you find that people with spending power, it is quite minimum.  It is even more minimum when you talk about rural areas and I think you touched on this before, in terms of people are just trying to spend money, like on food, basic things, in places like Nigeria, there is no electricity, you buy food and  when turn on the generator, you have to buy fuel, all of these expense, people are like a government on to themselves.  Philanthropy, a funding organization can help fill that gap.
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: Absolutely.
In our space, inclusive fintech, a thing that really astounds me, the amount of discussion around high‑tech solutions.
Everybody talks about blockchain, crypto this, crypto that ‑‑
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Artificial intelligence.  Right.
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: All of these applications require some smartphone technology for the customer to use it.  Certainly internet access.  The vast amount of people in the rural communities cannot afford smart phones or the internet access.  You know as soon as the solution says we need a smartphone, okay, that's an urban only solution. 
>> MODERATOR: We have reached the end of our appointed time here.  Thank you both for highlighting the importance of really focusing on the challenges that rural communities face in creating in this case solutions.  I think you put a real world color and depth to that understanding now in ways that I think hopefully will inform a lot of decisions in the future and we're grateful for you to spend this time with us and grateful for the terrific work that you have done.
Thank you, both.  We wish you well and we look forward to continue the great conversation on how your organizations continue to develop from here forward.
>> MARY OLUSHOGA: Thank you very much for having us. 
>> MICHAEL SPENCER: Thank you, Christopher!  Thank you to the team for organizing.
>> MODERATOR: It was our pleasure.  On a somewhat different note, there is another panel that we'll do on Thursday on the role of in this case and achieving SDGs and existing data graphs to measure progress and we'll have another conversation on another aspect of this problem.
We hope to see you there.
Thank you very much. 
>> MICHAEL OGHIA: Good‑bye, everyone.   
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-ws318182-discussion-on-the-protection-of-personal-datainformation-and-0^^

 
>> MODERATOR:  We will get started.  Welcome to the IGF forum.  This is the IGF workshop, and our workshop, the theme is the WS #182&318 Discussion on the Protection of Personal Data/Information and Privacy in the Prevention and Control of COVID‑19.  This is cohosted by China internet development foundation and this meeting, this is the Deputy Secretary‑General of the China internet development foundation, and also cybersecurity association of China and later, Mr. Luigi Gambardella will have a speech and Council of Europe, there are experts from Europe also from the consult Europe and others.  We have the First Vice‑Chair of the Committee of the Convention 108 from Council of Europe and we'll host the workshop together.  I must say thank you to all and with the global COVID‑19 social and the economic growth, it has been greatly effected worldwide.  Under this severe situation we are very glad to meet you here online.  I hope that everyone must feel good about this situation because some of you, you have joined this conference in your room, in your home, some of us, we come here in this year I hope that we can share our ideas directly and the ideas, it will give us a chance for the future.
We'll talk about personal data and information and privacy and issues with global attention.
Please, thank you.
>> TAMAR KALDANI:  This pandemic has brought tremendous challenges and many technical inclusions applied to stop the spread of the virus and the diagnoses and the treatment involving personal data, including sensitive health data.  I firmly believe that the data protection, it is not yes or no exercise, even in the crisis, it is how to exercise.  Therefore I'm privileged to co-moderate the discussion with such a distinguished speakers and looking forward to our discussion.
Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  I suggest our speakers say hi to everybody, and maybe waving your hand on screen.  Okay.
Hi.
Thank you.  Thank you, all.  Thank you.  Yeah.
So now let's start our workshop.  Due to the time limit, each speaker, please make sure to finish your speech within 7 minutes so that next speakers have enough time to share their opinions.  Today we're honored to have Mr. Liang Hao with us, Deputy Director General of Bureau of International Cooperation of Cyberspace Administration of China.  
Welcome Mr. Liang Hao. 
>> LIANG HAO: Thank you.  Thank you, Professor Li, for inviting me here.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to be here to join you in our IGF workshop. 
I would take this opportunity to extend on behalf of the cyberspace administration of China my warm congratulations on the opening of this workshop.
As we speak, COVID‑19 pandemic is posing severe challenges across the world.  It is reshaping how we work, think, live.  In this context, transitioning toward a global digital economy has rapidly accelerated.  Information technology, it has been playing a much critical role in many aspects.  For example, a democratic information sharing, supplies, assistance, telemedicine, et cetera, meanwhile, technology‑based anti-epidemic efforts if built or done incorrectly incurs risk to personal information and privacy, China attaches great importance to protection of basic rights and interests of the people, especially the right to personal information and privacy.  We have stepped up domestic legislature, the cybersecurity law which came into force in 2017 specifies that network operators should set up and optimize protection mechanism of user information.  The civil code adopted this May stipulates how to protect privacy and personal information.  The draft personal information protection law was submitted to the Standing Committee of National People’s Congress for Preliminary Review in this October.
It aims to cement the rights enjoyed by the subjects and further improve relevant legal system.  Protecting personal information and privacy is undoubtedly a global issue and no country is immune.  The world needs truly global solutions, China has put forward the global initiative on data security in this September.  Calling for collective discussions on measures dealing with data security risks as well as concerted actions on global digital governance.  I would like to take this opportunity to make the following three points, first, states need to improve domestic legislature and cross‑border coordination in a bid to establish multitiered personal information protection systems through legislative administrative, judicial and other instruments.  Governments should put a premium on and conduct in depth research in emerging issues facing personal information protection in our era of Big Data.  It is imperative to continuously improve domestic legislature to bring it in line with national conditions.  Governments need to adopt a multipronged approach in a holistic fashion to step up protection.  Our goals are twofold.  One, it is better protection of personal information and privacy, the other, it is to jointly foster sustainable global data governance.
Second, the roles of various actors should be given full play in order to form great synergy, security of personal information has a direct bearing on everyone.  Governments, businesses, technical communities, non‑governmental institutions as well as individuals, states need to facilitate cooperation between public and private sectors, advocate for company self‑discipline and continuously raise public awareness with a view to pulling everyone together for our common cause.
Third, we should further deepen international cooperation in cyberspace and continue to expect the significant roles of global dialogues and platforms in setting up rules on data protection.  States should in the spirit of equality, mutual trust and the win/win cooperation give full play to the UN's main channel role, leverage IGF, APEC, D20 and World Internet Conference and other fora for exchanges and cooperation and facilitate establishing international standards that are in the common interests of international community so as to ensure lawful, orderly, free flow of data.
Ladies and gentlemen, solidarity, cooperation, it is the only way forward.  Let us work together to address the challenges head‑on and build a community with a shared future in cyberspace.
I wish this workshop a complete success.  Thank you, all. 
>> TAMAR KALDANI: Thank you for the interesting messages and because time is limited, we want to have all participants ask questions at the end. 
Let me present with great pleasure our next speaker, Mr. Jennifer Kleijssen, Director of the Information Society and Action Against Crime at the Council of Europe.  
Please, the floor is yours. 
>> JENNIFER KLEIJSSEN: Thank you very much, Tamar.
Thank you very much to the IGF team and all participants for your readiness and commitment to meet under these very difficult circumstances on such an important issue as the protection of personal data and the fight against COVID‑19.  I would like to thank in particular also our partners from China and from France in organizing this event, this workshop.
I'm happy to represent the Council of Europe at this meeting, an organization made up of 47 European Member States, but whose standards have reached far beyond the limits of Europe.  We're very proud to have elaborated convention 108, which is now 55 state parties and some 25 observers, and in our Convention, as most of you all know, it remains to this date the only internationally legally binding instrument on data protection enabling an active engagement from Member States all around the world on this important topic and on the challenges that are facing us, even more so in the light of the COVID‑19 crisis, of course.
In April, this year, in order to prevent ‑‑ to present our Member States with some guidance as to how to address the crisis, the Secretary‑General of the Council of Europe issued a toolkit which was called respecting democracy, rule of law and Human Rights in the framework of the COVID‑19 crisis.  In this toolkit, a number of data protection issues were underlined.  Since then, the Chair of the Committee 108, you know, the convention 108, it is looked after, it is implemented through notably a Committee of national experts, the TPD, and it published ‑‑ it has published several statements on how this convention, our convention, can be best used in the context of COVID‑19.  The main message is about the general rules and principles of data protection are fully reconciled without the fundamental Rights of the public interests notably the right to public health, this Convention is perfectly enabling governments all around the world to address the COVID‑19 crisis while respecting the rights to privacy, data protection set out in Convention 108.
In October, so very recently, beginning of October 12, 12 October, we issued a report setting out how states are doing this.  We showcased Best Practice developed by some Member States such as use of privacy, impact assessments, prior to taking measures to fight COVID‑19, privacy by design principles implemented by a number of parties in order to best address the issues relating to the current crisis, and we also highlighted a number of measures that pros problems such as mandatory use of contact tracing apps and measures with the State of emergency with timeliness.  There are many speakers after me, I will refer you here to the summary of the report, and I'm sure the link will be made available which makes two recommendations with which I would like to finish.  The first is to take in mind that this crisis, it will be over at some point and hopefully it will be over as soon as possible.  The measures taken by government, they might last and it is important to ensure that the exceptional measures taken by governments, it must be provided by law, must be respecting Human Rights and freedoms and must be necessary and proportionate in a democratic society.
Secondly, it is clear that the manner in which the health crisis has to be addressed needs to be addressed and make it is clear that data protection principles remain fundamental for effective functioning of democracies and our capacity to react promptly to the new challenges without undermining our core values, without putting our societies at a greater risk in the future will be the test that we have to meet.
On this basis, I wish you a successful meeting and look forward to the discussions.
Thank you so much. 
>> YUXIAO LI: Thank you very much for your comments.
Now let's welcome Mr. Peng Feng, Deputy Secretary‑General of China internet development foundation.
One of our organizers of this workshop.
>> PENG FENG: Distinguished guests, participants online, ladies and gentlemen, good evening.  I'm very honored to participate in this forum as an organizer on behalf of China internet development foundation.  I would like to express our warmest welcome to all of the participants.  Our foundation is a public place and a public purposed social organization from the internet area, and since its inception, we have been focusing on the development of the internet with money and people power to promote the development of the internet and cybersecurity development.  In particular, we're committed to the cooperation of international partners so that the internet can benefit billions in the world, and COVID‑19 has put the world to test.  A lot of international meetings have had to be canceled or postponed against such backgrounds it is gratifying that we can hold this forum on time and this shows the benefits of promoting the development of the internet and IT technology, we know that with the rapid growth of the internet where we're enjoying the benefits of the internet, we're also suffering the challenge of the internet especially the leakage of personal data and privacy and it is now an urgent issue to effectively protect personal data and privacy.  
In 2019 China's cybersecurity promotion week, Chinese President had said that cybersecurity is for the people and by the people and it is important that we protect peoples' information, security, the rights and interests of people in cyberspace.  This has provided important guidelines for protecting personal data.  How can we improve people's sense of fulfillment, happiness, the security in cyberspace?  China is actively promoting the building of global internet governance system and to build a shared community in cyberspace, we have developed Chinese experience and attributed to the Chinese solutions in recent years and the China development. 
The China Internet Foundation has actively participated in international governance in cyberspace and it is the 11th and 14th UN IGF forum.  We hosted workshops last year, and we hosted China, Europe, data security and personal information protection workshop to promote international exchange and this year, COVID‑19 has made ITU's personal data protection a focus of the world again and there is the epidemic.  China used internet technology and made a victory over the disease and we're also trying our best to help the rest of the world to show the possibility of China as someone participating in the epidemic control.  
I feel that on the one hand, it is key to leverage internet information technology, although COVID‑19 has affected our life and the production, however we see that the internet and the IT technology has played a unique, important role.  For example, distance, medical treatment, it has helped us with prevention control epidemic, the online supermarket and classroom has helped with our lifestyle and live stream commerce and eCommerce, it has helped economies to recover.  
In China, we didn't lose hope, and we launched a new way of life and work and study, and on the other hand, it is urgent that we're protecting the personal data and privacy because we use such apps as healthy codes.  We have been able to support a resumption of work on the production, but at the same time, there is a risk of abuse and leakage of personal information so data security has become a hot topic in order to answer people's concerns, the Chinese government has taken measures to find the balance between the use of information and the protection of information and the next steps, we'll continue to adopt measures to protect personal data and privacy in terms of data technology platforms and regulations so that people can be assured.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends, now global pandemic, it still is serious, more and more countries and people have realized that we share the same future and in front of common enemies we must be united to overcome the difficult times, we just alluded to the fifth Plenary session of the 19CTC Congress made plans for China's 45 year plan and we're going to start a new journey of building a socialistic modern company and this plan tells us we have to accelerate the building of cyberspace governance system, cybersecurity system and accelerate the protection of personal data and to build a global cooperation in cyberspace.
In the future, our foundation will continue to pay attention to data security personal information privacy protection so that we can better utilize or grow as a social organization and to promote the building of international consensus on personal data and privacy protection and we'll welcome exchange and cooperation with all relevant institutions so that we can all contribute to global digital development and building of the cyberspace community of shared future.
I wish this forum a row sounding success.
Thank you.
>> TAMAR KALDANI: Thank you for the initial intervention, thank you.  I'm sure during the Q&A session we'll have a chance to discuss in details.
Now let me introduce Dr. Stephanie Perrin, President of digital discretion, Canada privacy and information management consulting company and Chair of Non‑Commercial Stakeholder Group with extensive experience in data protection.  Please, Stephanie, the floor is yours. 
>> STEPHANIE PERRIN: Thank you very much.  I'm now the former Chair.  I would like to give you a personal perspective on the work that I am doing pro bono on the specific COVID applications, and the first one, it is an example on data limitation, it is not always necessary to use IT for simple applications.  I volunteer as a privacy officer for the Anglican church of Canada, on the Ottawa and the municipalities asked the churches to enable contact tracing through con graciousness just because there have been vectors coming from church attendant, sectors of disease, we're using a clip board managed by the greeter at the door, that piece of paper goes with the name, address, phone numbers in a locked file be cabinet and will be destroyed after a month, that's a pretty easy solution to the data protection issue there.
My second application is much more complex.  This is the COVID tracing app for cellphones which has been developed by my former colleagues at industry Canada,, this is a federal government initiative done jointly with Ontario and is now available for free download across the country.  They have had both the federal and the Net Neutrality privacy commissioners review the application they did ‑‑ and that was shared then with provincial privacy commissioners, and they did a privacy impact assessment on the application itself, they have taken measures to escape random identity to use random codes and to make sure that the IP address is secured out of main traffic, not on the portal and destroyed after three months, that's security measure that maintains privacy because as we know, IP address can be considered personal information and leads to you the identity of the individual.  They have established an advisory council for oversight and that council includes a colleague from the Canadian civil liberty Union who have been quite critical of the whole concept of using cellphones for COVID pandemic tracing because of the implications of broader surveillance.
The portal, it is not available online but other materials are available online.  There was a commitment to ongoing row view by the privacy commissioner to ensure that the data management practices are being followed, this is a good application, pretty good example of building privacy in at the ground floor and my lingering concern that I'm sure that the privacy commissioners will be watching for, it is ‑‑ I have two, the phone tracing, in other words will this be the start of more phone tracing, and secondarily, they have already raised this issue, this is voluntary, it may be that employers and entities may insist on this, employers looking for employees to be tracked.
That is something to keep an eye on n is subject to both the privacy act and in the private sector, the privacy legislation.
Now my next example, it is indeed quite a bit more complex, I volunteer with Palantir Technologies on the Privacy and Disabilities Advisory Council, and that council meets regularly to interrogate the use of the company's privacy by design thinking in developing products and application.  If you're not familiar with Palantir, they are powerful artificial intelligence technology and software and they have made their phone dry technology and they have made their technology available to governments to help and battle in the coronavirus.  We have looked at some applications in providing the critique, the council is comprised of people with a career in data protection several things are brought out in white papers and in the public information that's been made available on this.  The first key thing is transparency accountability and proportionately in all data use.  These are overarching principles of data protection and they're imperative in the COVID application, citizens are not going to share data without trust and that will impact the disease spread.
In this, data governance is key.
Here are a few applications here.  In terms of outbreak prediction, supply management ‑‑ in other words, personal protective equipment, testing materials, beds in hospitals, personnel, this is all dependent on timely outbreak prediction and monitoring.  There are several risks, the data quality varies in all of these supply chains and it doesn't require personal data so data aggregation can be used and there's of course always a risk with data aggregation in variant data quality, data reidentification and lack of sound data governance, I will speak to sound data governance later.  In terms of COVID contact tracing, there is a need to know principle, it needs to be incorporated in the actual contact tracing, not everyone needs to know the personal identity or any of the personal data.  Quarantine monitoring and immunity passports, that's another application where data, rich data has been implicated.  There is serious risks of civil liberty infringement, racial or socioeconomic profiling, differential enforcement of pandemic extraordinary powers when it comes to quarantine monitoring, who is being quarantined, for how long, how much do we trust them, those kinds of questions arise.
Sound data governance, it is required here to ensure fairness and equity and no intrusion into civil liberties., but as required by pandemic legislation which most countries have in place when they need it.
The mitigations for governance issues, Palantir listed an overview of technical controls they consider essential for facilitating the sound data governance practices and agree with these and these with be built in in a privacy by design fashion.  First, it is discovering classification, the ability to find and differentiate between different types of data, not always present, you think it would, but it isn't, dynamic data minimization, limiting access to sensitive data, sensitive databased on the legitimate need and purpose of processing.  That's present in the law, not always built into the systems that provide access and that's a critical component.  Prompts and notifications, encouraging the appropriate use and accountability of data handling by enforcing additional controls prior to users accessing sensitive data and applications, it is really a subset of the earlier dynamic data minimization.
Auditing, facilitating oversight by maintaining a comprehensive overview of processing operations, retention, making data irreversibly irretrievable when the processing purpose has expired, obviously, it always in law has been for 50 years, but not always built into systems and not always easy to do in busy organizations.  I would like to note, finally here, that the effectiveness of data governance controls is largely dependent on the presence of some kind of independent oversight, usually in the form of a data commissioner or an independent oversight body, this is difficult to enforce if you're a private sector company dealing with clients.  This is where data protection authorities are really imperative to have a look in at what's going on, I must say that a civil liberty oversight board we have seen in Canada, in the COVID‑19 tracing app, that can also be helpful.
I believe I have remained in the 7 minutes, that's quick trot through three applications.
Thank you. 
>> YUXIAO LI: If we're looking at personal data and privacy hat, we can try this, and now let's welcome Mr. Luigi Gambardella, President of ChinaEU, it is also one of our organizers of this workshop.
Please. 
>> LUIGI GAMBARDELLA: Let me start with a very good news, just published in fact, I was looking at mobile, one of the biggest farm industry here, it announced COVID‑19, this is 90% effective, and this is great news for all of us and I see this news, it is spreading all over the world.  We will follow the next steps.
Let me start.  The first government lockdowns were announced in Europe in the spring of this year.  The debate on how to combine the respect to data privacy with the collection of data critical for the management of a public emergency was fast forwarded.  The debate, it was catalyzed by the often opposing views on the design and adoption of tracing apps.  In several European countries, the introduction, it was marked by public opposition, fearing that public health objectives were invoked to encroach an individual's private rights and a growing chorus of voices in the media, social media, began to question safeguards on the protections of the fundamental rights to privacy in the interest of a full, effective public health response especially when the case numbers were exploding in Europe why China seems to have successfully flattened the curve, there is much more resistance to defend the sanctity of data privacy in the face of such an acute crisis.
Sooner or later, the debate would have cleared up.  What was inevitably going to happen only happened on accelerated timetable.  From an internet governance and data privacy point of view, the outcome of the debate today does not seem very satisfactory, years of conference, speeches about the very high bounds set by Europe when it comes to account protection have convened to the European citizen that their data belongs to them individually, not to their government.  The GDPR, the knowledge delegations from these delegations, they must always be strictly required, temporary and proportionately.  The burden of proof is put on the health authorities that there is no less intrusive of a way than the one they propose to protect public health.  Therefore, when European governments sought cooperation of mobile operators to monitor the compliance with the lock dine social distancing measures on a greater basis, there was a public opinion backlash with many countries, while initially government envisaged making apps mandatory to better break the infections when they became apparent, the idea, it was dropped following the initial reaction against mobile operators and sharing location data with the public authorities.
In addition, apps based on localization has to be accountable.  Local internet right defenders rolled out the European policymaker would be granted the ability to track the location data of millions of citizens, and the main argument, it was that for governments having access to the personal data of its citizen may make this valid.  Implementing effectively tracing apps and other interactive tools usage to fight the virus strengthened.  How could we find a better balance between data privacy and handling in situation of crisis, the issue, it is not to design an ideal app that the public should sacrifice the protection of the personal data to some higher goods, specialists, experts, may agree on the perfect system.  The root of the problem is not a technical issue, but an issue of trust.  Trust building, it is a patient exercise.  Yes.  Application implying the processing of personal data, information that's been truly discussed between stakeholders such as Civil Society, developers, industry government, data protection authority, they will more easily be trusted than government‑driven applications.  If the government policy, to tackle COVID, if it is perceived as unclear, inconsistent, the European public will lose trust in the capacity of the national government to handle the crisis, this mistrust is still over 20 applications.  In such circumstances, initiative from NGO backed by the national data protection authority would see the most appropriate way forward, however DPAs, having all Member States well defined portfolio tasks and are not starting working with NGO such problem.  In a forward looking perspective, the mandate of the data protection authority should have been reviewed to enable the cooperation in cases of emergency, even if upstream of enforcement of the GDPR and oxygens could be that if the data protection authority cooperates to the design or tracing app that it would in the next stage be bared by the ‑‑ in case of compliance for breaches of the GDPR by this app.
My take is that the objection, it is not valid because in any case, the data protection authority, it would apply the same criteria to adjudicate complaints that's in the cooperation upstream.
Time is passing.
Another government issue is apparent.  How do we get our population online.
What is using a tracing app that the high risk population, above 70, they don't use a smartphone or only use it is to talk and reading.  Where this regulation is often stressful in these circumstances, it appears that it is a very vulnerable target for phishing and other criminal practice, keeping elderly users safe online, it is one of the most complex and difficult to other challenges.
Some European governments engaged with the technical community during this COVID‑19 period to find ways to mitigate that.  However, the success of any policy will depend on the channels available to communicate with the population at risk which are often very limited given the regulation of the elderly people in the European Member States.
My final point relates to the future of governance, until this year, the concept of this was linked to physical consultation meeting, interaction here, it is very different, and this year, physical meetings, allowed NGO representative to establish a new relationship and to further deepen, nonetheless during coffee breaks in the meeting.  There is no new normal where social interaction is limited and travel restriction, it will have repercussion in the current internet governance model.  
Thank you very much. 
>> TAMAR KALDANI: As a former data protection commissioner, I took many issues, but I would now ask Eduardo Bertoni to address several points in the discussion that Luigi Gambardella made.  I think this is very important to really address.
Let me now present our next speaker, this is Ricky Rakesh, faculty and researcher on data privacy and protection, he was actively engaged in drafting data protection in India.  I'm grateful to have a chance to present Ricky.
Please. 
>> RICKY RAKESH: Thank you.  I hope I'm audible to everyone.  This is a long way from India, Britain, greetings to everyone across the globe.
I enjoyed listening to a lot of points which fellows, guest, speakers brought out, and I think they're nothing in the sum of privacy is left, and technically at one point, we will compare notes, we have covered a lot of things.
What I have really wanted to draw attention without being politically bias, something from privacy world, which will be a problem, so a bit of background, I do help a lot of countries in writing the privacy framework and from a policy standpoint of view, I'm active in the Middle East and if you look at the whole system right now, the way that the Middle East and the rest of the privacy, it is very different, unlike other countries, Middle East don't follow a traditional Constitutional model, they don't have fundamental rights listed on a previous document, they don't have a central Human Rights document that will be the arch pillar for privacy principles.
If you look at a lot of other countries, they have a history of, you know, of a Constitutional remedy available to them and they try to piggy back on the privacy, that's happened in India, you know, the honorable Supreme Court of India, they made a 9‑1‑1 right and said, okay, since privacy is a fundamental right, we should mobilize or make some additional measures by virtual that we can really help them to strengthen the enforceability of that fundamental right and let's say how does a big IT giant in India, dependent on IT really get into a way to protect themselves from privacy issues.
There are two things that I want to understand as I mentioned, one is capacity building.  I think in a way everyone touched it and I think the honorable group from China covered the same point, no matter the country, small or big, you find a lot of challenges when you try to enforce privacy.  It is something that's happening in COVID, it will happen when tomorrow ‑‑ tomorrow it will be X or something other thing, we can't really know what's there in the realm of the future.  Essentially, any set of audience, in a country where you have linguistic challenges ‑‑ Europe is an example of that ‑‑ you can't overcome the cookie‑cutter approach to try to solve everything, India certainly is another example where you have so much of contrast in the literacy level, you don't have English as a first language for most of them, you don't have everyone at a basic baseline level of education, you don't have the same level of computer awareness with most of the people.  Now, with those kinds of challenges, what we're seeing right now in India, the most comparable thing is security, security came in 15 years back in the industry and I'm talking the traditional cybersecurity and when things really bumped up from antivirus to really high input system, if you look right now, the ecosystem, it is still struggling to find good professionals who can really give you good advice and could really help to you mitigate privacy issues.
We're not even talking about the deep down issues of AI, all of the medical worlds, we're talking about the general privacy issues.  That's the same thing that will happen with the privacy world, China, India, you know, anyone with a new privacy law.
How ready they are, with the kind of resources they need to support that.  How much government is really injecting time and money to make sure that you have the mechanism, you have the machinery that will provide you enough skills, with people that can manage it.  That's number one.
Number two, in terms of enforceability of privacy, of use cases, you will have to really think about scenarios where ‑‑ that's my son, you know, he wants me ‑‑ in terms of privacy‑use cases, you know, you have to also think that two countries, you know, they can certainly rely on basic privacy paradigm, as a result, I can tell you, everything across the globe is not same.  You cannot measure them with the same approach.  When GDPR came in, it is a popular saying in the west, when GDP came in, it sucked up all of the oxygen of privacy across the globe.  It was a hot topic.  The way I call it GDPR, it is ‑‑ an uncle in the family, everybody tries to compare them U know, Harvard, well educated, everybody in the world they compare it to GDPR, that's a good thing.  If we're doing it from an academic point of view, but then you have to really think about that Europe has a history of 50 plus odd year where is they have involved privacy from 108 to the GDPR, not many countries will have that privilege, not many countries have that history for privacy..
Many countries don't that that appreciation, they have other issues striking them hard.
The point I want to draw based on the research we have, done, when you try to create a privacy program, an establishment, the mechanism that you want to erect for the privacy, you have to make sure, you try to give your own country or your own requirements first preference, don't just baseline things because, you know, you're reading a fancy white paper, you know, from someone that works in Paris, things are very different in Paris compared to Beijing, things are different compared to other area, and we have to be really committed to this work.
Capacity building, comparables, the requirement of your own, it is only ‑‑ I think it is the only way privacy programs are still sustainable and it will be really something to work on.  I just want to conclude with the final remark, you know, we completed a recent study and that's the most important thing, which is also highlighting a kind of issue that many African countries face with privacy, you will find in Brazil, elsewhere, a country with other primary issues on privacy, a certain number of them, right, you go to India, you go to a shopping mall, Stephanie, you know, give me your family information, I will give you a coupon of 50%, there is a high chance in the end, they have a handful of data, it takes personal information over the requirements.  That kind of information, you have to invest ‑‑ you have to invest high on the education of use cases, and often people don't understand what will happen if the data is in the wrong hand. 
Everyone has heard about that, about the crude oil contamination, the people, they really tried to stop, okay, is the crude oil, it should not spill in the sea, when it is there, then the bigger problem is that now, let's see how much harm it will really do to the marine life and how do we recover it?  Unfortunately, there is no right way to recover it.  If you look at the privacy program, not around the globe but according to your own people, your own need, economy, and the way you want to shape the next 20 years, privacy will slowly grow.  It has to grow organic, that's the point.  It has to grow organic, you can't inject it, fast pace it, if you try to do it, people will only give you one chance.  If you lose it, the game is over. 
That, I think, I rest my case.
Thank you very much.
>> YUXIAO LI: Thank you.  I hope your son is okay!.
I thank you for sharing about a very important thought.
For the privacy protection divide across the world, it exists, and each country must look for the right way to protect that data and the privacy and there are principles and rules to fit their requirements.
And now I want to welcome Mr. Fang Yu from Director of Cyberlaw Research Center, China Academy of Information and Communications Technology.
>> FANG YU: It is my pleasure, honor, to be here with you in the forum.
Today I want to discuss issues about protection of personal data when facing public health crisis.  As we all know, Big Data has played a key role in accurate positioning analysis and prediction of COVID‑19 which also highlights the contradiction between public interest and individual interests.  I want to discuss how the government can ensure safe and reasonable use of the personal data of relevant people applying Big Data in a pandemic.  My speech is divided into three parts, including how to protect personal data in the prevention and control of COVID‑19, international experience and some thoughts and suggestions.  Now let's start with the first part, how to protect personal data in the prevention and control of COVID‑19.  The priority of public interest, it is a legal principle to weigh the use and protection of data in the context of conflicts between interests, how to balance it in the prevention and control of pandemic, largely depends on the principle of proportionately, that is comparing public needs or interests with the degree of Delegation of Individual interests to find a rhythm or balance.  First of all, the use of personal data is based on the premise of informing the private interest on personal data.  Then we can further seek the balance between personal and public interest which is a way to protect and use personal data at the same time.
Secondly, only when the protection of personal data in dangerous, public security can personal interests be restricted on the grounds of protecting property security.
Finally, according to the principle of proportionately, it is necessary to infringe another legal interest in order to protect one legal interest, it is prohibitive to accept the extent necessary to achieve this purpose.  That is when individual interests gives way to the public interests following that, the damage to individual interests, it needs to be limited to a reasonable level.
The second part, it deals with the practices of E.U. and the U.S., according to E.U. general data protection regulation, it is a lot to process personal data for public interest without the concept of the data subject in order to analyze infection diseases and to make early warning.  On March 19, the prone data protection board adopted a statement on the processing of personal data in the context of the COVID‑19, pointing out that data protection within GDPR, it does not hinder measures taken in the fight against the coroner pandemic, however the data controller and the processer must ensure the protection of personal data.
In the U.S., the Health Insurance Profitability and the Accountability Act of 1996 permits the use and disclosure of protected health data without any individuals, including public health activities, oversight activities, safety risk reduction and so on.
Finally, I would like to talk about some of my thoughts and suggestions, in emergencies such as an democratic occur, we should follow the principle of reasonableness and compliance strictly and prudently use the personal data, closely focus on the purpose of epidemic prevention and control and hinder the relationship between public interests and the individual interests to achieve a balance.  
First, when personal data is collected and used tore the purpose of prevention and control of pandemic, the scope of data controllers can be extended and the principle of informed consent can be exempted from laws to make the convention on personal data more convenient.  
The second, it is to strengthen the security awareness of the data controller or the data processer.  In the process of personal data collection, if the collection agency adopts the paper‑prepared forms to conduct investigations it needs to be guaranteed that the paper is not to be photographed or copied, if the relevant data is recorded electronically, it needs to be restored in a safe manner and encrypted.  Third, to clarify the norms for the sharing and use of personal data and any data that can identify individuals cannot be directly shared and disclosed and anonymity should be used in advance and it is necessary to eliminate the personal disclosure, only the gender date of diagnosis and area of the confirmed patient can be disclosed to satisfy the public's right to know the epidemic data and it is not necessary to disclose all of the detailed personal data of the patient.  The fourth, if the requirements of the public health crisis, the timely, adequate, the proper handling of personal data collected, it is also an important part of personal data protection when the pandemic, all parties should destroy or anonymized the personal of data in time and that should be happening reasonably with the sensitivity of personal data.  And the public needs to handle this to adopt measures that are appropriate so as to build a personal protection and a utilization system in emergencies.
That's all my sharing.
Thank you for listening.
Thank you. 
>> TAMAR KALDANI: Thank you for highlighting the important data protection principles, we want the audience to be as engaged as possible.  Please use the box for Q&As.
Now let me introduce Francesca Musiani, researcher at French National Center for Scientific Research and Deputy Director of the Center for Internet and Society.
Please. 
>> FRANCESCA MUSIANI: Thank you for inviting me to this panel.
When it comes to ‑‑ I thought I would provide sort of a national perspective on France, and not just an institutional one, because we have talked a lot about policies and the institutions that are working on them.  It is very important.  But also the ways in which privacy and data protection related issue, when it comes to COVID‑19 has been perceived and managed by citizens because France is pretty interesting example in this regard and quite different with respect to other national contexts so actually for a lot of French people, the two words coronavirus and technology have also become very closely associated with a third, that is to say resistance because ever since there's started to be discussions concerning the applications of COVID, for example, there have been several attempts by the French government to deploy digital technologies in order to monitor aspects of the population's activities, the movement, contacts, habits, and this has met with a fair amount of resistance from citizens and with several warnings coming from agencies tasked with protecting citizen rights that have been worried about the potential of excessive surveillance and the associated privacy risks and for several months a central point of debate is this application, which is the contact tracing act which works in the same way for example as a Singapore's trace together and others, this is controversial since first announced in mid-March and the problem, identified problem is especially the possible threats to privacy.  There were points of debate concerning for example whether the app would be able to access and collect individual data or other data that's not directly identifying a person although we do know that the total organization of the internet, it is very difficult to actually achieve, and other issues that were discussed, they would be for example if eventual follow‑up to alerts would be based on voluntary action of the concerned person or from a third party.
For all of the debate points, there is since then a limited number of downloads and even less so of notifications via the application which the press has said this is a disaster for the government.
Another point of controversy, privacy related controversy that's perhaps less known, the use of drones by French police to monitor public activity during the pandemic.  Following a complaint by the French Human Rights League to the Francis' highest level court, the state council ruled that drones would be banned until appropriately yielded basis for their deployment could be established or until they're adapted so that individuals filmed by the cameras mounted on the drones could actually not be directly identified. 
It is interesting to underline that as with the COVID app, the main question, the privacy‑related and data protected related question here was if specific surveillance and data processing initiatives are authorized in a State of urgency when and how would the country be able to revert back to the rights that citizens enjoyed prepandemic.
Perhaps resistance to the data related technology has been particularly vocal in France because the pandemic has happened in a particular historical moment when other stuff was happening, including what is arguably a new low for citizens trust in politics, it was following the unrest and along the strikes of the public transport workers and secondly, perhaps France has a long history of actors that are very alert to these issue, both when it comes to NGOs and other Civil Society organizations and it is the French privacy commission, it is very active agency ever since the reactions to the public project which is the first large scale attempt by the government to create a centralized database of personal data, it has led to the creation now more than 40 years ago.  The French Data Protection Commission has proved to be an observer of the potential misuses and abuses of digital tools so it was almost natural that during the COVID pandemic it was no exception.
Where are we now?  It is ‑‑ all glances, they're geared towards the new version of the application, it is ‑‑ it has been presented in a very interesting manner because it is no longer supposed to be a contact tracing app, but one of the many components of the government strategy to not only protect, but to inform, so it is supposed to have an important function of providing more largely information on the current state of the pandemic and in the role of the citizen.  It is part of what the government has repeatedly designed as a strategy towards citizens, and at the same time it is obviously meant to minimize the more surveillance‑related content tracing related aspects of the application.
So just to conclude, I wanted to point to interesting publications that either have already come out or are coming out, the first one, it is data justice and the global perspective, I have the link in the chat, it is coming out, open access, a couple of months ago, at the end of the summer, and it is a very interesting example of the report and the transversal comments about how issues of data, technology, COVID‑19 have played out in a number of countries.  I guess it would be a good resource for several participants to this page for whoever is interested and is a French speaker, I don't think it is available in English as well, here is the presentation of the new con be tact tracing app and the rest, the application in France.
Thank you very much.  I'm available to take any questions.
>> YUXIAO LI: Thank you very much for your speech.  I hope that we'll read that in France or English version.  It would be good to have an English version.
Let's welcome Mr. Wang Lei, senior counsel of Sina Group to share his speech.
Please. 
>> WANG LEI: Thank you.
It is my honor to be here to share my opinions in this forum, about the prevention and control of COVID‑19 in digital prevention.  
Here is my presentation and there are four parts, the first one, the necessity and possessing personal information in the COVID treatment and the second, it is the practice and the digital prevention and control that was in the process of COVID‑19 prevention, and next, it is the obligation to protect personal information in the digital academic programs and control and the fourth is the conclusion.
As we know, since the outbreak, since the outbreak of new coronavirus impacts and digital academic prevention and control has provided accurate, timely, comprehensive statistics of personal information during the academic period and here we have the necessity and the particularly of the personal information, because the digital academic prevention and the control has the advantage of being timely and comprehensive and you can process personal information in the process of academic prevention and control, the technical support for the adjustment of the academic situation and the high efficiency of digital prevention and the control demonstrates the necessity of the exploring of a new mode of emergency response in the digital area.
As we know, the obligation ‑‑ sorry.  My presentation has went past the second part.  The practice of digital prevention and the control in the process of COVID prevention, Big Data has become a powerful assistant for the academic control.  At present, it is particularly important to use cloud compute, Big Data, other technologies for detailed data and analyses which can effectively help the government to make scientific decisions.  According to the state counsels note on the scientific and accurate prevention and the control of COVID‑19 in February 25th, 2020 house code is the legal certificate for the administrative organ to comprehensively look at the personal health risk level and obtain the clarification to the return to work.
Here is the obligation to protect personal information in the digital academic prevention and control.  As we know, how to risk the scale between the disclosure and the protection, to find the appropriate balance between academic prevention and control, it has become the focus of social concern and it is true that the academic prevention and control needs the connection and the utilization and even parts of disclosure of personal information from government to enterprise, even to individuals, all of them should play an important role about the obligation to protect personal information.
Here, government departments collect and published the information related to the email according to their legal responsibilities and monitoring the academic situation with the emergency response and the Article of the regulations, the emergency response to public health emergencies and other regulations.
Enterprise organizations, individuals undertake the obligation of information reporting and use the data to support academic prevention and control with three steps, information, first one, information directly related to the academic situation shall be reported to the competent authorities and shall not be subject to the personal information protection rules.
The second, data processing, in accordance with the requirements in trusted contact shall now exit the relevant responsibility and the authority of the competent departments and shall not be limited by the personal information protection groups and the third, the independent analysis and utilization of the user data for the development of products and services related to academic prevention and control to fulfill their obligations of personal information protection and their normal circumstance.
The role of digital prevention, it shows that there is a social media platform that's set up an anti‑ COVID in the social media platform cooperating with the media, the government medical situations, institutions and the medical staff, and we were also actively fulfilling the main responsibility of enterprises and will deal with the content and the behavior of fabricating and looking at the fake news and the regional discrimination, in recent year, China has actively promoted the legislation and the practice of personal information protection, the personal protection system has been constantly improved and the law enforcement in key areas has been significantly strengthened.
My conclusion, the information collection, it is the proper meaning of the ding digital economy era and data is a strong driving force for the development of the virus views of society and it is necessary to clarify the rules of data utilization in spite of scenarios such as public events and how emergency events in the form of this.
Thank you.  Thank you. 
>> TAMAR KALDANI: Thank you for your intervention.  Time is running out.
Let me present the next speaker, T. George‑Maria Tyendewza, head of Cybercrime Prosecution Unit in Nigeria.
George, please, the floor is yours. 
>> T. GEORGE-MARIA TYENDEZWA: Hello.  Good day.
With respect to data protection and privacy, I'm just going to speak from the perspective of law enforcement.  Several of the speakers have already outlined a lot of the principles that we all agree need to be followed.  We're basically looking and sharing as we seek to counter the pandemic, and we also must respect the privacy rights of individuals.
An interesting aspect to this, for us, Nigeria has been how we have had to deal with collection of personal information as it relates also to the upsurge, the rise in online criminal activity.
While we have actively sought to engage and respect the privacy of our citizens and residents generally, because this is a Constitutional requirement, we have found that it is quite challenging for law enforcement to deal with the deluge of reports and complaints that came in in the wake of the pandemic because we saw a certain rise in phishing scams related to the pandemic.  There were phishing scams related to government interventions and Civil Society interventions aimed at alleviating some of the challenges posed by the lockdown so in the cost of that, the key thing, we have to deal with it, it is how we balance out the need to respect the principles for data processing as well as the need for law enforcement to get the requisite information to enable it and differentiate first of all between the people who are actually patients and people who may be in danger in terms of contact tracing and then those people that were hiding behind the situation created by the pandemic to perpetuate crimes.  This was a major issue.
We looked within the legal framework, the national health act of 2014 which essentially required that personal data should be anonymized and all of that, but you know from law enforcement perspective, when you anatomize information, it then make it is difficult, if not impossible for law enforcement to get to the perpetuators of the online came that were taking place.  This is a major dilemma that (for audio).
>> We cannot hear you anymore.
>> T. GEORGE-MARIA TYENDEZWA: I wanted to share.
Doing this, it is a balance, it is basically a balance of provisions relating to data protection and the needs of law enforcement, of course, it is essential to state that at all times it is ‑‑ one needs to take into cognizance the overriding public interest and this is not just about keeping information ‑‑ keeping the personal information of citizens and residents within the bounds, but also making sure that we find that thin line that enables law enforcement to actually carry out their work effectively.
I think by and large, this is the angle that I want to bring to this discussion.
Of course, the need for even the technical solutions being deployed to find a way to be deployed in such a way that this balance is maintained.  I would say that that's the main ‑‑ that that would be the main point of discussion at this point.    
Thank you.
>> YUXIAO LI: Thank you very much, George.
Thank you to our guest speakers again for your brilliant sharing.
Next, we will proceed to the discussion section and for the time reason, I hope everyone can control your time.
First of all, let's invite Ms. Wang Li, researcher at the Xi’An, Jiaotong University Suzhou Academy of Information Security.
If you have comments, please put them in the discussion area and we'll choose several to discuss.
>> WANG LI: Thank you for giving me a chance to join this discussion and all of your presentations, I want to share some of the opinions in order to combat the pandemic, government, private organization, they have taken several measures such as imposing social distancing, contract tracing, telemedicine and teleworking, we have consideration that was within the interplay between privacy and data protection, on one hand, the benefit of the public health and on the other hand, from my own opinion we have three aspects, four thoughts, one is about ‑‑ the first one, it is about develop and use privacy protection technology.  This includes using anonymous aggregated data, protecting information where they're use a contact tracing app and prevent the data from being shared and used outside its intended purpose and we still need to think more about the AI and other leading technologies when they are designed and developed we should have more consideration about the privacy and the security, not just after their launch.
The second, thinking about the common values and the fundamental principles, such as letting the public know that the organization, the government, the companies, they will facilitate the regulations and those with limitation and used limitation so that the public know that they can trust the operation of the data probing when they're information collecting, analyzing, using or sharing and I think it is very important when it comes to the personal identifiable information, and the third, I think it is about the data governance capability and we need to increase the risk awareness, realize the complex of the data governance and we must ensure there is just the best way, just to have the suitable, the effective ways to combat the academic and we do appreciate all of the countries' contributions and all of the experience still in the future we need to get more power and information to encourage the recovery of the society that we can embrace the shared future.
That's all of my opinions.
I thank you.
>> TAMAR KALDANI: Thank you.  
For the discussion, let me ask Eduardo Bertoni to give reflection, President of Argentinian DPA.
Thank you. 
>> EDUARDO BERTONI: Thank you very much.  I hope everyone can hear well.
Thank you for the invitation to the workshop and to make my comments.
They were all very interesting presentations.  I would like to frame my discussion under two specific issues.  One, it is that we have to take into account the main purpose of the workshop, it is protection of data privacy in the prevention of COVID‑19, this is one thing.  The other, it is that we are speaking at the IGF, which is a multistakeholder meeting, so I will mention actions that have been mentioned during the presentation, that should be made not only by governments, but I think also by Civil Society, academia, technical sector, so on.
So I believe that there were many important outcomes during the debate.  I'm not ‑‑ I cannot mention all of them.  I just point so some of them.  I don't have the time to do so.
One word that I heard, in some presentation, it was the word balance.
Balance between data, personal data collection and protection of health.  I said many times during this month. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-ws43-trusted-digital-space-via%E2%80%8Eprida%E2%80%93informed%E2%80%8Etransformed-africa^^

 
>> Well, hello.  Welcome to WS number 43, "Trusted Digital Space Via PRIDA" it's recorded under the IGF code of conduct and UN rules and regulations.
Thank you.  The moderator can now take over.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Thank you very much.  Welcome, everybody, to our session.  I trust you will have some space in Africa.  This is sponsored by PRIDA, PRIDA, its joint initiative between the African Union Commission, and the European Union.  It stands for policy and regulation initiative for digital Africa, and being supported by my colleagues.
Just to tell you the flow of the session, we will skip the introduction part of the panelists.  We will ask them a few questions and then open for the Q&A and then we'll have a closing session.
As we said, this is ‑‑ the session is entitled "Trusted Digital Space In Africa."
Africa has many major headway in developing its digital ecosystem in the past decade, which can be related in the adoption by the African Union for the infrastructure for 2020‑2030 this year.  Nonetheless, there's still an evident gap among AU Member States in determines of detail maturity, and adopt the projects and the proper strategy, capabilities and programs to mitigate cyber threats.
The ongoing digital transformation in Africa will not provide the desired social and economic benefits unless Africa has access to a secure and trusted cyberspace.  The rapid growth of the Internet has provided new opportunities that can be exploited, however because the apparent digital divide, the benefits are not reaching all Africans equal, leaving some communities and groups behind.
Another dimension to consider is that while digital technologies expand the possibility for people to enjoy freedoms and right to information on knowledge access as people come online, they face a number of possible harm from the use of their data without their consent and the lack of protection of their personal data.
To illegitimate use and cybercrime and cyber terrorists.  Information on data governments needs to be a top priority for all governments.
The African Union supports as an integral and divisible part.  These are essential to creating ‑‑ (Speaking non‑English).
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: For all ‑‑ (Speaking non‑English).
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: I think we have an issue with the interpretation.
>> Can you hear us?
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: We can hear you, but I think the interpreters, the channels, they have to be ‑‑ you are coming at the same time as I speak.
So let me continue, the African Union, is integral and ‑‑ these gaps are essential to creating the trusted environment necessary for ecommerce, eGovernment and digital services generated to take off.  The digital inclusion with the necessary protection will be an essential level in post‑COVID‑19 economic reconstruction across the continent and determinant of which countries will benefit from African continental free trade agreement.
The complex geopolitical situation and the lack of global consensus on cyberspace make it even harder for developing nations to promote coherent billing agenda.  Our speakers will attempt us to walk us through the challenges, highlight key mitigation measures and provide some answers.
Join me to welcome Mr. Abdul‑Hakeem Ajijola, the chair of the African Union Commission, Dr. Alison Gillwald, director of Research ICT after risk.  And Dr. Nnenna Ifeanyi Ajufo and Mr. Vladimir Radunovic of DiploFoundation.
Okay.  So as we said, we are going to start with questions to our panelists.  We have a very distinguished group of panelists.  I think most of you know our panelists.  I start my first question to Mr. Moctar Yedaly, the head of African Union Commission, and I think it's very important to know what is the role of the African Union Commission, in terms of building trust in the cyberspace, particularly for policymakers in AU Member States to ‑‑ to enable them to confidentially engage and in that ‑‑ in the same context, I would like him to explain what are the initiatives that are currently being considered by the African Union Commission and how they are all going to help close this cross gap in Africa.  Mr. Yedaly.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Thank you very much, Adil.  Hello, everybody.  It's also very good to have you here.  It's good for me also, I'm very happy to be here so with so much prominent speakers like Alison, Vladimir, Abdul and Nnenna.  Allow me to congratulate you and your team for organizing this in the framework of the Internet Governance Forum.
The question you have asked me is related to the role of what has been done by the African Union Commission so far.  And before answering straight to that question, I would like just to mention something very important to me, which is actually that the digital transformation is a requirement for survival for the African continent, and it is also a geopolitical challenge for the continent.
The economy and the threat of the future of the race for data collection and Africa must do something to avoid digital colonization.  Without the exponential growth of digital technology globally, Africans ‑‑ African state must reap the maximum benefit, while trying to remain sovereign.  It's very important.  The digital sovereignty is extremely important.
Having said that, the African Union Commission on behalf of the Member States objectives of it all is to have each and every member of the union adopting a cyber threat issue, number one.
Number two, to have them adopting each of them as cyber legislation, and adaptable to the context.  And lastly, each of them should have established a computer emergency incident team, a CSIRT.
So ten years ago, the African leadership has seen the importance of cybersecurity and my team and I have been requested to draft a normative text on the cybersecurity and we went beyond the expectation of the head of state and we drafted the African Union convention on cybersecurity, personal data protection and electronic transaction.
So ten years ago in 2010, we really seen the importance of protecting our electronic transactions and the fact that the link between the cybersecurity and the personal data protection, and that is how I ‑‑ we have been working since 2010 to have the Malabo Convention since 2014.  Right after this convention, we started negotiating with the European Union the PRIDA project, which received the regulatory initiatives for digital Africa.
And the project aims really one of the major things ‑‑ one of the project's aim is Internet government and digital governance.  And this is how we have been able to build the ‑‑ most of the capacity building ‑‑ to build most of the capacity within the African continent and make the African Union and the African Member States in the global context.
Now, this is ‑‑ what we have done so far related to cybersecurity, and allow me to insist on the fact that it is very important for us as Africans to finally start really using the digital technologies to change the way we are considering our development.  This is why in 2020, the African Union adopted the digital union strategy of which the major pillar, actually is cybersecurity.  With that, I hand it over to you and thank you for your kind attention.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Just a small follow‑up question.  Can you tell us the status of the digital transformation?  I understand it has been adopted, but what are the next steps?
>> MOROCCO: After the adoption in January of last year, unfortunately, we just hit right away the COVID‑19, and while our priority was really to start building a framework for the implementation, involving the regional community, the specialized institutions, the Member States, we started doing that in March and COVID‑19 came in and we reorient our activities now in implementing specifically the component of the digital transformation related to, one, the e‑education and e‑health specifically, and in addition to the activating the Working Group on artificial intelligence that will start tomorrow, actually, being operational.  Over to you. 
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Thank you very much, Moctar.  And so we now ‑‑ we heard what the African Union Commission is doing in terms of building confidence.  Alison, our next speaker, the next question is to you.  As stated by Moctar, Africa cannot afford to wait on the sideline until the trust issue is eventually sorted out by others, and in the process miss the train of enforcement the Industrial Revolution.  So given the complexity and the constraint that the African ‑‑ that is facing in terms of participation in this digital revolution, what is it in practical terms, what is it that the ‑‑ that can be advised by you through the research that you have done, through the years to address this issue from a policy and government perspective.
Hello, Alison, can you hear me?  
>> ALISON GILLWALD:  My apologies.  I turned my mute off.  I seem to have turned it back on.  Thank you very much, Adil, for your question and looking forward very much to engaging on this really important topic with these eminent panelists.  Because the issue of trust is absolutely central to addressing issues of inequality and creating the digitally enabled environment to redress the problems with COVID‑19 and if we get the type of reconstruction that we want with the African continental free trade agreement, all of these are underpinned by trust.
And I just wanted to sort of take a step back quickly and just say, you know, the issue of trust is a big issue in the analog world.  It's a big issue offline.  A lot of literature that political economy, the political science literature at the moment is around the lack of trust of institutions, the lack of trust of governments.  You know, the challenges that we have from normative frameworks that we have had, you know, trusted and used for years and years.  So there's enormous complexities around issues of trust.  It's not just a tap you switch on or off.  It's really got to be earned and we have got to contribute to making those work.
So, you know, how can we?
I want to start with distinguishing trust from security and from safety.  So these are underpinnings of trust, but you don't ‑‑ you need them.  They are necessary conditions for trust, but you don't automatically get trust once you have a secure system.  Once you have a secure system, you need to build on what Moctar said.  The underpinnings of trust are having a safe and secure Internet, cybersecurity, in that sense, and then the other one is, you know, the data protection that would actually protect people's rights online and I think that's a very important thing.
You know, very often in many jurisdictions we look for signatories to commit to global conventions, global conventions and regional conventions that are underpinned by human rights framework that is sometimes limited ‑‑ not existing in our countries.  It's absolutely important that for the legal systems to work, we have to have rule of law.  We have to have these institutions that work.  And then we need the cybersecurity overlay just to get the security and then we need the data protection.  But the trust comes on how those systems are used.  Cybersecurity can be abused for public surveillance and private surveillance, in fact, special surveillance is a big problem for us with the global platforms and monopolies.  We have to be careful that the cybersecurities is trusted and transparent and accountable and likewise with our data protection, it's no use just taking very sophisticated data protection systems from very mature economies and mature democracies and trying to put them into a context where we don't have the institutional arrangements to enforce them, et cetera.
On the other hand, we are part of the global system.  We have got to align with those.  We have to be able to ensure that even the most marginal people coming online in understand their rights and the competency and capabilities to check the system and trust that it's working in their favor.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Thank you very much, Alison.  I think you made a very important point is that even though, security and safety is the equivalent in the room, but there's some other component of trust that needs to be earned in order for the ecosystem to work, to function properly.
Abdul‑Hakeem, a question to you, the next question to you.  In the absence of globally binding legal framework on cyberspace, please explain the importance of international cyber norms for building confidence in the cyberspace.  And I want you to zoom in, in one of the norms and explain to us why it is relevant to Africa and the impact on African in terms of building the trust in ICT.
>> ABDUL-HAKEEM AJIJOLA: I have to unmute myself.  Sorry.
Okay.  First of all, let's put some of these norms in the global context.  First of all, at the United Nations level, it has been agreed, broadly agreed on the set of norms, and these norms basically are based on a principle that the international law applies in cyberspace.  So none of these things are considered beyond that context of international law.  So international law does apply in cyberspace.
Now, having said that, the UN has so far articulated a set of 11 norms, which basically are aimed at setting some clear expectations of what is responsible cyber behavior, especially by state actors during ‑‑ during peace time.
Now, of course, sometimes during wartime, you know, some bets are off, if not all bets, but the point is that these norms and confidence‑building measures are to try and prevent us from getting to a wartime situation.  And then these 11 norms which I will get into in a moment are underpinned or driven or supported by certain confidence building measures and some of the norms are inherently confidence building measures and I will get into that in a moment.
But the other key component of, you know ‑‑ is ‑‑ the underline cyberspace is based on the international law, are these norms.  It’s actually the issue of capacity building.  Without capacity building at various levels, whether it's systems, whether it's people, you know, which it's governance structures, all of these things, the idea is to harness the benefits on the one side, but ensure that we mitigate the risks on the other side of our interconnectivity.
And I would like to just draw on something that Mr. Moctar had said earlier, and the keyword that he used ‑‑ really, this is about survival.  And I think Africa very urgently needs to develop cyber diplomats, African nations as a whole, so we can make sure that the African priorities and perspectives are properly reflected, you know, as a foundation to those new types of international relationships that are emerging.
I am pleased to note that the African Union, in fact, in recent weeks has recently done some interventions on this specific issue, but the challenge is actually beyond the African Union.  The African nation states themselves must begin to see that cyber diplomacy is a new area that is in their national self‑interest.
So let's go over very quickly what is are the 11 norms.  Someone one is really about interstate cooperation.  Two is about considering relevant information.  Three is one that I think is of particular interest that is prevent the misuse of ICTs, you know in, each of our jurisdictions.  Please many had of us erroneously believe that cyberspace is borderless.  And that is because it appears or simulates borderlessness to the end user, and also to the bad actor, however, we must appreciate that cyberspace for the law enforcement or the nation state is restricted by those activities and especially systems that are within its jurisdiction.
So an investigator, for example, in Morocco cannot simply go to a server in Zimbabwe and interrogate it or even a Zimbabwean citizen who is physically in Zimbabwe.  You need that kind of cooperation so that African states ‑‑ and again, underpinned by the African Union can do that.
Number four is actually a call to ensure that there's some level of cooperation and stopping of crime and terrorism.
Number five is respect for human rights.  I think this is something that all nations, not just African nations could do well to improve upon.  Number six is not to damage critical infrastructure.  So, for example, if you have an undersea fiber cable and it’s in front of your country, you shouldn't damage it because you are having a problem with the next country because that undersea cable not only serviced the next country but services several other countries, you know, further down the line.
Then you have a duty to protect critical infrastructure, to respond to requests from other nations for assistance, and then we have to find ways ‑‑ and this is number nine ‑‑ ensures, you know, the security of the supply chain or various supply chains.
And then we talk about number ten which is to report ICT vulnerabilities.  And number 11, which, again, Moctar had touched upon do no harm to the CSIRTs, that he talked about, and analogy of the CSIRTs is that they are like hospitals.  So that in physical, you know, nation state interactions, you don't attack schools.  You don't attack women.  You don't attack children.  You have don't attack hospitals because the hospitals basically are, again, in this case, the CSIRTs are analysis to cyberspace hospitals.  That's where things are rebuilt, and the reconstruction, you know, putting ‑‑ basically getting the system to be better.
So that if it's affected by some kind of virus or malware, that's like a disease.  The hospital develops the vaccines or develops the cures and the hospital does the medical research, but the idea is that you shouldn't use hospitals in this case the CSIRTs for developing offensive capabilities and in return, other nations should respect that the hospitals or in this case the CSIRTs shouldn't be touched.
And very quickly and I will talk about this a little later but let me just touch on it, the confidence building measures really, the intent here is to ensure that we achieve some level of predictability.  It helps different nations seek ‑‑ or obtain and seek clarification on what is going on, because that's usually where misunderstanding or leading to conflicts happen.
The CSIRTs help in calming things down so that time is gained in order to do proper and in‑depth introspection and reflection before an action is taken.
It leads to improving of understanding and also helps the system, and that's now the global system, including states and regional bodies to reach some kind of enhanced maturity.
And finally, there are basically three general overarching types of confidence building measures.  We look at those that are information interaction and communication measures where states talk to each other.
The second type is actually the verification and the observation where some level of transparency is engaged by the various states so that others can see what they are doing, because sometimes seeing is believing.  And then the third type of confidence building measures is in the bucket of what we call constraints.  So that you just don't take precipitous action.  You are not careless.
So, again, while states are encouraged to have in place, you know, national legislation, remember, norms in and of themselves are voluntary.  And if we look at what has happened in laws of the sea, the laws of outer space, what other one I get oh, nuclear proliferation, some of these norms took decades to evolve into international law, but they did evolve.
So arguably, norms are soft laws.  They are voluntary.  But Africa needs to be parse and parcel of their development and also their articulation, because eventually they are likely to evolve into hard international laws that we must obey whether we like it or not.  And that's why it's crucial that Africa participates in those conversations, Africa has its own set of cyber diplomats who understand what is going on, who are able to advise the national governments and take these processes forward.  In the best nation ‑‑ in the best self‑interest or national security interest, of not just African nations and the African continents.  I will stop there.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Thank you very much, Abdul‑Hakeem.  I think two points got my attention.  I think it's the norms in themselves, they are not enough.  You into Ed to do capacity building around the norms and then the process of making sure that the norms are implemented is not necessarily a top down.  It can also work also bottom up in terms of Member States, you know, doing their job in terms of implying those norms.
The question to Vladimir now.  There's a lot of question about sovereignty, Vladimir, and now the digital technology globally.  How can the African dates have maximum benefit, bearing in mind the sovereignty and take a lesson learned from the other parts in the world.  What can be done to build the necessary trust in Africa?
>> VLADIMIR RADUNOVIC: Thank you, Adil.  It's really a pleasure to be considered an African.  It's an honor for me and a responsibility for me as well and I'm always happy to be in such a good company.
When I was thinking of that question initially, what came to my mind was a couple of opportunities and a couple of risks and I will start with opportunities.  I think we also ‑‑ what Alison mentioned, there are more elements to trusted just safety and security, and to my mind, turning technology into opportunities is also a good way to increase trust.
I will start with opportunities.  First one is Alison mentioned, the data.  And we know that I think Moctar at the beginning also mentioned.  As the Internet of Things is coming, the artificial intelligence, the virtual world and all of that, and, of course, as we are sort of under digitalization on steroids, data will be abundant and we will have a lot of data around that we have to somehow use, right, smartly.
Now Africa is such a big place on the earth with so many people, we'll definite be a producer and is already but it will be more and more vast amounts of data.  Certainly, the newcomers in Africa, which will connect will not start using the email.  They will start immediately from, I don't know, the Instagram or video games or whatever they would be around.
So the first thing is to make sure that Africa does not export the data, its own data as a raw material in a way.  Something like what has been in the history of Africa with diamonds and others things, but turn it into a process, export the process and see how to use the African data for particular applications that then you can export as a product to others.
I think there's a lot of opportunity with that, that will be learning with various industrial processes, traffic control, whatever you wish.  There will be a lot of opportunities to actually harness these data on the African soil and feed it into different applications then as a package you can export.  That's something that I see as a first opportunity.
And the second one is with all the emerging technologies, that we mentioned, I think creativity will be increasingly needed.  The technologies were most likely because of the circumstances still be advised in other places, in the US, in Japan, in China and the EU, maybe.  That's about it.  They have various infrastructures in place, funding and everything else to develop new technologies, unfortunately still.  But the implementation of these technologies will be ‑‑ will be increasingly important.  You have, you know, again, abundance of new technologies.  How do you implement it, creativity is something that will be key.  And to be honest, I see no other region than Africa.  Start with musics and arts, one of those behind me, the Kenyan art.  Start with even the technical services like Kampasa, which was an assessor of the digital currencies that we are talking to indicate.  So Africa has a huge potential on this creative part on the new applications and so on.
Then the two risks.  One is the cyber conflicts and this misuse of cyberspace by ‑‑ by governments in a way.  And Abdul‑Hakeem has mentioned much of that.  When Secretary General of the UN, I think it was a year ago, mentioned that he ‑‑ he's afraid that the new conflicts will actually start with cyber attacks.  I didn't read it as ‑‑ as a signal to the US/China relations or the US/Russian relations.  Those guys are quite cautious of what they are going to do because all‑out war ‑‑ they know what it means.
What I'm more concerned about is where the conflicts actually are today and they are mainly in Africa and Middle East, and Balkans, are and I would start with thinking how cybercrimes could actually escalate in war‑torn regions where the countries done necessarily understand issues of attribution, and that's one big concern.  The other big concern, certainly we can't stop the armament and the countries we know that the African countries are developing offensive capabilities to penetrate into other systems.  I guess we can't reduce no global trend.  What we can do is we make sure we reduce the vulnerability of cyberspace, that the gadgets we connect are less vulnerable and no one can exploit on them, particularly governments.
I can expand on a project.  And something else that we heard from Abdul‑Hakeem is the development of norms.  Confidence building measures.  Africa doesn't have any of the confidence building measures unlike Asian and even the Organization of American States.  They have some sort of CBMs being developed.  The least that Africa could do until maybe it develops its own CBMs or takes some of the existing ones would be, for instance to ‑‑ as African states endorse the GG norms that Abdul‑Hakeem mentioned.  The Asian countries did it on a ministerial level, but it doesn't change the rules of the game.
It may be voluntary.  But once the states endorse, it it's a different level.  That could be an easy way to go.  And to conclude as a bottom line, certainly the other risk is standards and we will see more of the conflicts on top of AI standards, 5G standards and interest net of things, and that will be a global technological war that I don't think any one of us will be able to skip, Africa included but you can do the best to be out of it to the largest possible extent.
So the bottom line is, engage more with diverse policy processes around the world, things are changing.
Define the rules of the games.  I think that's really something that needs to be done and I'm glad to hear also from Moctar things are moving in African.
Prioritize issues.  Abdul‑Hakeem mentioned, developing foreign affairs strategies on the national levels.  Understanding what are the priority topics for foreign affairs and diplomatic service is a key.
And finally capacity building that needs to be done simultaneously.  I will stop there.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Thank you.  I guess the cyber diplomats is an emerging theme from the speakers and I think this is something that the African Union would look into and see ‑‑ try to help the country how to implement the program advocating for cyber diplomats on the continent.
The next question goes to Nnenna, Dr. Nnenna.  Could the ratification of the Malabo Convention, with shared norm standards and principle providing a common voice and for trust building across the continent.  Moctar made mention of the Malabo Convention, could you tell us if that ‑‑ if the convention could be the answer for a united continent? 
>> NNENNA IFEANYI-AJUFO: Thank you very much for this opportunity to engage with colleagues who are very much interested in the advancement of a trusted digital space in Africa.
Based on the question, indeed, in this age of cyber uncertainty, the ratification of the Malabo Convention is a huge measure towards an African regional consistency, like in terms of cybersecurity and data protection.  As Mr. Moctar rightly pointed out, the Malabo Convention is important regional investigation which if you like broadly covers data security and cybersecurity and a trusted place for electronic transactions.  So it encourages the policing of cyberspace and the protection of data through a unified regeneration framework.
(speaking non‑English).
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Interpreters, I think you are getting into the live ‑‑ so continue.
>> NNENNA IFEANYI-AJUFO: Unfortunately, we in Africa have similarly failed to appreciate the value of protecting the critical infrastructure, protecting cyber ‑‑ 
(Speaking non‑English).
>> NNENNA IFEANYI-AJUFO: And we have failed to appreciate the digital rights.  Many African states have little or no data protection or regulation or even cybersecurity legislation.  So sometimes it seems like it's hardly a priority, where there exists some form of data protection regulation, there's so much disparity in implementation with no unified general approach.  The significance of the Malabo Convention depends on a large extent to its adoption ‑‑ (Speaking non‑English).
Depends to a large adoption of African states and that's why we need the common voice on norms and standards.  Africa must create their own cybersecurity and data protection agenda.  We must develop an African position.
And so for that, we need to clearly on cybersecurity and data protection and it's important that we pursue a unified approach and this is ‑‑ this is the significance of ratifying the Malabo Convention.  Of if we must project a corporate ‑‑ if we must reject ‑‑ (Speaking non‑English).
Now in as much as we promote digital sovereignty, digital cooperation remains fundamental in this age.  I was very happy when Mr. Abdul‑Hakeem was talking about the fact that we need mutual legal cooperation in Africa.  So this serves as regional and it may not continue to suffice.  I say this because cyberspace is not sighed to any geographically proximate location.  So it's impossible for African states to individually ensure cybersecurity without cooperation.  So it is important that we really look forward and look to how we must ensure cooperation in terms of ratifying the Malabo Convention.  Now the development of compatible and harmonized cybersecurity laws will be very important in terms of how we progress with the Malabo Convention, so that it will benefit and the development and the economy in Africa, especially in a time when we in after risk have decided to establish a single continental market.
Again, we must view the culture of safety and security for cyber activities and data protection and I always say that charity begins at home.  It doesn't begin with international conventions, which we would run out to ratify.  We must ratify that which is our own.
So finally, cybersecurity and data protection are and will always remain an integral and indivisible part of this digital resolution.  We need to work towards building a trusted African digital space which is necessary for our social, nor our economic, and for our political development as well.
And issue comments from the ratification of the Malabo Convention.  Thank you very much.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Thank you very much, Nnenna.  I think just a follow‑up question to you, maybe you or Moctar, what is the status of the ratification and how far do we need to go until the convention becomes a law?
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: If the question is addressed to me and I will tell you that so far, 10 out of 15 ratification.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: So we have five to go?
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: We have five to go.  And the African Union cybersecurity expert has put in front of themselves the challenge to have the ratification happen by 2020.  That was before COVID‑19.  Now, the COVID‑19 has changed everything and unfortunately we will not be able to meet that target.
But, again, we are too close, and we hope that it will be early next year be able to have that 15 ratifications to have this convention into force.  Over to you.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Yes.  I also want to take this opportunity to call out our audience, to encourage their countries to ratify the Malabo Convention, I think it's important as Dr. Nnenna mentioned, to have harmonized legal framework on the continent, so that we can start, you know, the digital ‑‑ the real digital transformation in Africa, including the e‑trade, the cross‑border collaboration.  Thank you very much.
I think ‑‑ I know that people are very eager to ask questions.  I think keep asking questions on the comment line.  I think we are ‑‑ we are very close to starting the questions from ‑‑ fielding questions from the comment line but I think we have just a couple of questions remaining for all panelists before we open the Q&A session.
Back to you, Moctar.  You know, COVID‑19 has been a significant crisis that impacted the whole world, but in Africa, I think the digital currencies prove to be a life line during this pandemic.  What kind of structure should the African state put in place, in policies and strategies in a trusted digital currency environment?
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Thank you very much for this question.  Let me just remind everybody that what is so‑called mobile banking.  It starts in Africa, not by Africans and then it becomes an African trademark and now everybody is using the mobile banking and mobile transactions outside of the continent.  And primarily this is a good thing that actually something is being exported out Africa knowledge, capacity, is being exported out of Africa, not like just raw material and data, probably.
Now, having said that, the mobile banking and the digital currencies could be the option for financial inclusion for most of our citizens, however, this is required in the context of our discussion, trust the needed infrastructure, soft and hard need to be put into place in order to have the African continent enjoying those applications surrounding the financial transactions.  Unfortunately, two things have not happened.  There's not yet a bottom up approach for that.  Member States have not yet expressed an interest to really have policy and/or regulation adopted at the continental level or the national level with regard to this matter.
And there is not yet a top down approach from the African Union to push for those kind of policy and regulatory framework that are necessary for starting using this.  We are facing a very critical situation.  There's not yet the infrastructure.  Nor the frameworks but it is time for us to start thinking about it.  Most of the people went from what we call the hard currencies and then the plastic card and then our evolution for the digital currency.  We need to jump that intermediary step which is the plastic card, the credit card and so on.  And only very good leadership ‑‑ African leadership will help to really try to put Africa on that.
I know there is an enormous amount of challenges.  Part of our Member States still haven't set had the financial currency independence.  Some of them are using currency that are printed outside of the continent.
Some countries don't have a Minister of Finance.  But, again, we need to break this wall in going through that ‑‑ to go straight away and really start pushing for not only an African currency, but also digital African currency.  Over to you.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Thank you very much, Moctar.  Back to you, Alison, I think.  You touch upon this subject, which is the tension between rights and securities and I think we have been missing now a lot of issues popping up from fake news, cyber service providers tourism, shutdowns and, and you name it.
I think how can we get the right balance in this equation in the context of all that is going on.  Some countries are now extremely getting impatient and then there is a concern that there's going to be fragmentation because of all of this tension.
Can you shed more light on this subject?
You are muted, Alison.
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Sorry., again.
Adil, may take this opportunity to answer the excellent question in the chat.  It relates to what I will be tucking about.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: I think we can do that after we finish.  If it's related then maybe, yeah, you can go ahead.
>> ALISON GILLWALD: And it follows on from what I said earlier about the ability of countries to leverage the African ‑‑ the continental free trade agreement is the degree to which they are digitally ready.  I think the important point about the excellent question is the interrelationships from a global governance perspective and the different multilateral associations going on.  One the issues I was making and the point I was making in the beginning and I want to pick up now, is trust has several dimensions to, it but it has tended to be equated with cybersecurity on the one hand and it's tended to be equated with the eCommerce debate on the others and that was the early eCommerce debates where we were talking about a small piece of the economy online.  What we are talking about now in terms of the digital economy is the digitalization of the entire economy.  The economy is ‑‑ the contemporary economy is digital and that's why it's so important that it's not just about creating trusted online systems or trusted retail systems or financial systems.  The whole ‑‑ ball of these critical infrastructures, the trust and the security within them is now interdependent and it goes back to the important point that's been emphasized by a number of speakers on the need for a transversal policy that will deal with these different people, between the different rights.
I think these tensions can be managed if one has, you know, right spaced, and people‑centered transparent institutions and policies, policy processes and implementation processes that are accountable and people have resource to the courts and law and those kinds of things.  So I think they can be managed but we do have somewhat of a tension in terms of individual and collective rights least, probably but I think also on individual rights, between freedom of expression, which is effectively, you know, they can't decide to privacy protections and which data protections, building the democracy.  Internet says this is an enabler of freedom of rights and it's a critical aspect of that and building trust in our institutions.  If our institutions are transparent, if people can ‑‑ if there's an open data regime that people can see data user to build businesses, et cetera, this is all about the openness that we would see.  But there are tensions around, for example, individual rights to privacy, they have become amplified under COVID with people concerned about their private information, their health information.  (Overlapping speakers).
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Interpreter, you are getting in the live feed.
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Translator, I think you are crossing lines.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Agree.  Go ahead.
>> ALISON GILLWALD: I think we have rights frameworks that can manage these different things.  That's very important.  Obviously, there's certain things that we can do at the national level and the global level and I think it's really important to understand data, the internet as global public goods that need to be realized at the global level and these global public goods.  The cybersecurity, the international cybersecurity system is only as strong as the weakest link.  They realize this and they put a lot of money into capacity building and that sort of thing, but the African governments need to realize that they have to take responsibility for the realization of those public goods at the national level and various things, you will not realize.  Cybersecurity is one of them.  Data protection is another.
As I said, it's very important to have a data protection framework in place that's that provides enough privacy to prevent the harms from the information that we are seeing that allow them to access that information, but also to mitigate the Ritz that's accompany these massive now data collection systems that are on our global platforms and our monopoly platforms that are currently more or less not accountable to anyone.
Working at the national level, the establishment of information regulators and I think the establishment of a grand coordinator mechanism is a very positive move.  The implementation can only be done through global cooperation because they operate in a global system.
The collaboration at the continental level could strengthen the regional response to this and, align and engage with international regulators who are equally new and struggling with this for the protection for data of elections and the manipulation of governments, and enable eCommerce and to flourish but that really requires people getting ‑‑ gaining trust in the system based on the technical elements that you need to in order to provide a safe and secure Internet ‑‑ the trust comes from the enforcement of rights.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Hello?  I think we lost Alison.
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Can you hear me?
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Yes, we can hear you now.
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Sorry, Adil, I'm not quite sure where you lost me.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: The last sentence.  Your last sentence.  Your last sentence.  I think we get the gist of is.  I thank you very much.  There is a question on the chat line.
(Speaking French).
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: I think we have some interference from the interpreters coming into the live feed.
My final question, COVID‑19 pandemic, many services went online, including the education for our kids and now they are online and, of course, the risk of child exploitations and what kind of measures that we need to make sure are in place, that we make sure that our children are protected online?
>> NNENNA IFEANYI-AJUFO: I think we put it mildly when we talk about online safety for children.  So basically we say sexual exploitation and radicalization, but then a lot more is going on in terms of child abuse, child trafficking online, child pornography, access to online pornography by children, illicit content and even online gambling targeted at children.
And essentially, your question actually highlights a point to safeguard the interest of children.
And I will approach this question from a three‑away approach, looking at responsible parenting.  If there was a hierarchy parent, I would say responsible parenting in this age.
And it takes me back to why I said we need a unified approach when I was talking about the Malabo Convention.
Unfortunately, what is criminalized in terms of online safety for children, is different when you come to different jurisdictions in Africa.  You find that there's no unified standard for the conception of age when you talk about the age for child pornography and what is criminalized in terms of child pornography.  There's no unified approach.  In some it's possession and sometimes it's distribution.  And so we must have a unified approach in solving this issue and then we must put online safety for children on the agenda as a policy and strategy priority.  We are so focused on curbing electronic and we neglect many aspects in cyberspace.  In as much as we have ratified so many child rights conventions, we must develop distinct policies specifically targeted at online safety for children at the regional level, the subregional and even international level.  And policies are not just to be left alone for governments.  We should have policies for schools, for Internet service providers and for companies and all of that and we must focus on implementation, on enforcement because even if we have these strategies.  We tick the boxes and we must look at implementing them.  One of the ways to implement strategies focused on online safety for children is reporting.  We hardly have reporting mechanisms in Africa for child protection when you talk about child protection in the digital age.
We also do not have statistics in Africa.  We hardly know what is going on.  The result was that since that paper was released, you have 25,000 offensive images with children online and that every day you have about 90 cybercrimes targeted at children.  Now you beg to imagine what would be happening in Africa.
We need to have our own statistics as well and how we progress and sharing online safety.  Digital companies have to be responsible and governments must take responsibility for ensuring that digital companies are accountable and we can old ISP providers accountable as well in how we protect the children online.  If companies are held accountable, it will ensure the framework for tackling the comprehensive set of online harms.  It's for illegal activities and content, behaviors and things harmful to children.  Now because of time, I will quickly talk about parenting.  Parents must get involved and know what online safety means and sharing parental controls.  Schools must understand what online safety means as well and maybe think in terms of including cybersecurity in their education.  I can't emphasize it enough, education, education, education.  When we educate, we take a people‑centered approach.
If laws are there, it becomes stagnant if they are not aware of these policies or these laws.  And so education must take on a multi‑stakeholder approach.  The parents should be aware.  The teachers should be aware.  The children should also be aware, including governments and companies so that we can as we progress, even after the COVID‑19 pandemic in terms of education, in terms of policy, in terms of our cultural understandings and our cultural perspectives, we will ‑‑ (Speaking French).
 ‑‑ ensuring that we safeguard the online space for our children.
And ensure their safety.
Thank you.
Thank you, Adil.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Thank you very much.  You were able to make it despite the interruptions.
Now I hand it ‑‑ I hand the mic to my to ‑‑ (Overlapping speakers).
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Good afternoon, everyone.  I just want to ‑‑ (Overlapping speakers) if the interpreters would use the French channel, please.  Not to interfere with this session in English.
So just a couple of things.  We tried to make this session as interactive as possible, and to update everyone this is a webinar format which means most of the attendees are not able to see the number of participants.  So we have ‑‑ (Overlapping speakers).
33 attendees and 15 panelists including our esteemed speakers and the technical teams working on this project.  So we have a number of contributions from the attendees and I would like to encourage everybody to use the Q&A window in order to ask their questions or provide comments.  I will try to list the this in chronological order, including commentary and in some cases or in most cases, actually, the question are general and not allocates to a specific ‑‑
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Hanane, we lost you? 
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Hello, can you hear me now?
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Yes, we can hear you now.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: So the comments are general and not specifically allocated to a speaker.  I would like to maybe recite first commentary is from Jimson.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: I think your French ‑‑ the French channel, please, I think we need no hear the English.  I think there is a mix‑up.  Had the core nation, can you please go to the French.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Thank you.  So first comment is from Mr.  ‑‑ I will display this again my Word document.  So Mr. Jimson thinks that the borderless of the Internet implies that any server can be probed from anywhere around the world.  If it is unguarded or unsecured, it can be easily accessed and exploited.  If there is borders, especially when it comes to persecution of cross border cybercrimes, the national laws can apply.
So I think any of the panelists can probably address this specific notion where people in general think that if there's borders, it's easier to apply national laws to cybercrime.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: And the rule if you want to intervene be, you can physically raise your question ‑‑ your hand and then you can answer the question.  So if we don't have somebody assigned on the questions, the panelists can raise their hands and answer the questions if they wish. 
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: So anybody wish to take which comment/question from our panelists?
>> ABDUL-HAKEEM AJIJOLA: May I quickly address that?
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Please go ahead.
>> ABDUL-HAKEEM AJIJOLA: Basically, I think Dr. Jimson is correct, but the key thing is that nation states are limited by jurisdiction, whether a server is guarded or unsecure.  One, they don't have the right or the authority to interrogate it, and more importantly, the nation state in which that infrastructure is located, that has jurisdiction, would certainly take exception, and that is actually what leads to international misunderstandings.
So really it gets very complicated.  For example, I reflect several years ago, there was a group of come artists based in Holland who were duping Canadian farmers.  They routed their illegally gotten gains through Bermuda or one of these countries and ended up spending much of the money in Paris.
Because these young men, this gang was actually African, the gang of their scam was Nigerian.  They were Ghanaian.  And the jurisdictional claims can be complicated.  The gang was based in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, and the victims were based in Canada.  The proceeds were laundered through Bermuda or the Bahamas or somewhere like that and the proceeds or the spending of so these illicit gains was in Paris.  And Africa was nowhere in the loop.  The point is if you call it a Nigerian 419 scam, even though they were Ghanaians, the Nigerians have no right to interfere in a case.  Who would have primary jurisdiction?  Is it where the criminals are located?  Is it where the victims are?  Is it where the money was transacted?  Or is it where the money was actually spent?
So it does get complicated but I think the key notion of Dr. Jimson is correct that at the end of the day in order for you to deal with these kinds of crimes, you need international cross‑border, not just cooperation but collaboration.
Thank you.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Thank you very much, Abdul‑Hakeem.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: I see Vladimir has his hand raised.
>> VLADIMIR RADUNOVIC: Been the norms, basically, the discussion on the applicability of the international law, there is a dialogue on due diligence by the states.  So whether the states are obliged to prevent attacks coming from their it territory.  And these attacks are coming from their territory.  We need to agree how the countries ‑‑ there is a norm about that, how the countries react when an attack comes from there.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Thank you.  I can see that the panelists are already addressing some of the questions.  We will try to go through the ones that are not addressed.  I think we have one that was early listed by Maurillia and Dr. Alison already elaborated on that.
I don't know if the panels have any more maybe input on the question of the World Trade Organization and the African free trade agreement contribution by Maurillia.
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Perhaps I could just elaborate a little bit on that.  I see that she did respond.  I think these issues that really require international cooperation in order to deal with the cross jurisdictional issues really ‑‑ you know, they are complex.  They are intersecting and I think Maciel makes a point, on the moratorium on the eCommerce negotiations and the differing positioning of different countries in Africa, and the complete lack of response, and how this impacts on the African continent or the free trade agreement which is now committed to looking at eCommerce in the next round of negotiations, that was previously not on the agenda.  Obviously these global developments are ‑‑ have enormous impact on each other.
To the point of dealing with cross‑jurisdictional issues whether they are security issues or content issues, fake news issues.  Cambridge analytical disruption, abuse of data governance for disruption of elections, these can really only be dealt with by, you know, the information regulator in the UK, actually taking a position against Facebook because that's where data was released and fining them appropriately.
I would just urge us to engage far more actively in these international negotiations and not because they always necessarily suit us or what is being proposed but at the moment, essentially, we are not only recipients of the outcomes of those which often don't represent our interests, but we also need to be far more participatory in actually setting the agendas.  So at the moment, we might collaborate on certain aspects, but what we would need to do even more and obviously through efforts of the African Union, is actually begin to set the agendas on these things.
As I said these issues of data governance, these are new issues for all countries.  There's no reason why Africans shouldn't be representing those interests very early on and actually setting the agendas on these things.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Thank you, Dr. Alison.  And the next contribution is actually a question from Mr. Peter King, and his question is related to the Malabo Convention, and it feeds into Mr. Hasan's question and I will combine them and it's for Mr. Moctar to address these questions on the efforts that African Union is deploying to promote the Malabo Convention and also to ensure that more countries are actually signing this very important instrument.
So Mr. Yedaly, would you like to share this?
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Well, I believe for the last three years ‑‑ actually four years, since the assigning of the Malabo Convention, in Malabo in 2014, there's nothing that the African Union Commission has not done to have this ‑‑ this 15 ratifications.  That starts every year in the Marching of the summit of the head of state, there is advocacy activity that's undertaken to promote the convention and request the leadership to take into consideration the Malabo Convention and sign it and our legal council is opening every year a session for signing documents and we have more signing than ratifications.  Now one has to understand that there is two steps.  One is the signing, which is most of the Member States have done.  They have done more than 25 signature probably, however, the ratification is an international process that is valid from country to country.
And sometimes within the country, there is no priority for really putting that forward to organizers in charge the ratification process and some countries they have to go through the parliament.
In some countries it has to be led by the Minister of Foreign Affairs rather than the minister of ICT.  So every country depend and has its own process.
We have been promoting this at every single ministry conference, every single workshop, every single situation that we use, like this one and other webinars, but unfortunately, there's something that is happening at the national level that needs somebody within the country to take the leadership, the department in charge of that and push it through the parliament or through the ratification channels within the country in order to do that.
But, again, we will continue with the help of everybody.  We will not give up on this, but we will continue again. 
The good thing is no one ever has said anything or put any reservation on the ratification itself, the content, and the usefulness, the principles that are there.  So that is the good thing.
The bad news is nobody is taking care of, you know, the process itself.
So ‑‑ but we'll continue to push.  Over to you.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Thank you very much, Mr. Moctar Yedaly.
There is many more questions on the Malabo Convention, but may I shift a little bit.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Go ahead, shoot, shoot, shoot and please give me ‑‑ give me just Moctar, not Mr. Yedaly.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Okay, Moctar.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: I love that.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: I'm trying to take the questions in chronological order, but yes, it makes sense to link to the Malabo Convention.  The next question is the effort to work basically with the RECs and what type of collaboration and coordination is happening at the moment between UC and the RECs?
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: That's a very good question.  I have heard this question somewhere else.
Now, again ‑‑ and the regional economic communities, the eight of them that are recognized by the African Union are considered the building blocks of the integration of the African continent, principle number one.
Principle number two, they asserted they are considered as part of the whole AU process in terms of adoptions of text and implementation of policy and decisions.  Every year, there is a meeting between the leadership of the RECs and the African Union.  Every year.
At my level which is in the ‑‑ not the level of the commissioners, for instance, we have included the RECs in every single project we are taking care of.  Every time there is a project that requires the implementation at the national level the RECs are sitting in the steering committee of that project.  So there's a very good cooperation at the technical level, at the high level.  We're probably in the middle management, at the level of commissioners and so on and then we are working on that.
But comment that RECs are ‑‑ they don't have a boss like the African Union chairperson is not their not boss.  They have their Member States and they have their rules, but we tend to use all the agreement that has been signed between us as an African Union Commission and the RECs and every one of them have signed very good memorandum of understanding about how to work together and how to implement things.
And we hope that we will continue to learn from the processes and create and enhance our cooperation in order to implement projects and decisions and policy at the regional level, using the bottom down approach and ‑‑ bottom up approach and top down approaches.  Over to you.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Thank you very much, Moctar and we do have a number of very good suggestions on the chat window about how to promote the Malabo Convention at the local level and beyond that the official ministerial meetings.  I think have one suggestion to allocate focal points in each country where work is needed, and I think that's a very good suggestion to take into account.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Can I respond to that?
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Of course you can.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Well, there was a suggestion from some RECs to have the African Union chairperson writing directly to their chairs, but also remember, that the PRIDA has national focal points in each and every country.  We have now out of the 55 members of the AU, I believe we do have something that approaches the 50s.  So we have a good number of focal points and that is a good suggestion and I'm inviting the PRIDA project managers, and some of them are now here, in participating and listening to review that opportunity to help us to promote the Malabo Convention, using those focal points that are designed ‑‑ designated in the framework of PRIDA, but if there is a need for a specific focal point on cybersecurity, you will be allowed to do that.  You will be open.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Now that you are presenting the PRIDA program, we have two questions and I think we do have the team present in this session, and they can address the question on what is the role of PRIDA in developing the local capacity of CERTs in Africa and I will merge it with the question on how PRIDA could assist the OSC in accelerating the capacity building in Africa.
Adil?
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: No, no, let me address that too.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Okay.  Perfect.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: The design of the PRIDA did not really address the matter of cybersecurity and that is because not ‑‑ not because of our willingness to do it, but because of the funding part from our partners.  Which PRIDA is 100% funded by the European Union and been the European Unions, the departments who are dealing with the PRIDA have never dealt with the cybersecurity issue and that's why it did not address the issue of cybersecurity.  That doesn't mean that they don't have programs related to the cybersecurity.
As we speak, I currently design a program on how to help each and every country to have their answer.  We are in the assessment phase and we believe ‑‑ with believe we are in the assessment phase and we believe before the end of the year, we will be able to mobilize resources to help our Member States.  Remember, we have three objectives, one is cyber strategy and we have three pillars of over to you.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: I would like to remind everyone to keep their eyes on the chat.  There's an interesting discussion between Marila, and Alison to the cybersecurity strategies.
I will take a question from Mr. Xing Lee, and he asked about the institutional arrangements for transborder data flow to support the data flows again the COVID‑19 pandemic.
I don't know who of our panelists.  I think Mr. Abdul‑Hakeem is raising his hand.  Maybe you want to take this question Dr. Abdul?
>> ABDUL-HAKEEM AJIJOLA: Actually, I don't want to take that particular question, because I don't have a good answer.  As a very, very important question.  Forgive me.
Really the area I wanted to touch on was something that ‑‑ hello.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Yes, we can hear you loud and clear.
>> ABDUL-HAKEEM AJIJOLA: Okay.  Okay.  The area I wanted to touch on is an area that I think is a bit uncomfortable for us and probably something the African Union itself would not want to directly speak about.  Why are African nations hesitating in adopting and ratifying.  I think that Moctar has outlined some cogent reasons.  And the other reasons, such as the Malabo Convention in some ways would put some restraints now for many of us, positive restraints on African governments, but governments don't see them positive.  As we speak in Nigeria, we are debating or rather the national assembly is debating legislation to be imposed on social media, and so some of those potential legislations might be at variance with the privacy provisions of the Malabo Convention.  And this is one of the key reasons why some African countries are a bit hesitant.
Now, of course, you still to need to continue the awareness so they see a bigger picture and they understand that some ever these limitations on social media will impact negatively on the development of the digital economy.  Part of the onus is on us to educate them.
Don't forget, one or two African countries have imposed Internet shutdowns.  I think it's important to realize that some of these notions and ideas may not be well aligned with the aspirations and intent of the Malabo Convention.  So while as great as the Malabo Convention is, as necessary and as important as it is, I think it's also important to understand that there might be some underlying hesitation, because of theism pack of social media.  Many governments blame social media to embark on demonstrations.  Meanwhile, the African leaders are not solving the underlying ‑‑ the real underlying problems that make people or drive people to go and demonstrate.  We have to keep this in mind.  Thank you.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Thank you very much.  Just to remind everyone, we have four minutes left on this situation and we have five questions open questions.  I see that ‑‑ we need to wrap up this session as well.  Please go ahead.
>> NNENNA IFEANYI-AJUFO: Okay and at the same time, I will touch on the question of GDPR.  Thank you Mr. Abdul‑Hakeem.  I will follow on on that point.  I understand that this is more of political concerns but then we must not excuse behavior that is not responsible by states and it takes me to discuss the GDPR, now the GDPR in Europe, actually affects individual states' concerns and behaviors but at the same time, it's been implemented.  So I think it goes back to states understanding what is responsible, and I think the Malabo Convention is trying to achieve that.
So there are older legislations in other parts the world which have been implemented and states ratify those.  We can understand why the states do what they do and it goes back to the style of governance in Africa.
I will stop there because I have 30 seconds.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: Thank you very much.
I think Mr. Xing Lee still doesn't have his question answered on the arrangements ‑‑
>> NNENNA IFEANYI-AJUFO: Can I talk on that?  Sorry.  We have never needed, you know, cooperation, transborder data flow as much as we need it now to cope with the pandemic, addressing it from the self‑perspective.  And institutional frameworks will work very well in ensuring transborder, particularly from parts of Africa, which at times we feel that the pandemic rate is under reported.  So, yes, if there is that institutional framework, it will allow the global caption.  And it goes back ‑‑ cooperation and it goes back to Abdul‑Hakeem touched upon it from an international perspective.  We must look at that collaboration if I can take the word he used, and push further for a transborder regulated unified transborder flow of data.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Hanane.  We are almost out of time.  And I think there were a couple of questions that were very pertinent and important.  Number one question, I think I just go quickly to answer these two questions.  One question pertaining to having subsector of the economy.  The second question pertains to ‑‑ if I just get my thought clear.  Yeah.  What models do the African ‑‑ it's considered ‑‑ the governments that we consider the US model or the China models.  With err not considering either.  We are trying to do our own model.
So I'm going to assume that Nnenna and Abdul‑Hakeem spoke to this.  And so 30 minutes, please to wrap up the ‑‑ to give your final closing comments.  Thank you very much. 
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: You mean 30 seconds, not 30 minutes.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: 30 seconds.  Yes.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Because 30 minutes, I can stay here and talk about whatever.
>> HANANE BOUJEMI: We have an extra five minutes.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: 30 seconds.  You have to take that.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Well, the issue of trust is extremely important as Africans to really ‑‑ (Speaking French) ‑‑ our development issues.  We cannot allow ourselves to miss the opportunity to use the ICT ‑‑ (Overlapping speakers).
(Speaking French).
Adil, could you assign him as an interpreter.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Can you stop interpretation for now, because this is just the final comments from the panelists.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY: Okay.  I was saying just quickly that Africa cannot allow itself to miss the opportunity of digitalization in order to address its development in different way.
We have been conceiving our educations approach for the last 50 years and we still haven't met the minimum requirement and so we have in the health sector, et cetera.
The ICTs have the opportunity in order to really change that, leap frog in every sector we wanted, and hence we need for that very stable trusted digital space and enhance the issue of trust and cybersecurity in the service is extremely vital and important.
I said at the beginning, it's the digital transformation is really a survival opportunity for us as Africans.  Over to you.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Thank you very much.  Alison?
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Absolutely, Moctar.  And absolutely critical to post‑COVID reconstruction.  If we don't put this in place, we have an opportunity now to kill the slate and get things in place and start again.
I wanted to quickly build on what Nnenna and Abdul said about the data flows and the lack of responsiveness to the Malabo Convention.  COVID‑19 has really just highlighted things that we needed to have in place anyway.  So the importance about COVID for the cross‑border flows of data for COVID purposes, is just ‑‑ it just highlights the need for us to have it full commerce, you know, full research, full public health.  So these are just things that really emphasize our need to do.  That making that possible means having regimes that are harmonized and having regimes that can offer reciprocal protections, safety and security protections, data protections and then, of course, rights frameworks which really goes to the question that was going on in the discussion and Abdul was responding to in relation to the Malabo Convention and the accession to it.  At the moment, we are getting security to the security and the conventional side.  There's a freedom of expression that will build the trust for the digital economy and society.  It will prevent the known harms that we know accompany it without anonymized information, without data protections and it will highlight the data that that's what you need to build trust in these environments.  The data governance systems, the data government systems provide us with some of the risks that we know are there.  Unless we put in these in place, we are not ‑‑ we are simply not going to get the benefits that the digital transformation is pushing for.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Many thanks.  Vladimir. 
>> VLADIMIR RADUNOVIC: Simply to ask for two hours for this conversation.  I like it.
But I think it's more of a priority to have states more informed and involved in the dialogue through African Union, rather than necessarily going for a position, because, I mean, European Union doesn't have common position on many things, yet it's raising the states who can actually be able to get more involved in the national dialogue, synchronize their own work and position within the union and that's wait to step up.
The second comment is related to Nnenna and I think it's the key, is the enforcement.  We can have as many papers and documents as we want, but if it stays a dead piece of paper, it doesn't make any sense.  I come from Balkans.  I know how it works.  We just tick the box.  We have many policies.  It doesn't get implemented.  There are so many things that we can do on the lower level, while developing the framework and the policies and one of those, I mentioned is security the devices and the environment.  There are many things we should be talking about how Africa with boost trust beyond just coming to the documents which is necessary.  Back to you.
>> ADIL ISMAIL SULIEMAN: Thank you very much, Vladimir.  There's some concern by the people who ask questions that the question, I think we can answer the question after the session:  Thank you very much for participating and actively contributing to this very rich discussion.  We apologize for the timing.  I think we have very short time, but I hope ‑‑ we are glad that we addressed some of the key issues that have been presented here.  And I want to thank you very much for your participation and have a nice evening.  Thank you very much.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-ws53-right-to-play-online-gaming-and-child-rights^^

   >> VINCENT MWANDO:  Welcome.  My name is Vincent Mwando.  So welcome.  And remember the session is governed by UN's ‑‑ just a second.  Just a second.  All right.      Wenying, when you join just let me know.  We need an interpreter to just confirm.  If you are around, please let me know.  Thank you.  Welcome, everyone.  
   >> XIUYUN DING:  Okay.  We are testing now.  And when we are okay I will tell you.  Thank you.  
   >> Okay.  Welcome.  
   >> XIUYUN DING:  Thank you. 
   >> WENYING SU:  (Off microphone).  
   >> Hello.  Not clear yet.  Not clear yet.  Not clear yet.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Still having issues.  Can you hear me now?      (Video). 
   >> Please, Wenying, if you can hold the microphone some distance from your mouth.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Can you hear me?  Is it not a good quality audio or you can't hear me at all?  
   >> Now it is better.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Much better?  
   >> Yes.  
   >> WENYING SU:  So can we ‑‑ okay.  We will start.  Okay.  Good afternoon.  Maybe good morning or good evening, depends on which time zone you are in.  We are here at the Workshop No. 53, online gaming and child rights of IGF 2020.  We are here with Chinese panelists Livestreaming from Beijing.      And we welcome everyone participating for this workshop.  We have a wonderful, knowledgeable panel today.  And I can't wait to have a lively and interesting discussion.      This topic is online gaming and child rights.  We know that online play is major and games share a long history of humankind.  Lead a secluded life, digital technology, to some extent ‑‑ maybe you are an enthusiastic gamer yourself, curious mind.  After all, online games makes multi‑billion businesses, change the way we relax and socialize and brought about a lot of questions we don't have clear answers yet.      We have questions as to how to evaluate the impact of online gaming of children.  We hear a lot of discussion about addictive laws, harmful content and sexual views and exploitation and gaming platforms and this terrifies parents.  We are here to dive in to these topics, highlighting a child rights perspective.  Before we start let's watch a short video that we produced so you can get a glimpse of what children and adults think about online gaming.  So the video.      (Video). 
   >> But, of course, as a parent you want to monitor types of video games.  There are video games that perhaps promote the violence or any other questionable behavior.  
   >> WENYING SU:  That's a very informative discussion.  And we hear a lot of these today.      So without further ado let me introduce my panelists.  I will start with the three who are physically here.  First our child representative Yufan Bai, a 13‑year‑old who enjoys writing, painting, gaming.  She also has online chat with 30,000 fans.  Now we have Dr. Jing Sun.  She is here as a renowned game scholar but also happens to serve as the director of the game research center, Perfect World, business segments of games, movies and TVs and educational product.  And then Lanky Zheng, assistant general manager of Tencent which needs no further introduction that knows a thing or two about gaming industry.  We have Amanda Third from the Institute of Culture and Society.  She is an internationally renowned expert in child‑centered participatory research.  Hi, Amanda.      And we have Manisha Shelat, digital platforms and strategies.  And she is at the Center for Development and Management and Communication.  Last but not least we have Professor Pete Etchells.  He is a Professor of Psychology at Bath University from UK.  His research looks at the behavior and facts of playing video games.      So let's kick off today's discussion with Peter's presentation on gaming addiction which is a very heated topic here in China but also globally.  And one of the top concerns for parents.  So Pete, the floor is yours.  
   >> PETE ETCHELLS:  Good morning, everyone.  Thank you for having me here.  I can't ‑‑ I'm not a cohost at the minute.  So I'm not able to share my slides.  
   >> Just a second.  
   >> PETE ETCHELLS:  Are you able to change that for a second so I can put my slides up?  
   >> Done.  Done.  Just try again.  
   >> PETE ETCHELLS:  Brilliant.  Thank you.  Yes.  That's done the trick.  So I just set these up for everyone.  Wonders of modern technology.  Right.  There we go.  Brilliant.  So yeah.  I just wanted to talk very briefly today and I know we have got a lot of really great speakers and not much time really, but I wanted to talk briefly about the gaming addiction and the science of what we currently understand about it.      So I think the first thing to say is that there have been worries about technology going back to at least ancient Greek times and very famously it was ‑‑ the new technology that would stifle free thinking and education was being developed.  And they were talking about books.  As soon as any new technology has come out over the decades and hundreds of years we have seen worries about them.  And there is a whole other talk we can have about that, but we have seen talks about screen time and social media and this worry about whether video games are addictive or not.  
And this came about largely as the World Health Organization announced in 2018 they were including something that is a gaming disorder in ICD 11, the international certification of diseases.  This led to a whole series of stories in the news about games like Fortnight being addictive.  It happened to be a particularly big game at the time.  And that's a scarey thing to hear.  It is scarey to hear that this hobby that lots of people do could be a bad thing.  But there are some problems are research in gaming.  It is useful to know a little bit about the back history of it.      World Com gaming addiction has been around as long as gaming has been around.  We usually get doctors and clinicians writing a report for an academic journal where they describe an encounter they had with somebody who came to their clinic exhibiting problems with playing video games.  A classic case in 1981 of a report describing a case of Space Invaders obsession.  These sorts of reports started to spark a small concern that gaming is not a good thing for people.  There are a few cases like this.  
In the late 1990s and early 2000s more research.  More research in this area takes the form of a survey.  You give them questions about gaming and add up a response.  And you get a score between 1 and 100 to make a decision of what sort of score would be high enough to say that that person has a problem with gaming.  That's fine as a starting point.  
Those questionnaires that were originally developed were based on surveys well‑known for addiction, such as gambling or drug addiction.  Some people in the gaming population might exhibit a certain set of criteria or show a certain set of symptoms that you can assume to be gaming addiction because they look like the same sort of symptoms that manifest in other sorts of addictions.      Now the problem with that sort of approach is that it is not necessarily the case that gaming addiction if it actually exists looks the same, is something like drug addiction or gambling addiction or another sort of behavioral addiction.  If you use a similar set of questionnaires for both and somebody scores highly on a gaming addiction questionnaire, you might incorrectly conclude that they are addicted to games when, in fact, they are not.  It might be easier to unpack that with an example.  There are lots of criteria whether to decide if somebody is addicted to gaming or not.  Here is a list that the World Health Organization implemented.  Increasing priority giving to gaming to the extent it takes precedent over life interest and daily activities.  
If we were to substitute the word gaming with drugs, probably we would be in agreement that's a reasonable check to make.  If you are using drugs so much that you are not doing other hobbies that you used to enjoy that's a problem.  But the problem with using that criterion for games is that games are a hobby.  If we substituted the word gaming with golfing instead, arguably we wouldn't be as worried.      For this sort of reason and other scientists were fairly split when the World Health Organization made these announcements a few years ago.  Some welcomed the idea and argued it was a good thing.  By formally calling this a disorder people who were experiencing genuine harm can get access to treatment, become eligible for insurance and get financial support and things like that.  Other scientists and I include myself in this camp argue that this was perhaps a little bit too premature.  That we don't know enough about gaming addiction, what it looks like for a formal diagnosis to be made.  
One of the arguments that we made is that basing the criteria for gaming disorder on other types of addictions risks missing the symptoms that might be more representative of gaming addiction itself.  And it is the sort of approach that assumes that games are harmful in and of themselves.  But games are by their very nature immersive and interactive hobbies.  The standard criteria for addiction doesn't seem to sit well for a benchmark for harmful engagement.  If we don't have a clear set of criteria for diagnosing gaming addiction it makes it hard to get a good idea of how many people are suffering from.  Lots of studies have been done.  But because they all use different ways of categorizing the problem, the estimates vary quite wildly.  Some studies suggest as much as 46% of the gaming population shows signs of addiction.  Others suggests that the number is as low as 0.2% with the real number somewhere much closer to that 0.2% number.  And that results in lots of problems.  Like we end up potentially misdiagnosing people.  We are treating video games abnormally when in fact, they are not causing any harm.  Or we underdiagnose, we miss the people who do actually have a problem.  All of these things are an issue.      So from a scientific point of view the jury is still very much out on whether gaming addiction is an actual thing.  It is worth pointing out that no scientist are saying there aren't some cases where playing video games is having a demonstrably harmful effect on someone's life.  The problem is that we don't have a clear idea yet of who those people are and whether or not it is video games is the causal reason behind any of the negative issues in their life.  So I think there is a risk particularly that if games developers don't understand the psychological affects that playing games could have on their player base they risk walking down a dangerous path.  
Now look at one of those briefly in a moment, but aside from understanding the responsibilities that developers have in the way that they make games I think it is also important that they show a social responsibility in the way they are marketed.  I play a lot of mobile games.  And I very often see adverts during game base.  There is a disconnect here because developers can't market their games as addictive and then get upset when Government policies curb their use.  
One of the most heated debates in centers on the way they are monetized and a lot of developers make their money not from the initial sales of games but in the form of micro transactions.  Loot boxes are outfits that you get for characters.  Some are common and others are much rarer.  And those are the desirable ones.  We have seen studies over the past couple of years, surveys of thousands of gamers asking them about their online gaming habit, whether they buy loot boxes as well as asking them about potentially problematic gambling behaviors.  This study shows paying for loot boxes and levels of problematic gambling.  It doesn't matter how loot boxes are implemented.  There are thousands of ways that you can do that.  As long as you have to pay for them from this day there seems to be a relationship.  This sort of effect is correlation in nature.  It doesn't tell us what causes what.  But in a sense it doesn't matter which way it is.  It is a problem either way.  So either it is the case that loot boxes cause problematic gambling behaviors to start in which case it is sort of a gateway to problematic gambling or it is the case that people who already have problems with gambling are more likely to buy loot boxes in which case games companies might be inadvertently exploiting games to make money.  This is that data from March this year that looked at relationships between loot box buying behaviors and excessive buying and psychological distress.  
The interesting thing here while positive correlations were shown between buying loot boxes and psychological distress the relationship between loot box spending and affect how we feel wasn't as clear‑cut.  Spending showed positive correlations and positive effect as well.  If you look at the ‑‑ this in terms of relationship with problem gambling, people at higher levels of problematic gambling spend more on loot boxes.  But they also spend more on other aspects of video games, nonrandomized game purchases.  
So one suggestion is some gamers who have enough disposable income to comfortably spend on loot boxes also spend more on games because they enjoy doing them.  It is a greater predictor of positive mood.  I know I have run over a couple of minutes.  Should we be worried about gaming addiction?  For a large part, I don't think so.  But we shouldn't give games a free pass.  It is likely in day‑to‑day lives generally we will become addicted to video games.  That doesn't mean that there aren't people out there for whom gaming becomes a big problem, but we don't have a clear idea of who those people are and how many there are.  
One particular problem we need to be aware of at the minute not so much that video games are good or bad but whether specific aspects of video games that need tweaking or not.  Mechanisms in gaming like gambling that have an effect.  The take home here we need to take greater responsibility.  From a scientific perspective, in games development greater social responsibility as well.  I'm going to stop there.  Thank you very much for listening to me.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Thank you, Pete.  I agree with your conclusion and we should be mindful, maybe a little bit worry but don't panic.  And still so much more to learn about this issue in the community, produce more solid evidence and more importantly communicate them effectively so we could guide policy making and industry practices.  So now we mention, we look at connected games is to view it as the new media, a way of storytelling and art form.  In this sense let's hear about how Manisha explores this as an expert on media literacy and communication.  You can start, Manisha.  And please try to limit your presentation within ten minutes.  Manisha?  
   >> MANISHA SHELAT:  Yes.  Can you hear me?  
   >> WENYING SU:  Yes, yes.  
   >> MANISHA SHELAT:  Okay.  Great.  So as Wenying said I am going to bring the media literacy perspective to my talk today.  And I also bring a little bit of the angle, you know, from the part of the world where I'm from and that's India and larger South Asia.  So I should confess that I'm not a gamer.  But I'm a media literacy practitioner and also a scholar of digital cultures of young people.  As part of my work in these areas I have actually witnessed four shifts in how we treat games because when I look at this part of the world and I'm sure it is also true in other parts, is that gaming is not now considered, you know, something that a small group of weird people engage in.      It has become very much a part of the larger culture.  And so I believe that if we don't pay attention to these four shifts which have gradually occurred over the last couple of decades, we will still stick to the media literacy approaches which were older and work will not remain relevant anymore.      So these four shifts are gaming has now become a serious business.  And by serious business I mean a serious occupation as well as you know from hard core money point of view.      The second shift is that parents have changed.  The third shift is the gender gap is reducing but the issue's connected with gender and gaming are not reducing.  Games themselves are changing.  So we have to include a lot of new versions of games and gaming and new game cultures.      So I will very briefly touch upon these four shifts and then we will leave the details for the discussion later.  So let's look at some of these numbers.  So if you look here, Asia leads the world in the number of gamers.  And Southeast Asia is the most leading region of the world as far as gaming is concerned.  But even India is among the top ten gaming countries in the world, 365 million users and a good 45% growth in volume.      And we also looked at, you know, the projections for global gaming market are really, really huge.  So why we have to pay attention to this is that we have to make sure that, you know, because there is money, so much money in gaming.  There are a lot of vested interest that will also come in.  And then if we want to protect child rights then we have to look at the business angle there.  
The second shift that I was talking about, how parents have changed.  So I ‑‑ if you see these two pictures, one is that of a game called the Blue Whale and the other is PUBCG.  And these two games have given sleepless nights to a large number of parents in India.  So there has always been this reservation about the games being the best of times and games being addictive and having a very serious impact on children.  And parents have bought this completely in India.  As my Wisconsin colleague pointed out that so many of these parents don't even know what gaming is, have never played any game but they have very strong views about how games are harmful to their children.      At the same time now we have a new generation of parents who are also entering the field.  And recently I came across this survey which said that 59% of the respondents said they spent roughly the same amount of time playing games and 24% confessed they spend more time playing games online than their children.  It doesn't mean these parents are critical about games or they know what games to choose for their children and what good games do or not negative things that games can do.  Because these parents are playing games means they are game literate.  We have to work with both these groups of parents, parents who are ‑‑ have never played a game and are very worried about gaming and parents who play a lot of games but yet are not media literate.      Sorry.  Yes.  Finally, you know, the same survey gives a very, you know, startling data that in India, 88% of the men considered online games to be the best past time.  And I admit this is a small sample, like 1500 adults.  So we can't just buy these findings without a pinch of salt but even other surveys have definitely shown that the gender gap is reducing.  There are more and more women who are active gamers now and then you know that that's the small percent, 61% of the men in this survey are hard gamers.  They would skip sleep, other activities just to play games.  So this graphic here shows data on gaming.  
And finally, the fourth shift is that games themselves are changing.  So earlier we only knew about a few games and like violent, shooting games.  But that has now given way of such a valid landscape.  So there are games for education.  There are games for learning professional skills.  There are advertising games.  A lot of gamification of marketing.  So interactive marketing.  And then there are, of course, games like Avatars and gambling.  And then really serious e‑sports.  So now when we talk about media literacy we have to make sure that we address this entire landscape.  And within that we find out when games benefit and when games are really harmful.  So, for example, as (inaudible) said there is definitely violence, sexualization, gambling.  There are all these risks but not with every games.  These are the four major shifts.  And if I have a couple of minutes I will just talk about what we need to do with parents and children.  And now because games are becoming such a serious part of our culture, media literacy has to also extend to teachers, game designers, media owners and policymakers.      But, you know, what is actually needed is a serious dialogue between all these stakeholder groups.  Because a lot of problems are caused because, you know, they think so differently about gamings.  They don't see eye to eye about what games can do, you know, good or bad.  So I think first thing in media literacy is to have a serious dialogue about gaming cultures about all these different stakeholders.      So finally I have taken, you know, this very interesting structure of game literacy from a scholar, from VN.  In his 2016 work he gives a very nice structure to address media literacy is that that is learning in games, you know, you can learn a lot of things, like communication skills, develop agency, creativity, technological literacy.  Game design also involves a lot of learning.  And then there is a gamification where games help you learn all different concepts.  So I would leave at this just charting out the whole landscape of media literacy.  And then I think we'll address the details when we discuss this.  Thank you.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Thank you.  Thank you, Manisha.  Excellent time keeping as well.  And very interested about the last slide, four types of learning.  So let me turn to Dr. Jing Sun.  You have translated in to English the book.  It is very fitting for you to share your views next.  Elaborate on how if and gaming can empower children.  
   >> JING SUN:  The presentation or question?  
   >> WENYING SU:  Presentation.  
   >> JING SUN:  Okay.  It is a very honor to participate in this panel.  I'm talking about online games and empower children.  Great.  Thank you.  And my topic today is connecting gaming.  First of all, I want to make a very short ‑‑ can you view my slides there?      Okay.  So my talk today is connecting gaming.  How online games empower our children.  And when speaking of children's rights, applying them it is not just only about protecting their rights.  I think we have to teach them how to play games or in other words, literacy and also we have to teach them how to protect themselves.  Thank you.      Much better.  Sorry.  Yes.  I think again it was very important.  Quite agree with Manisha's point of view and I want to share my views about this topic.  First of all, I want to share some facts about child online gaming in China because we are living in China.  And we have a huge population of gamers, especially youth, teenagers and preyouth ‑‑ even very young, young generation and also the old generation.      So first of all, China, how very huge, very high Internet coverage rate.  You can see more than 90% Internet coverage.  That means a huge majority of Chinese people can play online games in China.  And also they can see very little difference between city and country users.      And the second table is Internet participation.  We can see third high activities and online Internet activities in China for Chinese users.  That means we use Internet as their way to play games with their peers, their friends and maybe their family members.  The third table is about motivation.  This table is collected by ‑‑ 
   >> Hello.  Yes.  Just a second.  Please the mic, please slightly away from the mouth.  Okay.  Sorry, the mic at least some distance from the mouth.  
   >> JING SUN:  Okay.  Can you hear me now?  
   >> Yes, yes.  It is okay.  
   >> JING SUN:  All right.  Sorry for the inconvenience.  And the motivation is mainly about their relationship or social relationship with peers, their classmates and also the social purpose.  So I think in China children's online gaming motivation is basically based on their socialization in the neighborhood, in school and in their family.  And the third table is about time length.  We can see, no matter what days it was, during holidays, children, you know, are almost from 10% to 15% ‑‑ 20% maybe, 20% youth or children they play games for more than two hours which is a little bit wrong.  So if they play video games for this time, for a long time maybe they ‑‑ there are some problems or severe problems.  And just now we see some facts and numbers for Chinese gamers.  And now I want to share some participation or some categories of their gaming activities in this group.  I borrowed this mode from an American scholar called Professor Ito.  And she is a scholar at the University of California.  And her team wrote a book about media literacy and youth and children.      So they give us a mode about how children's gaming practice could be interanalyzed or analyzed or described in their daily lives.  First one is killing time.  And most children they play games just for killing time.  They take their games ‑‑ maybe riding the bus.  During this very short time they play games just for fun.  It is a harmless activity.  And the second one is hanging out.  Like they play games with their friends but it is also friendship driven, instead of interest driven.  And their competition's view on friendship and socializing with their peers is that of the game themselves.  And the third activity is recreational gaming.  In this part and we can see friendship driven turns in to ‑‑ becomes interest driven.  So ‑‑ according to their observation users are young males with that of girls based on their graphic research in America.  And also has ‑‑ it is recreational gaming activities or pathway to learn more about media and technology knowledge.  And the first mode is organizing and memorizing.  It is more like institutionalizing or competitive activities.  Just now we have lots of users in China.  And most of them are ‑‑ are in in this group.  And their activities could be capitalized as organizing.      In this activity they need more specialized technology and also the knowledge about gaming and they develop very, you know, power, power gaming activities.      And the final way it is augmented game play.  What does augmented games play mean?  It refers to activities of, you know, knowledge seeking and cultural production, including modification like cheat and also some kind of creativity ‑‑ creative activities.      So you can see children can use games to do lots of things from, you know, ranging from friendship interest activities to interest‑based activities.  And in this economy we see not only about children themselves, it is also about their peers, their parents.  And also their adult takers, also have producers, developers and game companies and also in China it is, especially in China we have a very strong influence from policymakers, from our Government.      Now in China I see the absence of this part, academia.  We need a much stronger game research in China right now.  That's why we started our connected game research in December.  We organized lots of activities, like seminars, talking about games.  And bringing the industry through scholar and students, bringing the international scholars and Universities, their institutions to organize ones.  We have also projects like game publications.      We offer our, you know, suggestions so some China based think tank and we introduce some good publications about, you know, game literacy, serious games and game analyzing in to China.  And we do some public lectures and also activities, introducing game literacy and help the parents and also the whole Chinese public to improve their game literacy.      We want to build a platform and an international community and also we want to produce some outcomes who can benefit to have some people, huge majority of people and have them to know games better.  That's why I bring this concept of connected gaming.  Originally this concept is from Professor Ming from the University of Pennsylvania.  But now I want to broaden this concept.  She uses this concept to describe a situation integrating games making and games playing but now I want to use connected gaming to describe a vision of including four different parts.  The first one is parents and educators.  I think the parents and educators they can follow these four steps.  First one is, you know, to know, to understand games.  Second of all, they have to have help their children to select games and then they need to play with the games better.  
Last they need to set a time limit.  That's for the parents and educators.  Then for producers in China we extremely need diverse products.  We need not only more produce ‑‑ not only ‑‑ more serious games and more educational ones.  We need to have safety for our children, for these young users.  And the final point is about productivity.  We have to develop more games to help them to change the pure entertainment in to creativity and productivity.  Have them to learn from games.  We have to ‑‑ we need more games about learning through playing or learning through, you know ‑‑ through participate, participating in different areas of game activities.  And the third part is about policymakers.  In China, as I said, our Government have a huge influence on the whole gaming ecology.  So I think our Government should, you know, support more funding and supports to game research, including the industrial innovations and also the public game literacy.  And for academia we need more international region plus more focus on China, Chinese contacts.  And also we have to bring region of lifelong education and give our readers more books and publications.      Okay.  So that's it.  Thank you.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Thank you, Dr. Sun.  Indeed concerted efforts from our sectors are needed.  And I also want to thank you as a games researcher to bridge knowledge and experience between China and the rest of the world.  And we have here today another industry representative, Lanky Zheng from Tencent.  Let's hear what he can tell us about views and practices about the biggest gaming company.  
   >> LANKY ZHENG:  Hi everyone.  As we all know with the rapid development of video games the impact of games on the development of teenagers has become a pressing issue.      Okay.  The increasingly open network environment is becoming a significant social force affecting teenager status, values and future.  As one of the most important achievements of digital technology video games have become the most widest use entertainment mode in this era.  But the society mass psychology is affected.  Teenagers are often the most sensitive group in society.  Growing up with gaming in their generation has positioned games as a unique and stable cultural element in children's lives.      By using game‑based interaction to guide teenagers learning and protecting children's right to play in the digital era, we consider the issues that every game company should be thinking about.  In April this year a game called Right Wronger appeared on the home page of the app store.  It is a very horizontal game.  It looks like a little bit of Sharpie alongside the independent games or beautiful commercial apps.  Only when players saw the first game level title, fight for your right to play did they realize it is a real significance of that app.      Developed by UNICEF it promotes protection of children's right to play safely.  Mr. Burt Hason of UNICEF pointed out that playing is the best way for young people to understand their rights.  Tencent has done a lot of work for functional play.  We have developed systematic game designs in many fields like traditional culture frontier and exploration and youth care.  We have released more than 20 functional games.  The everlasting recreate, interpret traditional culture.  As a bridge between traditional culture and the teams it forms a new way for inheritance and development of traditional culture.  
Here is another game, Mandarin tongue.  It was recently released.  It is a first charity game with language and culture press under the Minister of education.  This game offers a new learning master and pass for (inaudible) for Mandarin learning.  
As a parallel to space and time of the real world, games present children with an existing way of living reconstruct structure of reality and step across the borders.  According to a report titled Children's Right to Play, coauthored by Stu Lester, the attitudes, damage ‑‑ daily life of disabled children is constantly monitored and cared by adults.  And that greatly affects their participation in game space.  When children's right to physical playing is a hindrance, video games may play a very important role in leading their development and protecting them ‑‑ protecting their rights and interests.      Video games can also surmount the constraints of social and economic status, gender, place and time and provide children with more extensive social opportunities.  The simulation of the reality in video games help children to suspend limitations in real world, especially when difficulties that disabled children are facing explore the real world.  They strengthen entertainment and satisfaction.  The protection of children's rights begin to attract the worldwide attention.  In the past century the details of children's rights have continued developing.  In particular the children's rights to play has gradually gained value.      Different kinds of efforts have been made to ensure that right.  Tencent games has always existed on improving the system to protect use.  We hope to strengthen guidance.  Enable games to become company to teenagers in their healthy growth.      On June 23, the International Telecommunication Union launched new 2020 guidelines on child online protection.  It is a great honor that Tencent games have provided support for the protection of minors in the video game industry to reflect the significant changes of the network environment and digital landscape.  The 2020 child online protection guidelines is designed from the ground up.  The Internet, online games, machine learning and AI are all explained in the guidelines.  Meanwhile the update has also filled a major gap in the support of disabled children.  The Internet world is essential for full social involvement of disabled children.      In 2019 Tencent games upgraded its concept to explore more possibilities of the gaming and expand value from angles.  The Tencent interactive ‑‑ entertainment social value research is an integral publication within our company.  Since March last year six issues have been successfully published.  That journal is designed to convey game related cutting edge information, academic research and extensive game values to the industry and to the public.      The 2020 functional game industry report shows a model, functional games need solid academic, serious support at Universities and research institutions.  We hope that Tencent games can utilize its huge user base to open a development pass for the functional game industry.      Tencent games is actively developing partnerships with Universities, scientific research institutions and other organizations.  For example, Tencent games and Beijing University joined innovation, thinking of gamification this summer aiming to spread game thinking to colleges and Universities and explore its value in education and training.  In addition Tencent games is exclusively supporters of the first backbone teaching class jointly held by the Shanghai science and technology youth institute and Tongji University.  They learn how to apply the game concept and game mechanics to education and teaching training.  
Tencent games was pretty well recognized for creating learning scenarios, stimulating learner's interest, motivating their passion.  Nowadays video games are gradually (cutting out) media and also as an art.  Therefore the information connotations presented in video games may be more widely accessible.  It should be our mission as a game company to benefit as a whole community with some fruits of this new technology.      Regarding the development of teenagers, reality of network infringement and network of crimes hinder the realization of right to play.  The key to improve youth online protection is using multi‑stakeholder and child right centered approach.  We must gather strength of all key participants including young people, minors.  Tencent games will always exert great effort to promote the healthy growth of teenagers as a new technology.  Video games are in a child's daily life.  It is important to have a teenager realize how to creatively use the toys of this era.  The maturity of this market, new game technology provides a new perspective for the society to understand video games.      As exploration in the fields of medical treatment education and public welfare has begun to bear fruits, video games can be regarded as another way to protect a teenager's right to play.  Maybe that's what video games should mean.  We believe that games can be more than that.  Thank you.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Thank you.  Very interesting introductions.  I have ‑‑ I have actually quite (cutting out) I don't think we have time for that.  We have heard a lot from adults.  Now it is time to let a child speak.  I want to emphasize that Yufan, our child representative initially wrote her presentation in Chinese which is beautifully written but she decided to do it in English to make it easier for the international audience.  Kudos to you, Yufan.  And you may start.  
   >> YUFAN BAI:  Yes.  Gaming is part of my life.  I was once asked by my mom what does gaming mean to me.  It was a scarey question.  Does that mean I'm not allowed to play games anymore.  Gaming means a lot to me.  I really don't want games to go away in my life.  So I saw the browser question, what does gaming really mean to me.  I feel gaming is not as many other things.  They take it as a bad thing.  In their eyes gaming means two things.  First spend money and you will win.  In this kind of game you buy powerful equipment, weapons and skins.  Then you have a big advantage in the fight.  With the golden equipment, you can win every game and without money to top off.  You have great skills.  You will still lose.  In such a game your IQ and skills are of no or little value.  Only money matters.  There are games like these and many people play them.  However, I don't like them.  And I feel those people do not get to experience real interesting and fun games.      Second, games are easy to win.  You do some very simple stuff and gain a huge sense of achievement.  This kind of game will keep offering you new levels to encourage you to go on playing, to lose yourself in it, to sit in front of an iPad for five hours.  I have to say many games are like that.  This kind of game that can remind you that you have no achievement in life and only in games you can get things done.  Let people find the joy of achievement that they don't find in real life.  For example, gaming gives you a chance to find the real fun in making friends.  Gaming is a social topic.  When you get in to new schools with nobody you know, you can talk about your favorite games.  If someone happens to have the same like as you it gives you an opening.  
I enjoy talking about games same as my parents enjoy talking about dramas and shows.  On the other hand, gaming is a way of spending time with my friends.  Parents do if by sharing a feel, singing Karaoke and going to concerts.  For me I play video games with my friends.  We have big fun together.  Playing online while chatting and working together to defeat the enemy and discussing tactics.  Those are my social life.  Also gaming is a part of my cultural life.  I love musical games.  Notes are dropping down one by one on the screen.  You have to hit it right to make the right song.  And you tap the notes as if you were playing music.  I don't think there are any difference from Einstein playing violin after he did his science project.  We all enjoy music and don't have to take the great exam.      Another of my favorite game is Sky Children of Light.  In this game you can play instruments.  When someone is playing music, others will listen.  You can play a concert where everyone plays the same score with different instruments which is very exciting.      There are other games with plots.  The stories and characters are the same of those of movies, but the story will develop adhering to the player's mode to reach different endings.  My father said that ‑‑ this kind of game was like the best from the drama in the University theater.  We would finish the game, as if like having watched a movie or TV show.  You have a role in the game.  I believe the game is a great way for me to relax.  Same as parents watching a movie, reading a novel or playing bridge or going to the art gallery.      In the game we are as nervous as you watch a movie.  There are many amazing props and instruments as well as nice surroundings.  And the most interesting things you can be a part of it for yourself.  There are so many possibilities in the games.      I hope adults could not forbid kids playing games when they don't want to understand what games can be.  We have to correct one misunderstanding that games are designed for bad, lazy, stupid ones and target all the weakness of the human nature.  No, games are not like that.      It is for ‑‑ it is for everyone.  Those who enjoy friendships and art.  We should encourage people to play more games, different kind of games.  We should let them know that gaming is not only for killing time.  Not only for win.  It is for drive, for fun.  Thank you.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Thank you so much, Yufan, for this inspiring and honest sharing of your experience with games.  I dare say it shows a great deal of gaming literacy that we just talked about, a lot combined with good parenting children can benefit from good quality connected games.      So Amanda, I'm curious what you think about Yufan's story and beyond that what insights you have on this topic from years of working with children on their digital use.  
   >> AMANDA THIRD:  Thanks.  It is really great to hear Yufan speak like that from the heart about her experiences.  I thought what a lovely job she did of walking us through all the different feelings that she has about it and the different kinds of things that people say to her about her gaming practices.  And yes, thank you, Yufan.  That was wonderful.      And thank you, too, to UNICEF China and the China Federation of Internet Societies.  I am going to talk about child's rights and online gaming.  Children say around the world they use the Internet for communication, connection and sharing followed by information seeking and play, leisure and relaxation.      And they say these things are critical to their well‑being and enabling them to realize their rights in the digital environment.  So play in online settings as we have just heard from Yufan for children is among the most important benefits that children derive from their use of digital technology.  Children's online play enables them to develop important skills and decision making outcomes.  In online games they use literacy, numeracy, critical thinking and many other skills to solve problems or to strategize.  But children also enjoy games which is important and the end outcome in itself because that supports their well‑being.  
At the same time children's online gaming can expose them to a range of risks.  While the challenges of excessive gaming often pre‑occupy those who govern online gaming, there are a range of others pressing risks of harm that need to be mitigated in order to ensure that children can maximize the benefits of online gaming.      For example, as Sonia Livingston notes children often gain heavily commercialized and underregulated digital spaces, exposing them to forms of economic exploitation, and I was thinking here as Pete was earlier of loot boxes, gambling, advertising, as well as the harvesting of their data by third parties for purposes that don't always benefit the child.  Many children are participating in gaming platforms that are not designed specifically for children, which, of course, raises a series of questions about the extent to which they might be exposed to inappropriate content, practices and relationships with others, and whether they have the skills and capacities to deal with these risks of harm.      Of course, cyber bullying is known to be a problem on some gaming platforms.  And there are concerns that some gaming culturing reproduce forms of toxic masculinity.  How can we approach governance in this domain?  I'm going to highlight some ways that rights‑based approach can support the governance of online gaming.  The Convention on the Rights of a Child and the supporting mechanisms for interpreting the Convention are really important tools in guiding our decision making when it comes to governance of online gaming.      So the Convention stipulates rights of all children under the age of 18.  And it was signed in 1989 and it is the most widely ratified Treaty in the history of Human Rights Treaties.      The obligations ‑‑ it also spells out the obligations of duty bearers to achieve those rights for children.  And it provides a readymade and very robust framework for ensuring that governance can best support and enable children's rights.  There are three dimensions of children's right as laid out in the Convention.  They are provision, participation and protection.      These dimensions of children's rights must be carefully balanced as we think about how to address the governance challenges of online gaming.  It is widely acknowledged that online gaming may simultaneously infringe and support children's rights.  Online gaming perhaps most obviously impacts children's right to protection from harm, but also, of course, and importantly their right to rest, leisure and play.  But remembering that the digital environment is complex, there is much more at stake than these two rights.      Indeed, online gaming potentially impacts a very wide range of children's rights both positively and negatively and some of these are on your screen now.      But what governance efforts have to remember is the divisibility of children's right.  There is no hierarchy of rights.  Children's rights must be progressively realized in combination.  So we can't prioritize one over the other.      And I think this is very important in terms of thinking about how we approach governance wholistically, trying to think about all the different possibilities and threats for children's rights.      The Convention has four guiding principles; the right to nondiscrimination, the best interests of the child, the right to survival and development and the right to participation.  And additionally the Convention acknowledges children's so‑called evolving capacities.  This idea of protection of and guidance of the child must transform as she develops and grows.      So online gaming may influence the rights of different children uniquely in accordance with factors such as age, gender, geography, ability, culture, socioeconomic standing, or their level of exposure to the digital.      Children are not as much in this category.  Their experiences are shaped very deeply by the context in which they live.  Meaning they have different levels of access and they use technology in different ways.      More than that, children's experiences of online play differ according to their gender.  Boys as we have heard already today tend to play more of a particular kind of game online than girls.  And it is vital that we pay attention to this diversity to be able to act in children's best interests.  Indeed the Convention specifies or makes a particular provision for children with diverse needs.      Further, children of different ages use digital technology to play in a wide variety of ways according to their developmental stage.  Play tends to be highly repetitive in children's early years.  And it broadens out and diversifies as they grow older.  Indeed interpreting the Convention on the Rights of the Child for governance of online gaming can help guide us in thinking how to appropriately support children's evolving capacity, the ways they grow and change over time and the consequences of this for their rights.      The stereotype of the teenage gaming addict tends to dominate our thinking in policy and programming about online gaming.  As Pete just indicated earlier, for a small minority of children compulsive gaming can be a threat to their safety and well‑being.  For a majority of children it does not seem to be a key issue.  Some games do aim to keep children engaged, to compel them and we do need to regulate and make sure that these practices are ethical.      And indeed I think we need to remember, too, as Yufan just said that one of the real ‑‑ the things that children find most compelling about gaming online is their relationships with other children.  This is one of the spaces where children connect with each other in a world where often a lot of the spaces for them to connect have closed down.      At the same time though, I think one thing we need to remember is that children around the world have told us that the adults in their lives, parents in particular, but also teachers, Governments and others don't always according to children understand the value that digital technology has for the sense of play and meanings and pleasures that children derive from their online play.      Indeed in the most recent consultations that I have conducted they are calling on the adults in their lives to listen more carefully to their experiences, to really understand how and why children find meaning in online gaming.      And if we don't pay attention what we do is we risk stigmatizing and even criminalizing and certainly medicalizing as Pete gestured earlier at children's online gaming practices.      So we also need good, strong evidence‑based approaches.  There is a wealth of good research on children as online gaming and new research is emerging all the time.  I would point to the newly established digital futures in the UK which prioritizes play as one of the its key foci.  And I think it is lovely examples of the way that we might do evidence driven policy and practice.      But it is also true that to date a lot of the research again as Pete just gestured is not conclusive.  There is a strong need for further research that's driven by child rights approaches to inform the decisions that we make to support children's rights.      I think we also need to think carefully about what mechanisms of governance we can apply in order to build in safety in children's ‑‑ in the games that children use.  And a good example here is Legos approach.  While we can't always anticipate with certainty all of the affects that different children might experience in relation to online play.  We can ensure that minimum safety standards are built in to the games and the communities with which children interact.  Safety by design which was pioneered by the Australian office of the e‑safety commissioner lays out principles to guide developers whether small startups or multi‑national companies to embed safety tools.  We have enforceable standards around the children's data via gaming platforms.  And standards that acknowledge and protect children's rights.  
The way forward for governance in relation to online gaming is not entirely clear and needs to better channel high quality research, including research that consults with children.  Yufan has really illustrated if we listen to children they have very important things to say.  The Convention provides us with a tool for ‑‑ for achieving the aims of embedding children's rights in those online gaming spaces.      And beyond the Convention itself, of course, there is a series of general comments that guide the interpretation of the Convention.  I would point to the one on children's right to play, but also the forthcoming general comment on children's right in the digital environment.  These documents provide evidence‑based and principle guidance that can support states, NGOs, private enterprise and many other people with investments in these issues  to ensure that governance in relation to online gaming is informed by a rights‑based approach.      Together this collection of tools provides us with a strong way of navigating the challenges to children's rights and supporting children to maximize online gaming for realizing their full range of rights.  Thank you.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Thank you, Amanda.  Thank you for this very comprehensive unpacking of the relationship between child rights and online gaming.  We have probably another 15 minutes.  And we also have some questions.  But the time is very limited.  So I would just summarize some of the questions.  And the first one I think it is ‑‑ it is a bit broad.  But we will ask you to answer from your own different diverse perspective.      Many of you mentioned that all sectors, we all have a role to play.  But no one can deny that the gaming industry, the gaming companies have probably a bigger and most important role to play in terms to really fulfilling child rights.  And so I'd like to ask you to give a very short, one or two sentence answer about what do you think, what's the top priority, the one thing you want to see gaming companies do.  Probably start with our panelists virtually joining us.     Amanda, I will start with you.  One or two sentences.  
   >> AMANDA THIRD:  I think safety by design, or rights by design is what I would like to see ultimately to really see gaming companies pick up this idea that we embed children's rights at the very heart of gaming platforms.  That would be my tweet length response.  
   >> WENYING SU:  How do we do that?  It seems very ideal vision.  But one thing you want to ‑‑ the gaming company to do right now to reach that goal?  
   >> AMANDA THIRD:  Oh.  Yes.  So there is a toolkit that is available via the e‑safety commissioner's website which lays out how to implement a safety by design approach.  That would be my one wish is that gaming companies would pick that up.  Is that precise enough?  
   >> WENYING SU:  Yeah, yeah.  We will shortly share the toolkits and first pass them to Tencent in a perfect world.  And Pete, what do you think?  You mentioned responsibilities that came.  What's the one thing you like to see?  
   >> PETE ETCHELLS:  I think the most immediate thing that we can do is start sharing data with researchers.  So there is a lot of questions that we still struggle to answer as scientists about the basics of why people play games and what effects they have.  And there is a lot of rich diversity that game developers have.  There are issues around privacy and we need to push harder to share that data in a collaborative way.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Okay.  Great.  Manisha.  
   >> MANISHA SHELAT:  Yeah.  I would really like them to take the girl gamers more seriously.  And by that I don't mean that, you know, design accepted games for girls.  Like dolls and homes and not that.  But really make the space more empowering for girl gamers, you know, and like more safety, like less harassment so the real benefits, if these are the real benefits of gaming, they should be able to reap those benefits.  So that would be my take on it.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Thank you.  Thank you.  So now we will turn to our two industry representatives.  First I want to ask Dr. Jing Sun, because there are a lot of, you know, sort of masses or tools adopted by the games.  And one thing child rights community are very concerned about is, you know, maybe embedded marketing for children.  So what do you think of that?  
   >> JING SUN:  It is too commercial?  
   >> WENYING SU:  Yeah, yeah.  Yeah.  What do you think that companies should respond to such concerns?  
   >> JING SUN:  I think for now in our context, in China, we do have some problems about commercialized promotion and also commercial production.  However, luckily we see the higher game literacy in both female gamers and male gamers.  And now people are willing to play more creative games with more fun mechanics.  And I think it is really a cycle for me.  Just now as I said it is connected gaming ecology.  And with higher or rise of game, gamers taste I think it will push developers and production team to produce more creative works.  And finally, they will find a commercial promotion is not the only way to attract gamers.  And they have to provide better works or better games for them to help them to, you know, fill in their entertainment time and help them to do some functional tasks like in education, health and care and also other social society ‑‑ social responsibilities things.  Thank you.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Okay.  Thank you.  And a quick question for Lanky.  You talk about the efforts by Tencent on educational games.  Given the seriousness of such games are not so appealing to the children.  The learning and other benefits needs to be fully started.  What's your vision for serious games to make a difference?  
   >> LANKY ZHENG:  That's a serious term, functional game that we use to describe games with a different purpose.  But generally the public usually thinks there is other one or two famous games for commercial purpose in the market.  So this game is like one or two very famous title.  But I have read an Article called Origins of Serious Games and scholars have concluded that all games have a purpose to describe, to solve a problem in very similar, in real life.  So that's the target or the aim of game design.  So actually every game has its real purpose just like what we do in real life.  Just because we designed the game, you know, the game is designed to be so interesting, so entertaining, for entertainment.  So people noticed the entertainment part of the game and maybe not forget the other part of this game.  I can give you one or two examples.  First I just like I mentioned in my presentation the everlasting regret.  It is a very famous masterpiece created by Dre.  But it is an Asian art.  It is very hard for people to understand or feel the feeling about art.  So we have created a puzzling game, same name, same title and let all the players to feel feeding of imagery.  Even commercial games can do the same purpose, like very famous mobile game, everyone play this, I don't know the English name of it yet.  It is a very famous game, very popular.  There is a University in China called Public Security University.  The students there they are going to be police officers in the future.  They use this game to train their tactics.  They play the game.  Use the technology or skills, learn from the cars and try to test as a result.  
And then they can ‑‑ even they can review the video they have recorded to see if this tactics or plan works just as taught in the classroom.  I think the main problem is not what we use, what we deal with the games.  It is a problem can we find good games for proper users.  So it is a bigger challenge for all of us, like game companies, producers.  So even schools, parents, different kind of roles in society must participate in this progress and help or kind of users to find the right titles for them.  So I think this is final solution for this problem.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Thank you.  Thank you.  Last but definitely not least I want to invite Yufan to use one sentence to share her vision of gaming in the future.  
   >> YUFAN BAI:  I hope that gaming companies will make more creative, creative games.  And make us more happier, not rather than make them richer.  
   >> WENYING SU:  Make better games make us happy and not richer.  Very well said.      So, everyone, 90 minutes went by so quickly.  So much to talk about and so little time.  Now we are coming to the end of the workshop.  Thank you so much for all the panelists for your time and energy and insights.  And a big thank you to the IGF organizers and support team.  We could not have done this without you.  
Lastly the audience that stayed with us.  It was great to meet you virtually.  And we will hopefully continue this important discussion hopefully next time or in person.  Thank you.  
   >> Thank you.  
   >> WENYING SU:  End of the workshop.  Thank you, everyone. 
   >> Thank you so much.  Thank you so much.  And remember to ‑‑ there is a feedback e‑mail that will be sent.  Please just at least do give us feedback.  We will use that to plan for the next IGF.  
   >> WENYING SU:  We'll do. 
   >> VINCENT MWANDO:  Thank you so much.  My name was Vincent and I was your host today.  Thank you so much from IGF.  
   >> Bye‑bye. 
   >> Bye.  Bye Amanda.  
   >> See you next week.  
   >> See you. 
                               
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-6-%E2%80%93-ws57-e-human-trafficking-understanding-challenges-opportunities^^

 
>> JESSE ROUTTE:  Greetings and welcome to our webinar on ehuman trafficking.  I see we have ten attendees.  We will wait one or two more minutes for others to log on and then we'll begin our session.  Thank you.
Greetings and thank you for attending our session on etrafficking and understanding the programifications that this new dynamic topic of etrafficking poses.  We hope we will have some realistic policy to address the issues identified by our panel.  I hope to have engaging conversation of the audience towards the end of session.  My name is Jesse Routte, I'm with Three Stones International.  It maintains a presence on Sub‑Saharan Africa.  
Joining me are representatives of Global Initiative on Transinternational Crime and the Egyptian Foundation for Refugee Rights and members of academia.  They developed presentations to their background on this topic.  We have social workers, anthropologists, human rights, and legal experts who devoted a dedicated effort towards further articulated consequences of human trafficking moving online.
We have arranged a session in a manner in which each panelist will present on their selected topic.  And we will utilize the rest of our time together to offer an opportunity to pose comments or ask questions of our panelists.  I ask that the audience members utilize the sidebar chat in order to voice their comments and concerns, and I encourage comments throughout the duration of this, but especially at the end during the question‑and‑answer period.
I would like to start the presentation with an overview of human trafficking which will also provide potential ground up solutions to set the tone for this conversation.  This will be presented by Dr. Laine Munir.  Dr. Munir is an anthropologist with a background in legal development in Sub‑Saharan Africa.  Dr. Munir has experienced communicating with a global audience especially with a focus on value‑added and measurable outcomes.  She's invested in implied of ‑‑ of progressive scholarship in order to enhance understanding of gender equity issues at local, national and regional levels.
Dr. Munir, I leave it to you to proceed.  You are on mute.
>> LAINE MUNIR: Okay.  Thank you, Jesse, thank you for that warm introduction.  Good morning or good afternoon, wherever you are joining us from.  Thank you for being here.  So as Jesse mentioned, I'm an anthropologist working in Rwanda right now.  So I will first offer some ground level context on vulnerability to human trafficking, particularly for individuals in developing countries.  And then as our panel progresses, you will get further information on international or I would say higher level policy recommendations for this issue, but I'm really talking about ground level vulnerabilities for individuals and any policy recommendations at the end require low technological capacity and have a low cost.  So that's my focus of my research.
So to start off about this number varies greatly depending on which organization is collecting data, but about 70% of human trafficking victims detected human trafficking victims worldwide are female.  So men are also victims of human trafficking, but the majority are women and girls.  And so first I want to talk about some of the drivers for human trafficking, from the bottom up, that need to be identified.
So the first is obviously poverty and most of us already realize that, because poor people are more likely to take risks to provide for themselves and their family.
The good ‑‑ so there's good and bad news.  The good news is global poverty rates are going down.  The number of people who live in absolute poverty is much lower than it was 20 years ago.  The problem that political economists point out is that most of these cases of rising out of poverty come mostly from China, and some economists argue if you take China out of the measurements, it's in the going to down and specifically it's not going down in Africa.
That's something that we need to think about as we think of poverty as a driver.
The second driver is political instability.  As we know, war, civil unrest, violence, natural disasters create unstable conditions with limited options for people who are caught in them, and specifically, they separate children from their families, which is a driver for human trafficking.
Increasingly, as we face an immigration crisis across the globe, particularly in the Middle East and Europe, people end up in temporary settlements, which are unemployed and that leaves them vulnerable.  And traffickers can take advantage of these circumstances.
And I also want to emphasize as an environmental researcher that climate change is increasingly a driver for forced displacement that puts people in these temporary living situations, and leaves them vulnerable.  So this is really the Nexus of environmental change and human trafficking.
The third driver, this doesn't apply so much to Africa, but it's an extreme driver in central and South America, which is gang involvement.  And it's a driver for much of the forced ‑‑ human trafficking within the United States.  Women can be exploited through gang involvement, by entering as a girlfriend or romantic partner of a gang member and then they can be sold with and without the gang's for sexual acts and that's particularly salient in Central America.
The fourth driver, these are two separate issues but they often ‑‑ they can be intertwined and that's mental health issues and/or substance addiction, because anthropologists have found that people with mental health issues face a variety of challenges that make them vulnerable, such as social isolation, and particularly diminished capacity to consent and really a limited ability to assess risk and be able to detect ill intentions.
And then in turn, even once people have been trafficked, traffickers can use substance dependency and addiction to keep control of people who have become victims of human trafficking.  And these last two gang involvement and substance abuse issues, we find are often correlated with intimate relations trafficking.  So there's often a common misnomer, especially among the tech and the IT community, that human trafficking is typically strangers baiting strangers online, and what we find is that in ‑‑ as particularly for women, compared to men, that we have people who are victims of human trafficking, using technological means but their trafficker is someone they though, it's a family member, a romantic partner or someone in their community, unfortunately.  So I think when we think about technological responses to ehuman trafficking, we also have to keep in mind that it's not always a stranger finding vulnerable people online, that we can use the Internet within our own community to create these vulnerabilities.
And I think at this point in November of 2020, we're still just learning about how the impacts of COVID‑19 could possibly increase vulnerabilities to human trafficking, as the rate unemployment is going up because of the pandemic, people both perpetrators and victims, are seeking out in you forms of income and I think we can probably only see the results of this maybe next year.
And then particularly from Africa, in Africa, demographically, the average age here in Rwanda is 20 years old.  And with the youth bulge in a lot of countries what we have is lots of young people with technological know‑how who can use the Internet but proportionately very few older people who can monitor them.  And that's correlated to all forms of civil unrest and conflicts when you have a huge youth population and very few older people to help monitor their outcomes.
So just four pretty easy inexpensive policy recommendations that anthropologists are experimenting with, include unintegrating vulnerability, screening questions into intake and processing procedures at health facilities in high‑risk communities.  So asking all new patients who come in for health care questions related to vulnerability to human trafficking.  Two would be developing and providing for free high school or even middle school curricula, on human trafficking vulnerability to help young people be aware.
The third is training local law enforcement to separate human trafficking from illegal sex work.  So in a lot of ethnographic field work, we found a major problem is that local law enforcement treats victims of human trafficking as criminals who have willfully engaged in sex work, and, of course this creates a very negative cycle in which people feel afraid to go report their victimization to local law enforcement and then we get a gap between what's happening on the ground and what law enforcement can do to help victims.
Fourth is being rolled out in some communities in Central America, which is anonymous reporting of human trafficking, via SMS or text messaging to local law enforcement or to local NGOs and trying to use cell phones as a way of reporting human trafficking rather than simply being a tool for facilitating human trafficking.
So those are some ground level policy recommendations that we can think about that might ‑‑ other panelists will expound upon.
Thank you.
>> JESSE ROUTTE:  Thank you, Dr. Munir, for setting the context and also providing some practical recommendations.
Our next panelist is representing the global initiative against transnational organized crime.  She will provide additional information about how technology is used and various phases of trafficking and consider challenges, technology poses when combatting trafficking.  Lucia bird is a senior analyst, and in her capacity, Lucia researches and writes on a broad range of organized crime types, internationally.  However, her focus today has been on the role of human smugglers as a vector for migration tracking, the vulnerabilities of migrates using smuggling services to exploitation by organized crime groups and also exploring how policy and legal change affects the dynamics of human smuggling and human trafficking markets in Africa.  This is in particular on the human rights of those on the move.
Previously, she worked with the planning and develop.  Of the Punjab government in Pakistan and before that in a similar role for the ministry of finance in Ghana.  Lucia, the floor is yours.
>> LUCIA BIRD: Good afternoon or good morning, everyone, and thank you very much for joining us.  It's a pleasure to be here today.
I will be following on by sketching out how technology is being used by trafficking markets around the world, and taking a more macro and decentralized viewpoint geographically.
So advances in technology have been transforming illicit industries as dramatically as they have been changing their counter parts and the human trafficking is no different.
You may have already noted that there's a challenging in quantifying the scale of this crime, and who is measuring exactly what, but some estimates suggest that over 40 million people around the world are affected by human trafficking.  And although it's extremely difficult to quantify profits, it can be quite a profitable industry with perpetrators estimated to bring in at least 150 billion US dollars annually.
And unfortunately, although digital and network technologies have, of course, brought significant benefits with them around the world, they have also led to the emergence and expansion of cyber‑enabled human trafficking offenses and changed the trafficking landscape.  So in this presentation, I will scrutinize these impacts.  Give than there is limited time, I would like to flag that we at the Global Initiative look at this further in a report called "transformative technologies how digital is changing the landscape of organized crime" which is available on the Global Initiative website.  Now is a particularly important time to talk about tech‑enabled offenses because COVID‑19 and the measures introduced to counter it have shifted many offline activities online.  And illicit markets are no exception.
Already the role of technology is growing, in human trafficking and other forms of organized crime, but the role of technology is having further acceleration.
First, we want to note how technology is being used by networks and perpetrators in each of these steps.  Taken together, the opportunities that technology offer unfortunately means that both the risks and the costs to perpetrators can be reduced.  In particular, because in some context, those committing the acts of exploitation do not have to be physically present with the victims, which, of course, significantly diminishes the risks of interdiction.
So 2018 research found that under half of child trafficking victims met their traffickers face‑to‑face.  With the others using text, or messaging websites to communicate.
As we said, going through each step of the process, firstly in grooming and coercion, the chat rooms, the messaging apps and social media platforms like Facebook play an increasingly large role, and in particular, Instagram, which was found by recent research to be the most used by sex offenders to groom children.  So we are really not talking about the Dark Web yet.  This is all on the surface web and social media platforms that many of us will use ourselves.
Then turning to exploitation, unfortunately, the online ‑‑ the abuse can be conducted online, and then live streamed and recorded and distributed further.  In particular, life stream and peer‑to‑peer sharing networks which are increasingly common are extremely difficult to track because they occur for the set amount of time and then they stop.  So law enforcement need to be incredibly quick in order to identify them.
Then marketing and advertising the services of victims, again, online platforms on both the surface and the Dark Web are uses for this so websites such as Backpage and Craigslist have been used to market the services of victims although it has to be said that online child sexual abuse material, possibly because it's such a policy priority, is predominantly on the Dark Net.
And then finally to transfer the proceeds that are emerging from these trafficking crimes, crypto currencies such as bit coin have been used by traffickers to both get the proceeds ‑‑ so those are joining, for example, a peer‑to‑peer live streaming network have to in some cases have to pay for this and the transfer to the producer and streamer of the material may well use crypto currencies.
And the networks abuse these to distribute funds to the other criminal networks.  Human trafficking is a form of organized crime that really is distinguished from some other areas of organized crime that I have been looking into and really has made use of the opportunities offered by both the Dark Net and the crypto currencies to engage in operations.
So a few key changes have been driven in the trafficking markets by growth and technology.  Firstly, in many contexts, technology appears to have flattened trafficking structures.  So they are less hierarchical and less interconnected.  As I already mentioned, it enhances anonymity, and it's key to bear in mind that wide spread Internet penetration, although, of course, carrying huge benefits also creates a significant vulnerability and that we are seeing spikes in the production of online child sexual abuse materials in areas where it was not quite so common, which track across growth in Internet penetration.
Turning quickly to the impact of COVID‑19, as I mentioned, it has really had significant impact on the shape of illicit markets and one area for which we have quite a lot of data is regarding the production and the dissemination of online material.  We can track the significant growth in both the demand and the supply of this kind of material.
So national law enforcement agencies together with Europol tracked a spike in the number of attempts to access websites that feature such material, including in Spain and in Denmark, and increases in attempts to initiate online contact with children for the purposes of online exploitation.
Unfortunately, as Europe headed into the first set of lockdowns in March, Europe had the significant acceleration in the volume of child sexual abuse materials being posted on online forums.
In some countries such as Spain, this increase was huge.  So between the 17th and the 24th of March, national law enforcement authorities in Spain reported a 25% increase in detected connections from which child sexual abuse material was downloaded.
Of course, it's difficult to identify exactly why these spiked occurred, but some theories is that it's linked to the increase in unsupervised children at home, the increase in working from home dynamics and unfortunately newly produced abuse material will multiply online and remain available until it's taken down.  While if there are new perpetrators these are likely to remain after the pandemic.
Unfortunately, this means we may be looking at a long‑term expansion of the online human trafficking market.  Although those immediate spikes in March increased as many countries are heading into phase two of lockdown, its yet to be seen whether we will see a renewed acceleration.
Turning to responses.  Firstly, a couple of tech‑specific challenges.  So encryption poses a huge challenge to detecting and combatting and monitoring online content, and the use of tech for human trafficking purposes.
So the ‑‑ firstly as I mentioned, the wide spread use of encrypted communication services by trafficking perpetrators to communicate between themselves and to also contact victims and contact consumers of services of these victims, make these communications extremely difficult to track.  It also means when end‑to‑end encryption is used, it cannot be screened by private sector platforms which limits their ability to block or remove inappropriate content and encryption brings with it many benefits particularly from a privacy and data protection sphere.  And therefore, it's being increasingly adopted.  So Facebook has announced that all of its services will be fully encrypted in the next few years.  So there is extremely concerning for law enforcement bodies and it suggests that the challenges posed by encryption to monitor detection are yet to increase.
Secondly, cybersecurity regulation remains patchy and affects all forms of cybercrime.  In particular, the vacuum of Internet of Things legislation translates into an unregulated marketplace for Internet of Things devices and this is of particular relevance to human trafficking markets because traffickers can and have tracked devices to identify profile, recruit victims and simply just to immediately record material that, you know, without the knowledge of those being recorded.
So turning to policy responses.  As you have tracked throughout the presentation, social networking sites ecommerce platforms and Internet service providers play a significant and growing role in human trafficking markets.
So really, the principle policy recommendation is that they should play similarly large role in addressing them.  Now to date, most jurisdictions do not require Internet service providers to monitor for content relating to illicit markets.  Instead, marriage social networking sites such as Facebook or Google implement internal policies to remove content and respond to government requests for data or requests for removals of data on the basis of national laws.  And the private sector already does a lot.  Both unilaterally and also in the form of multi‑stakeholder initiatives such as tech against trafficking.  However, there's growing demands among policymakers for the private sector no do more and this is partly because of the recognition of this scale of the challenge that law enforcement authorities and state authorities face in regulating the Internet.
So however although there's consensus around the fact that greater engagement is needed, there's less concerns around exactly what this looks like, but we are in an absolutely pivotal moment in this debate that is currently being discussed in the UK, the US and around the world and it centers on two key questions, firstly the liability of the inter‑sector liabilities and the criminal offenses including human trafficking; and secondly, and this is connected to the liability point, the statutory duty of care, whether such platform providers have a duty of care to monitor and remove content.
One idea that has been proposed is that the liability be limited to an extent, however, that service providers should comply with the statutory code of practice, regulated by public sector entity and be liable for sanctions to breach of this code.  There are significant time limitations and I will stop there and we can hear from the other panelists, however, I would encourage you to take a look at the further analysis on the role of tech and criminal offenses in the report titles transformative technologies on the global initiative website.
Thank you very much.
>> JESSE ROUTTE:  I did put the link to the publication in the chat.  And I encourage you to access that for what Lucia and her organization are doing.  Thank you very much, Lucia.  I hope that there will be some questions from the audience for you, during the Q&A in a few minutes.
Now moving on to Mr. Farahat.  Mohamed Farahat is an Egyptian lawyer with 12 years of human rights working with refugees in Egypt.  He joined the Egyptian Foundation for Refugees Rights in 2014, and is currently serving as the program's director.
In addition to that work, Mr. Farahat has served as a national coordinator in Egypt for the African civil society for Information Society, starting in 2017, and before that, he worked for Africa Middle East refugee assistance in Egypt, as an access to justice team leader.  He's also worked for international commission for jurists as the legal researcher and holds a law degree from Cairo university, and is a faculty of high African studies in Cairo University.  Mr. Farahat, the floor is yours.
>> MOHAMED FARAHAT: Thank you, everyone.  I would like to thank all of my panelists, Dr. Munir and Ms. Bird for the introductions.  I don't want to repeat ourselves and don't repeat what my colleagues mentioned during their interventions.
So my presentation will directly focus on a specific ‑‑ it's about the rank between the human trafficking ‑‑ the electronic trafficking and the process.
So now most transactions is transformed to be online, and the abusers they start to use the technology and online platforms to recruit the workers from other countries.  So really, I focus in the cross‑border human process.  This process is ‑‑ as my colleagues mentioned before, that they use that technology to recuse persons and jobs in other countries and it's a promise the person or the victims of high salary and good life in other countries, especially in the time of COVID‑19, there's now, many workers are affected by COVID‑19.  Many, many persons, workers now lost their jobs.  So they are now ‑‑ they are vulnerable, the most vulnerable person, not in a specific region, but all the world.
So they are a potential victim for the trafficking so aligned applications and platforms.  So what the solution or this presentation is focused on one of the solutions to ‑‑ to combat the trafficking, the align trafficking is through.  What is the process?  In simple words, it's to ensure the workers come from other countries, who are involved in cross‑border human process, they enjoy all human rights.  All human rights despite for the workers.  They have the right to know that they have a written contract, and a known salary and everything about nature and the type of work and the place and the country, they are located.
So one of the gaps that ‑‑ of course, is a problem to track as Lucia mentioned, that it's difficult to track the different application and transactions through the online, and to know what the ‑‑ the online now is most ‑‑ we can say that the most safe place for the traffickers to start to commit their crimes, because they ensure that in had advance, they will not track by anyone, or it's difficult.  Especially when using the new technologies, like the websites, that need specific terms of TOR to access to this website, that is mentioned ‑‑ (Telephone ringing).
So the Dark Web site.  So it's not easy to access this.  They know this technology and they use this technology to start or commit and organize their crimes, especially in trafficking.  So it is ‑‑ they start to do that online with the difficulties.  As I mentioned, they are in advance ensuring that they will not be tracked by any authorities in any countries.
So the problem, how we can encounter this aligned practices.  I think one of this is ‑‑ all countries have to make sure that all legislation is consistent with the international standards for the government to process and also to make sure that their realization is tried to cover this new form of crimes.
I think I ‑‑ I trust that most of the audience, the first time they hear what about what etrafficking and I think there is a question of what is etrafficking and so this ‑‑ and I think ‑‑ I believe that this is the first time to be discussed during IGF.
So this ‑‑ this is an issue and we have focus on how to encounter the trafficking is related to the process, because as I mentioned, this is one of the areas, I think this is a trafficker ‑‑ they are more active in this area because it's very difficult to be tracked and to access.
I would like to conclude this presentation because the presentation, as I mentioned, the aim of this presentation is to highlight the link of etrafficking and the recruitment process and we have to be more focused and to choose that it's ethical and we ensure all the rights of migrant workers before they leave their country of residence to come to the country of ‑‑ to their work.
So I would like to conclude with some recommendations.  The first recommendation is that all states should ensure that their national laws, especially for the trafficking laws can go through the litigation process.  And I would recommend that all the national labor organizations should adopt a new binding legal document or amended and include etrafficking and ways to combat.  And I ‑‑ there's competent resources in every country and institution, who are responsible for combatting the cybercrimes and the human trafficking should pay specific attention to the trafficking.
And a recommendation that if IGF members keep including etrafficking in general, and in ‑‑ especially on the agenda in common area meetings.  And also in general recommendation, I think civil society and national organizations and the governments have to review the existence of international legal framework to assist if still valid to cope with etrafficking or not.
So I would like to end by not the recommendation, but as an invitation.  I call all interested people, in the audience or attend this session to form a Working Group under the IGF Secretariat to review the international legal framework lead to the etrafficking.  So in the end, if anyone interested to be part of this Working Group, to prepare for this Working Group to review the international laws related to etrafficking and you can contact me or anyone from the organizer.  We can start to think about this ‑‑ this Working Group and to prepare and organize and we take actions to get this idea off the ground.
Thank you.
>> JESSE ROUTTE:  Thank you very much, Mohamed.  I'm glad you have a way forward for us, very high level engagement.
Our final panelist, Irene Routte.  Irene is a doctoral student at University of Michigan, in a joint program in social work and social cultural anthropology.  Her research is focused on refugee resettlement, forced migration and displacement and centers around how people are in relationship with their built and natural environment and how these fluid relationships affect the well‑being and community and resilience.  She has conducted research for Harvard, as a member of the human policy Working Group in the past and before entering her doctoral program, Irene manages a social justice leadership program at the university of Portland.
She's also worked for many years as a clinical case manager with unaccompanied refugee youth in both New York and Boston, where she specialized in working with survivors of trafficking.
Irene has a master's in social work from the University of Michigan, a master's in anthropology Harvard divinity school and a bachelor from Princeton University.  Irene, the floor is yours.
>> IRENE ROUTTE: Thank you so much, and thank you all for being here.
Today, I want to look at the intersection of technology and trafficking, with a focus on vulnerable individuals and on‑the‑ground interventions.
And specifically, with the sentiment that if technology can harm, so as my colleagues were saying, through recruitment activities and technologies of control, it can also heal.
So according to a 2018 Polaris report.  So Polaris is one of the anti‑trafficking NGOs based out of the US.  So according to their study, three‑fourth of survivors use Internet platforms during their exploitation and 40% of survivors use private messaging on social media apps to communicate with service providers.
So clearly, the development of new digital apps in cloud‑based web interfaces that focuses on connection with support systems is our greatest means of intervention.  But what does this look like or what could this look like?
I want to share three types of intervention that could be supported by governments and executed by private tech companies and NGOs and these interventions are all focused on point of victim survivor use or interaction.
So the first intervention is based on increased sharing of information and connection to service providers.  So technologists are continuing to develop new tools for detection disruption and reporting trafficking but more needs to be done for are to access and service providers.  In addition to photo DNA or other photo hash systems which assist in the detection of exploited photo media, there's new AI software applications that have been developed specifically for suicide prevention interventions.
These may be a good fit and a good model for anti‑trafficking interventions going forward.  The software flagged certain language on a user and then offers assistance so information targeted ads will pop up, help lines advertisements, et cetera.
Of course, privacy considerations and opt in agreements or extremely important, especially as we think about privacy concerns for those who are the most vulnerable.  But this is a step towards new platforms that are designed from the beginning to embed methods of sharing information, particularly in linking victims to service providers.
The second intervention is based around the creation and the expansion of networks.  While isolation is a method of control that traffickers use to exploit individuals, technology can create horizontal or peer‑to‑peer connections building trusted social networks between those who are going through similar experiences.
Having access to peer‑to‑peer networks is key in creating safety plans and also in exiting.  They also provide platforms for lifting up experiences and self‑empowerment.  This not only ties back to strengthen systems of crust that disrupt the balance that traffickers exploit, but it's alternative pathways to justice.
A really great example of this is OFW Watch, OFW Watch, based in the Philippines and focused on labor trafficking is a free, open source location tracking mobile platform that allows overseas workers to download a contact list of other workers near them.  They are signed up through their Facebook or other social media accounts and if there's no activity on their social media for a preset length of time, other OFW members or staff are notified.  So this really creates kind of a holistic safety net around people who opt in.
Along with thinking about ways to create and expand horizontal networks, building apps that are accessible and usable to individuals who are vulnerable is key.  So apps that embed private messaging, disappearing messaging or jail location services and social network location, it allows for public check‑ins for service providers or support networks is important.
And overall, this is just an important reminder and recommendation of thinking about design thinking from a tech perspective that is always trauma‑informed and trafficking is informed.
And then the third intervention I would like to address looks at recovery and support for survivors of trafficking.
So psychological entanglements often cause them to return due to trauma bonding.  Due to multifaceted levels of trauma, a memory disorder called fragmentation occurs which complicated testimony or throws testimony into doubt, if survivors do decide to prosecute.
Due to these two things and others, are having consistent access to psychological supports is necessary for survivors of trafficking to prevent return and support full healing and reconnection to their communities.
Since COVID‑19, we have seen significant gaps in access to mental health care, but we have also seen huge increases in use of teletherapy and the development of new tech‑based therapeutic modalities, in particular, therapy apps that are done through messaging in order to ensure confidentiality for those living in close quarters.  These include asynchronous store and forward technology where messages, images or data are collected at one point in time and interpreted or responded to later.
Evidence‑based therapeutic modalities that are now being made more accessible through tech‑based tools should be looked at as an important tool in anti‑trafficking work prevention and intervention.
So these examples of these three interventions digital apps and cloud‑based web interfaces that focus on connection with information, service providers, creating peer‑to‑peer networks and connection to evidence‑based therapeutic systems not only support survivors but also can be used in creative and effective ways to support those in positions of trafficking remain hopeful and find strategies of exit.
Thank you.
>> JESSE ROUTTE:  Great.  Thank you very much, Irene.  And the panelists in general.  I think we covered a lot of ground in a very short amount of time, and I appreciate that this isn't something that will come to a conclusion here, but as Mohamed recommends, there should be additional conversations that we hope to continue and I think Mohamed will share his contact information for further discussion.
I would like to start off the question‑and‑answer period and I would like to start with a question to pose to Lucia.
Lucia, you mentioned a little bit about the issues with tracking, illicit activity and encryption and I wonder if you could talk about how you track illicit activities who are operating on unlisted and purposefully opaque networks and if you could elaborate on whose role it is to address these illicit activities whether it be like regional bodies.  You mentioned the private sector in your comments but maybe elaborate a little bit more on whose responsibilities and who we should be really focused on in engaging at this stage to address etrafficking.
So I will leave it to you, Lucia, to fill us in a little bit more.
>> LUCIA BIRD: Thank you, Jesse.  I will take those questions I suppose together.  And look actually first at the question of who, and to some extent, this does depend on whether we're talking about surface web or Dark Net activity.
When we talk about the surface web, it's certainly important that law enforcement and cybercrime and agencies are involved in on monitoring and taking down content.  It's important to understand that trafficking can take place using technology, and sometimes trafficking using technology doesn't look the same as offline trafficking, but it still meets the legal definitions and therefore, requires the same focus.
But as I highlighted previously, right at the heart of the response in terms of surface web activity will be the private sector.
And perhaps to give an illustration, of this, and in particular, how encryption does pose a huge problem.  Facebook, one of the best-known platforms was responsible for 94% of the almost 70 million child sexual abuse materials reported by the US tech firms.
However, if Facebook introduces that end‑to‑end encryption, then these reports will L. vanish because they will be unable to detect this.  This is not because most of the abuse material is on Facebook, but because Facebook is the most diligent in screening its platform, and at the moment it does not use these encryption technologies.
And there are these tensions between the two debates, particularly around encryption, and it ‑‑ and it's kind of positive power in the context of privacy.
But it's key to balance these data protection privacy concerns against the ability to detect and enforce against crime, and also we should bear in mind the privacy, of course, of the victims themselves.
When we're talking about the surface web but also to an greater extent, law enforcement bodies are extremely important here and although the Dark Net really poses significantly challenge, and law enforcement bodies are able to increasingly track an trace within it.  I would like to use 1 March 2020 takedown, because it exemplifies a couple of dynamics which lie at the heart of this successful tracking tracing.
So this was the March 2020 takedown of a Dark Net child sexual abuse site, called Dark Scandals which had images of nonconsensual and violent abuse.  It's been operated since 2012, until obviously March 2020, when it was taken down and it posted over 2,000 images and videos and the administrator had reportedly made almost $2 million, but through the cooperation between the Dutch police, the US authorities and Europol, they arrested the administrator and bring down a number of legal prosecutions and at the heart of this is cross‑border intelligence sharing and that's absolutely pivotal to illicit activities on the Internet.  A huge challenge is that the Internet is cross border and cross jurisdictional and this has to be at the heart of it and these multi‑stakeholder and regional law enforcement, like Europol and Interpol will be extremely important to responses.
Thank you.
>> JESSE ROUTTE:  Thank you very much, Lucia.  And moving on, I have a question for Laine, we would like to know a little bit more about what is important.  We talked about policy and also local level solutions.  So what should be focused on, the higher level policy regional efforts or the look at cultural and social behavior change at the community level, and, you know, from your perspective as an anthropologist, what would you recommend? 
>> LAINE MUNIR: Well, I think the ideal approach would be top down and bottom up meeting together and being interactive, right?  Because in general, the issue with human trafficking is we have a gap between law on the books and high-level policy and then the realities of what life is actually like for trafficking victims on the ground.
So Lucia is an expert on the top down and my background is more in the bottom up.  So maybe you can take both of our messages together.
So one of the reasons why current legal frameworks have not worked is because they fail to take into account what we call everyday insecurities in anthropology.  So the first of that is in several ethnographic studies what we found is that human trafficking victims actually understood that they were about to be human trafficked before they left their home and before they left their country, but they were too far into the process to seek help from their families.  And this had a couple of reasons.
One, they were under the age of 18.  They were minors, and their families didn't know they had a phone.  And two, their families didn't know they had a social media account.  And this was ‑‑ I have done some research in the Punjab region of Pakistan, the families didn't know that the girls had social media or phones.  They couldn't turn for help, because they weren't supposed to be online in the first place.
Secondly, in a lot of areas, especially rural areas, women live very far from law enforcement agencies and it is unsafe for them to travel alone to seek help if they can't seek out their families.  So there's all of these levels of safety nets that should exist for victims, but it's very difficult to get past them.  So even if you were to move past your family, you live far from a police station, and even if you do have access to law enforcement officials, oftentimes in post‑colonial contest, south Asia, Sub‑Saharan Africa, we have legal pluralism which is the coexistence of multiple legal systems in some times.  You some vestiges of indigenous law and local law and state official law since innocence.  And when it comes to issues of youth and women, those issues are considered a family matter by police.
So if you have an issue with a youth or especially a young woman, that is not a real legal issue.  That is an issue for her family to settle within the community by a local leader.
So in places where we have legal pluralism, that actually ‑‑ these multiple legal systems instead of giving possible victims multiple options for getting help, it actually confounds their options for getting help.
So this ‑‑ and I think it ‑‑ this is particularly salient because we also need to acknowledge that not all human trafficking crosses borders.  And Lucia mentioned how important it is cross border data sharing absolutely, but what happens when the victim of human trafficking doesn't cross an international border and is actually an IDP, an internally displaced person, they have never crossed a border.  So how do we get data on them when they are sent from, for example where I study, south of Pakistan to the north of Pakistan.
So those are just some things for us to keep in mind.  Maybe Irene has a different approach to how we can solve these sort of, like, community‑level conflicts that help human trafficking victims unable to get help.
>> JESSE ROUTTE:  Thank you, Elaine and thank you for elaborating more on that.  I think we will skip ahead because there was a very important aspect that was brought up, and, you know, you were talking about social norms and culture, but then there is a difference between what's in the communities versus what's online and on the web.
So I was hoping that maybe Lucia could spend a minute or two just clarifying further what, you know, social considerations would be made on the web and how that differs from community.
>> LUCIA BIRD: Of course.  And just to quickly to add what Laine was saying, unfortunately sometimes when activities occur online, the social norms around them see these activities as less damaging than were those activities conducted offline.  We have encountered this across organized crime markets.  So many individuals who would purchase things offline feel comfortable doing so online and in the context of human trafficking, unfortunately, many ‑‑ we have seen that in many countries, the involvement of children and adults in online sexual acts is seen as less damaging than physical sexual acts.  And therefore, in some areas, particularly in parts of Asia, parents have sometimes encouraged the participation of their children in online sexual acts in exchange for money, which is in line with the perception that this is not particularly damage.
So social norms around online acts and purchases really need to shift slightly, so that the norms and practices that we apply in our everyday offline lives simply govern our interactions online.
Thank you.
>> JESSE ROUTTE:  Thank you very much, Lucia, for clarifying that.  And as we come to the end of our session, I would like to perhaps give Mohamed another opportunity to give some final thoughts surrounding etrafficking.  I would like to kind of maybe pose the question or idea that was mentioned by one of the ‑‑ by one of the audience members that etrafficking must exist since the 1830s and there was trafficking with telephone, perhaps.  Maybe you can clarify that and then give us some final words regarding your thoughts and maybe a way forward.
>> MOHAMED FARAHAT: The question is a very interesting question, but the problem, is yes, it may be ‑‑ we can ‑‑ we can call it etrafficking, but the problem now is very different, because we cannot access the etrafficker through the online because many, many accounts ‑‑ all persons working in IT field knows the difficulties to track the person online.
So for that, and let me take from what Lucia had mentioned and what Dr. Munir mentioned about law enforcement.  So to solve this problem, I know Dr. Munir and Lucia have a legal background like me.  So ‑‑ but the law is not enough to solve all the purpose and even as a legal person, if we need to solve something legally, we have to involve with other aspects to ‑‑ to the design this.  So we cannot as legal state together and draft the laws to combat the etrafficking.  We need the person who specialized in cyber security.  We need the person from technical areas in the ‑‑ in the area of the Internet to give us what happens exactly in the deep website, in the Dark Web site.  Because we don't know.  We don't fully aware what happens exactly in these techniques.  So we need this person to share with us their source of these techniques and as a legal, we can think about what the solution and these difficulties.
So as mentioned, the last thing I would like to end is I think this is very good start to discuss this topic, during IGF.  I think we have one year from now to the next IGF meeting, we have to discuss or to build on our session today and to take another dip and tackle another issue to keep ‑‑ to ensure that we keep the etrafficking issue be discussed in the agenda of IGF.
And as I mentioned during my presentation, that I'm very interested to form a group, a Working Group to discuss in detail what the legal aspects or how to solve ‑‑ to review the legal framework to etrafficking.  Of course, this Working Group as I mentioned will not include legal person only, but will include all persons from different areas and fields to try to solve it.
If we ‑‑ if we could to form this work group and we start work from now to the next year, I think we will build on our decisions, our discussions today and we will come with at least some overview about what the legal framework is suitable to solve this problem, or we can reach to, like, the modern law that can be used by any category, not only the international legal framework but also we can urge to national framework.  Thank you.
>> JESSE ROUTTE:  Thank you very much, Mohamed.  I would like to thank all of our panelists for an insightful discussion.  I would like to thank the audience that were able to attend and provide some very insightful questions and I would like to challenge us all to continue thinking about this topic of etrafficking and perhaps at the next IGF we'll be able to present some additional solutions and show our progress.
So once again, thank you, everyone, for your participation.  It was great to have this discussion.  I hope this isn't the end to this conversation.
I hope everyone has a great rest of your day and take care, everyone.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-main-session-trust^^

>> JENNIFER CHUNG: Good morning, good day.  I'm with my other co‑facilitators of this Main Session.  Welcome to the Trust Main Session, Internet Fragmentation: Is Digital Sovereignty the Problem or the Solution?  We have an extremely enriching conversation and wonderful set of Speakers and Panelists for you.  Of course we do also have our great Moderator from the Internet and Jurisdiction Policy Network, Director of this network, Mr. Bertrand de la Chappelle. 
 A little bit of housekeeping before, all attendees are encouraged to use the chat for comments and also please, if you have any questions for the Panelists, please do use the question and answer part.  We do have this session split into three segments for you.  The first one will be on the Data Sovereignty, and the second will be on the Disinformation and Fragmentation, and the third will be on Internet Fragmentation about the infrastructure.
I would like to pass the mic on now to our esteemed Moderator, Bertrand de la Chappelle.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Thank you.  I'm excited to moderate.  I'm excited also to see the list of attendees.  We are at 1:24 and looking at the list, I see a lot of familiar faces there, and I'm extremely happy to welcome everyone.
A few words of introduction.  Words do matter.  And there are some words that are actually carry a strong emotional connection to specific communities or to high‑level principles.  This is the case of the term, sovereignty.  It not only connects with the pride of nations and citizens of nations to belong to an entity that is exercising its self determination, but it is also the foundation of the International system, our current International system, through the concept of sovereignty equality of states.
Unfortunately, we also know that the term, sovereignty, can trigger other emotions, conflicts, and sometimes devastating wars.  So this is a word that has an enormous weight.  We are in a situation where the global cross‑border nature of the Internet is actually challenging the notion of an architecture that is based on the separation of sovereignties.  We now have to collaborate across borders because transnational is the new normal.  And this collaboration needs to be along not only states, but other actors; private entities, civil‑society actors, technical operators, Academia, International organizations.
In a poll we were conducting in the complex of the global status report that the Internet and Jurisdiction Policy Network published last year, 95% of the people who were polled said that they expect cross‑border legal attentions to increase in the coming years.  And more importantly, more than 80% of them considered that there is not enough cooperation Internationally to address those issues.
In this context, the expression, Digital Sovereignty is big and trendy recently.  I will not make the list of the act oars using this expression, but it is in a certain way very controversial and it's controversial, I believe, because we do not have a shared understanding of what is actually meant by that.  As I said in the beginning, it is a word that has an enormous weight, an enormous power.  And when we are using this expression, we need to be careful and understand exactly what each actor means.
And this is the reason why this Panel is actually starting with a question, or under the question, is the Digital Sovereignty the solution or the problem?  Of course you can imagine that this session of 90 minutes is not to solve the problem in 90 minutes; but the goal, I think, is more to help everyone understand better the complexity of the issue, the different dimensions of the issue, and more importantly, the positions of the different actors and the consequences of those certain number of choices, because we have a problem in common, which is very simple, how are the rules set, implemented and enforced on the Internet?  And also what are the respective roles of the different actors?  What is the role of states?  What is the role of companies?  What is the role of Civil Society?
As Jennifer mentioned, we will structure this in 3 buckets.  One related to that sovereignty, the other one more of a content moderation and fragmentation, and the third one on the interfacing between the policy and the technical layers regarding the Internet.
So, we have 90 minutes to cover.  We have a very nice group of Panelists.  And when I look at the list of participants and attendees, I know that is there an enormous wealth of knowledge in help community.  So instead of ‑‑ in this community ‑‑ instead of picking one or two questions that the time allows at the end of a long session, I strongly encourage you to use the chat and to post comments or pick up things that have been said by a particular Panelist that attracted your attention that you think is important.  Please do it in the concept of mutual respect because the goal is not to fight a battle here, but more to understand the perspective of others.
I will do my best when we do the reporting on this session, to incorporate the comments from the chat in the report.  And if you have a very specific question, please use, as Jennifer said, the Q&A button.  I will do my best to monitor this particular feed and insert the questions as the need arises in the session.  So with that, we move to the actual substantive part.  I would like to kick this with two questions in the poll that I will ask the technical support to launch.
One is very simple, it relates to the title of the session.  Is it part of the problem or the solution?  So please tick the boxes if you think it is part of the problem, part of the problem and the solution, part of the solution, or neither the problem nor the solution.
And the second question is an introduction to the first segment.  The meaning of Data Sovereignty is clear for all actors.  Do you strongly disagree, disagree, neither agree or disagree, agree or strongly agree?  This is a way to ‑‑ you have one or two minutes to fill this poll.
This is a way to take the temperature of the room and to understand where people stand on those issues and the degree of understanding that they have of the parts of the debate.  So you have a couple of minutes more.  I will leave it for maybe another minute.  I think it will be very interesting to see the results of this initial question because this is a complex issue and I'd like to understand the starting point.  Does the technical ‑‑ the people from the technical staff, can they tell me if we have a significant number of responses yet and when we can maybe close the poll, not to take too much time?
>> TECHNICAL TEAM: We are about 70%.  One more moment and I will finish the poll.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: So this is great.  Do not hesitate to take the opportunity to peak at the list of attendees, people you haven't seen in a while that you would have met in Poland if we had all been together, and send a private message, because keeping the personal connections in those times of separation is particularly important.
>> TECHNICAL TEAM: I have just finished.  Should I show the results?
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Please show the results.
>> TECHNICAL TEAM: Yes, sir, here you are.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: I think we have a pretty strong message, which is sort of what I anticipated where the majority of people consider that it's precisely part of the problem and part of the solution, and a distribution on both sides, which I think is a good basis for having the nuanced approach to this question.  And the second poll if you can show the page for one second, is that the feeling that the meaning is clear for all actors is an overwhelming sense that it is not clear for all actors.  So it is an encouragement to try to clear up this.  With that, thank you very much for presenting the results.
I will move to the first pot, which is basically a nice natural segue from the question about the clarity of the concept.  So in the first segment regarding Data Sovereignty, there is clearly a tension between Data Sovereignty and free‑flow of data.  And I will start with Rudolph, from the Minister of Economy and Energy in Germany with a question which is, I understand that Germany is pushing both the notion of data and the notion of Data Sovereignty.  In addition you're in presidency and Germany is in presidency of the European Union and your permission pushes the Data Sovereignty.
I understand that Germany doesn't see Data Sovereignty as an extreme concept.  How do you see the way to reconcile those two objectives and navigating in a certain way, this narrow corridor between the two objectives?
>> RUDOLPH GRIDL: Thank you very much Bertrand.  And good morning and good evening to everybody.  First of all I want to congratulate you Bertrand and my dear colleague and friend, Jennifer, organizer of this session, for the high attendance it's around 200.  It's not as much but nearly as much as yesterday at the Opening Session.  I think that shows us already how important this issue is.
When we did the poll and when we were thinking about the concept, I was remembering when I was very young the world was clearly divided into two blocks and you had freedom fighters on both sides, fighting for either the east or the west in another country and these freedom fighters were always terrorists for the other side.  So it is perhaps with the Data Sovereignty a little bit similar because it really depends on your point of view and how you define it if it is something worth defending or if it is something that might even destroy the order of the Internet.  And that is the corridor in Germany and everybody until Europe and beyond s now navigating.
We do definitely want to have in Europe and Germany the ability to be a self‑determined digital economic space or nation.  So, we want to not only as a state, but businesses, SMEs, research institutions, the Civil Society, we all want to have the possibility to be our own masters when it comes our data, when it comes to technology development, when it comes to new business models.  And that is quite natural for everybody.  We are in Germany and Europe in general, free‑trading and free‑flow of data promoting area.
When we talk about serenity, we definitely do not want to talk about perfectionism, do not want to talk about it or even self-sufficiency.  We want to avoid the creation of islands and silos between the great regions.  And how do we want to achieve this?
In our view, it is important if you have this aim that I just described.  It is important to look in the mirror and say, okay, do you want to have the capability, we want to be at the haste of the discussion and the research.  So it's not be putting up borders, it's not by making the others poorer, it's not by destroying the network that exists.  It's by getting better.  So that's our aim in Europe.  We want to get better than we already are.
When we look at our data strategy, for instance, we have Human Resources, capacity‑building within the European constituencies.  We have all the aspects of research.  We have the project where we want to connect existing structures and build out of them a European Cloud and especially a data area where we want to reach through cooperation, through working together.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: If I can cut in.  You mentioned ‑‑ can you explain how it connects with the notion of the organization?  Is it a commercial offering?  A mental framework?  Is it a space for corporation?  I understand there will be a major event soon on Gaia 8.  Can you tell us what the concept is?
>> RUDOLPH GRIDL: It's not date implication.  It implicates companies all over the world, not only from Europe.  It is about leveraging the treasures, the data treasures that are available in Europe but that are hidden treasures in research institutions and states and organizations and SMEs and larger companies.  So the idea is to pool this data so everybody gives something into this pool and has the possibility to draw from this pool all the other data that also in this pool.
So if you want to, there is one aspect ‑‑ I wouldn't call it localization but an aspect of regulatory aspect because the ecosystem should be ‑‑ should be according to the rules of the data protection laws, the European laws in general, the antitrust laws and so forth.  So there is an aspect of how you say ‑‑ European regulatory ownership.  But it's not meant to be exclusive.  And what we want to launch now is a vehicle, this kind of sent recall entity that allows us ‑‑ central entity that allows us to start with this pooling exercise.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: So if I understand it right, there is a dimension of sharing, a dimension and commons and the majority dimension, a certain number of regimes that apply to the data that would be stored cross borders.
>> RUDOLPH GRIDL:  Yes.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Thank you very much.
The next person I want to talk to is Paul Mitchell from Microsoft.  As many of you know, Microsoft was part of a major case regarding the location of data that was, at the time, stored in Ireland.  And I want to ask you Paul, the fundamental question, does the location, the physical location of data really matter?  Should it really matter?  And can it even be determined all the time?
>> PAUL MITCHELL: So the answer to the questions are maybe, possibly and sometimes ‑‑ I think.  I think the reality around sovereignty and data, and if we think about the warrant case, which you're referring to, the reality is that in the digital universe we have situations where the most important asset can be shared just as easily as it can be not shared.  It's not scarce in the economic terms.  If I have a piece of data and you have the same piece of data, we can both use it at the same time; whereas if I have a physical object or physical good like lumber, for example, I can have it but you can't have it at the same time.
I think that fundamentally changes the way that countries and actors like Microsoft, need to think about what is actually happening in the economy being driven by data.  When we think about sovereignty, perfecting the idea that something is subject to specific laws and regulations of a specific jurisdiction, that was essentially the issue in our warrant case where we were asked to disclose data that we had in a data centre outside of the United States.  Ultimately, that case was resolved and it led to the creation of the Cloud act of the United States, which defines the opportunities and limits to the responsibilities of U.S. data holders relative to disclosure of data that may be requested by law enforcement or for other reasons.
I think nevertheless, the whole point of this is that we have a new situation where the old rules of scarcity and control don't make sense anymore and this has led to discussions and legal cases, et cetera.  I think a big challenge for this universe is how we rationalize differing approaches.  So we talked about the idea of sovereignty on the one hand and the poll was interesting in terms of basically saying, it's part of the problem and part of the solution, because we have different interpretations of what sovereignty actually means in this context.
I think it's probably a mistake to focus on the idea of sovereignty itself.  I'd rather see us move the discussion to enabling social development and enabling economic development because data can be a shared resource in a way that physical assets cannot be.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Just one question I want to advance on.  One is scarcity.  I think this is a development that is not necessarily taking into account in the approach to the Digital Economy where the sharing of data is a fundamental element and the restrictions to the sharing of data are actually limited to create value.
But there is a second dimension embedded in the case that you were mentioning, which is the territory of sovereignty.  And this is why I was asking whether the location of data should matter or whether it is more a matter of who controls it, who creates value, et cetera.
>> PAUL MITCHELL: The practical reality for data is, it doesn't matter where it actually is as long as there is a connection to it.  Right?  Microsoft has data centers all around the world.  Google has data centers, Facebook, Amazon, all the big Cloud providers have data centers everywhere, it seems like, and it doesn't really matter where the data is, as long as it can be accessed.  And so that does get into really complicated questions about how you manage the networks and who owns or operates or what are the rules for operation of various segments of the networks that are all interconnected with each other that then enable this sort of global sharing of data.  But I think these are the things that really are substantially, creates substantial differences in the way you manage the resource.
You think of data as a resource.  You can expect value out‑of‑data and the value of data gets more valuable when there is more of it, when you can actually do more correlations.  If you think about what you can do with artificial intelligence and using AI framing systems, the more date that you have, the better your end results can be over time.  And this is fundamentally a different way of thinking than the old commodities‑based thought.  Now, in the early days before we had Cloud services and before we were really thinking as expansively as the industry is now, we sort of moods over the concept of free trade zones for data.  So the closest analogy we had was, well, we have got free trade zones in certain ports where ships can unload containers and they can be shifted around and they are in a protected zone.  We wondered at various times what is the data equivalent of that?  We don't really have an equivalence because that whole model still was based on the idea that things were scarce.  And the only reason the data is scarce is if we make it artificially scarce.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: I think it's a very important element.  I think what you're highlighting is the difficulty of applying the existing mental frameworks we have for goods to something that is structurally behaving differently.  That is different.
Just a final quick question so we can move on with the discussion, when we were doing the preparatory call, you mentioned something that I think is important for the people in the audience to know because it is sort of counter fragmentation, the fact that Microsoft historically does apply a level of privacy protection that is compatible or equivalent to all around the world.  Is that the case?
>> PAUL MITCHELL: Yes, and that is actually very important.  So moving the conversation from data as an asset, for the economy, to data as an extension of your person, the GDPR at this point, the world's most advanced privacy framework for citizens.  And when that came into effect Microsoft made the decision to apply the GDP.
‑‑ our implementation of GDPR protections to everybody, everybody that is a Microsoft customer.   It just makes sense.  At the same time, Microsoft is the also actively in the United States.  We are pressing for federal legislation on privacy.  We think it is a whole lot better to have a common privacy framework than to have 50 different ones from 50 different states, which is simply the direction we otherwise would be going in the United States.
But, yes.  Our view is protecting privacy, data privacy for individuals, supremely important worldwide.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE:  I wanted to highlight this because when we are talking about.  There are also trends going in the other variation and harmonizing and in this case, through a higher level of protection.  Just as I mentioned in the Q&A, there is a comment by Michael Nixon in particular, saying that sovereignty is not the only topic of ‑‑ or Digital Sovereignty is not the only topic is fuzzy and a lot of those discussions are built on expressions we don't really know the meaning of.
There was a comment also on, how do we unify our understanding of dinge tall sovereignty and develop universal rules of the game for the Internet Governance and digital corporation?  I think what you were mentioning, Paul, is going in that direction, sort of what are the rules for the Cloud services that are available?
I want to be very conscious of the time and move now to Atsuko Okuda from the International Telecommunications Union.  You're based in Asia and I continue is sometimes difficult for International organizations to navigate the different perspectives of its own Member States.  And you can not take sides.  But I wanted to ask you, do you think that there is enough awareness in different regions, and particularly in Asia, on the different elements of digital date?  And also do we take enough into account the perspective of smaller or less‑developed states?
>> ATSUKO OKUDA: Thank you for this excellent question.  I believe this people‑centred approach ‑‑ perhaps I can also add trust elements ‑‑ important ingredient for the discussion.  And I also want to build on what Paul was saying regarding the importance of data sharing and the opportunities and empowerment that creates by doing so.
In Asia‑Pacific, ITU covers 38 countries, that is 60% of the world's population.  One of the key mandates that ITU has is to connect the rest of the ‑‑ half of the population.  A huge number of people in Asia‑Pacific and to address the digital divide is a mandate through digital connect activity and capacity development.  We are making progress.
Now when people get connected to the Internet, what do they do?  So a lot of people start using the social media, different platforms which are available, and at the same time that opens up a lot of opportunities for e‑Commerce.  So an increasing number of companies are getting involved and integrated into the global value chain.  By getting connected, that created an opportunity for education and health and employment, for example.
So the Internet and the access and the data which are being shared have been transforming the lives, social, economic realities in many of the countries in area and the Pacific ‑‑ Asia and the Pacific, including LDCs and states which are least‑Developed Countries, land‑locked Developing Countries and small islands, and Developing States.  However, I agree that this Data Sovereignty is an important issue and establishing group norms and principles would be important so these people who are coming to be connected for the first time in their lives know that their data are treated in the way that is transparent and they know what happens to the data that they produce themselves.
To come back to your question, because of that dynamics, which is happening in Asia and the Pacific, people are starting to realize the importance of the data that they generate or they share.  So within the country, there is an increasing awareness but perhaps there is no broad‑based discussion, per se, but we are getting there.  But that is also creating another complexity, because in Asia‑Pacific, not all countries, because of those are not fully equipped to engaged in the International discussion.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: When you say equipped, you mean equipped in the terms of the political understanding and participation?  Or ‑‑
>> ATSUKO OKUDA: Yes.  And perhaps the understanding of the data protection policies, privacy policies, which they may or may not have in place.  So with that, it is going to be a challenge to be fully engaging as of now, but we are assisting member countries to raise awareness on many of these points without compromising, perhaps, the economic and social opportunities that is getting connected is creating.
I just also want to add one more aspect of our work.  I believe that fundamentally important in all of this discussion is a trust.  And in order to create the trust and address the privacy cybersecurity issues, we are also assisting member countries with child on line protection and service to community, so that there will be capacity and policy and expertise in our member countries to address the challenges that we are all facing in the data sphere.
So I hope that is ‑‑
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: It is important and one of the things that also is in the background is whether the notion of that elevation is actually a necessity for development or on the contrary something that can only be achieved by very large countries that have the infrastructure and have a number of already existing powerful positions and whether in terms of development, data localization is that something that helps small countries or small companies or actually reinforces the position of the higher powers?  I just wanted to mention that in this context.  Thank you.  I will now shift to another continent which is Africa with Alison Gillwald.
This is a question that is related to also the diversity of situations in Africa and the very diverse stages of development, both in infrastructure and policy capacity among the countries that exist in Africa.
I was wondering, as you mentioned, it seems that date sovereignty is more a matter of control and ensuring the right protections and develop the value of the data rather than the key question of the location, right?
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Thank you.  Sorry about that.  I just wanted to say, absolutely.  I think some of the data localization points that have been pointed around African governments wanting to ensure the data is localized has been a little bit of a red herry, especially when the argument is made that African countries, nations, don't have the infrastructure and capacity to actually run Big Data warehouses, and particularly even beneficiates that data.  But I don't think that is actually the point.  I think there are two aspects to this.
One is that data localization is actually being used by governments that are concerned about controlling data, very often for political ends, Listserv for economic ends, although I'll come to economic ends because I think there is a legitimate rational for data localization or at least data control in order for industrial policy, in order to develop economies and develop.
What we see is a conflation of issues around sovereignty and indeed legitimacy on which the normative national sovereign states and Digital Sovereignty are based on this assumptions of legitimate sovereign states, exercising the legitimacy and defending citizens rights, and really states whose legitimacy challenged internally trying to control data flows both in and out of the country in order to control the citizens and potentially reach their rights, et cetera.  One needs to look at those and often they are conflated and often all Developing Countries are put into the same box and obviously there is enormous variations there.  So I think putting that political aside and looking at the issues around legitimacy and concerns about data, which is now become a very valuable asset.  Governments have a strategic obligation to been how this can be applied and maximized for their own development.
And that is request I think it's problematic that we ‑‑ that is why I think ‑‑ we think about these ecosystem issues in these kind of silos, trade or development or political power and those kinds of issues, data protection and rights et cetera.  Because they are very interrelated and it goes to the point that Paul was making around data and now very valuable non‑rifle is good.  But I should point out to not make artificially scarce by governments only, which is the implication, countries make it artificially scarce by wanting to localize.  It's been made most artificially scarce by big monopoly platforms that is controlling that data and so these should be global public goods date, Internet, cybersecurity, these all have the potential to be global public burdens and now delivered by private entities who control those assets.  In the delivery of those enormously successful, but it doesn't mean governments abrogate their obligations to their citizens to ensure their citizens data is protected, that that data can be optimized locally and the kinds of concentrations of data that Paul referred to allow companies like enormous first mover advantages, closing off data to competitors and those kinds of things, shouldn't be dealt with at the national regional level.
And this goes to the incredible need for countries to be able to cooperate globally.  These are issues you can no longer address at the nation state.  You can't close down your borders and help to develop digital opportunities in your country.  So it really goes to the need to find some supra national system that can allow for these data flows to move across borders in a way that are protected and safeguard citizens, et cetera.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: The moment you mentioned the word, supra nationality, will trigger alarms among people.  I think if we said transnational it will be more ‑‑
>> ALISON GILLWALD: It's bigger than the nation state.  The Sovereign Nation state cannot deal with this on their own.
[ Multiple Speakers ]
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE:  I know the sensitivity about the term supra national.  Each of those remarks deserve a whole confirmation.  I think it's important to mention the notion of the creation of value and the creation of social and economic value because there is an opportunity with the sharing that also creates social value outside of the pure economic evaluation and the more barriers there are, the less for value creation.
I and will ask you to be very concise so we will come back to you a little bit later.  You are the Chair of the Internet Engineering Task Force and I thought it was interesting to have your comments because the fundamental idea to the technical protocols is they are oblivious to your versions and the standard setting bodies is something you describe as things that are as general as possible to allow devices to connect in this way.
How much of a burden is it for the technical layer to reintroduce some elements, mainly geography, and also what is the connection with the notion of resilience?  Does that increase resilience, breaking resilience?  How is this seen from the technical layer?
>> ALISSA COOPER: It's a great question and I think you hit to the right on the mark, that the way that the Internet was designed was explicitly to encourage global interconnectivity and to be oblivious to International borders.  That was one the core goals, to get as many people, devices and networks as possible on a global scale.  And that continues to be the objective when we are designing and evolving the technologies at the core of the Internet.  So we continue to want to ensure that we can get as many new kinds of devices and kinds of networks connected and that we don't tailor the way we are designing these things to the requirements of any particular jurisdiction or the way that networks are administered in a particular country.  It's very important to hold the fabric of the Internet together.  At the same time, the other goals we are pursuing, when we look at what happens with Data Sovereignty outside of the bounds of the design of the technology, what Data Sovereignty does is introduce constraints.  So these goals that we are pursuing are improving the performance of the network, making everybody's user experience better, faster, more seamless, improving security of the network increasing the extent to which we have confidentiality and integrity of the data we share, making the networks easier to configure and manage; so introducing simplicity and automation into the way we manage networks, these are the kinds of things that we in the networking industry are pushing forward on hard every single day.
When we then look at Data Sovereignty, it creates constraints around all of these things.  So if you can only have end points a certain location and you're trying to reduce your latency, now you have to factor in the fact that your just going to have to detect a far away endpoint in order to have the data reside at the same place.  Same thing with security.  You're looking at how to manage my encryption key infrastructure.  If lots of new constraints are introduced around where we can hold the keys, or if they have to be split or sharded keys, this is more complexity in which we are trying to simplify.
It's not to say that we change the way we design the network in order to accommodate new Data Sovereignty requirements, but these are things than having in the world we can't ignore and therefore it adds another layer of complexity we have to acknowledge and think about as networks get built and deployed in the real world.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Thank you very much, Alissa.  I think there is an element that you mentioned that is worth inserting here without belaboring on it, is the distinction between the capacity for different actors replicate their data for their own optimization versus the obligation to replicate in certain places.  And I think it's a mental distinction that we need to have in mind.
And once again, as Alissa was mentioning, the goal of this is not to have a one‑sided version.  There are, or as Rudolph was mentioning before, the concerns about protection, particularly person data, about the control, the capacity to extract value, to improve the accessibility for certain information is a very valid concept that are somehow embedded in the notion of Digital Sovereignty.
What Alissa is telling us is the way we handle this is potentially posing certain constraints, as she said, and we will come back to that on the last part regarding technicals.
I want to finish this round, which was setting the scene in general, with Jun Murai, an Internet pioneer and one of the initial people who set up the Internet in Japan and one of the first Board Members of Vicam (sp).  You see the current debates and as we were saying, it departs a little bit from the original vision of the global infrastructure.
During another session of the IGF, I understand you emphasized something that is important, which is one of the priorities for governments should be to have their own frameworks in order at the national level in order to be able to interconnect with other frameworks Internationally before trying to solve the problems on a technical basis.  Did I understand correctly what you are mentioning?
>> JUN MURAI: Yes.  As we all know that when we are developing the Internet, we kind of intentionally and not intentionally, developing the Internet without the concept of the border, especially around the border of nation state; therefore we have established the ‑‑ probably the first of the human being in the history, truly global space.  That was the Internet, which is a very important thing.
And then also the digital data, digital information is applicable, therefore if you lose the data then you can still generating the exactly the same data again, which is located anywhere and also another aspect is encryption technology, which is basically the protecting the data, therefore the data location, isn't really the problem ‑‑ without the border and the nation state and the nature of a digital information, that was a creating the brand new space on cyberspace.  And so when the different aspects of the nation states, government‑based deployment of the global communication also existed, so the question was what is the difference between the nation International space versus a global space, which was suddenly created by the Internet.
So then therefore the history, we have been thinking about the government put the government as one of the stakeholder, which is basically a design of the ‑‑ and so of course certainly one of the stakeholder but then the government and then the industry and especially the operators and how the Internet is being operated and the provide global space have been considered very important.  And because of the big change that everybody ‑‑ society is saying it is for everyone.  And after the 30 years of the process and then it's been kind of ‑‑ and after that, then it's a matter of and citizen and therefore the citizen and people has to be protected by the government.  And now government concerns about the Internet space and maybe it happened after the 2000 one, especially when it happened in United States and then so the government now started to say two ways.  The security issues and also the economic issues, and government both those are the two subject, national security and then the economy.  That is government concerns so therefore they started to care.
So the question has been how we can kind of co‑work together this is different from the original position of the government and the Internet.  That's what I was talking about.  So very simple statement about this relationship is that each of the nation states should be kind of responsible on a kind of safe and trusted and their Internet space, cyberspace, including the data architecture, transparency and that is the government's responsibility.
And also the International relationship among the government should be kind of explicitly discussing about that, exchanging wisdom and I think that has been happening in many places.  So, that is what I was talking about.  So the change of the role of the government is ‑‑ so it should be the Gold Standard and it should be working individually with the government and also the relationship and among the government as well.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Thank you very much, Jun.  I'm sure that everybody in the audience feels the frustration to be obliged to cut the segments in order to keep all the discussions in the timeframe.  Thank you very much for your comments.
This will basically close the segment on data.  We will launch the poll question for the next segment on content and while you are feeding this poll question ‑‑ if you could launch the poll question, I will be making one comment regarding the discussion in the chat.  That was the first poll.  We'd like the next one which asks, there is International cooperation between the different stakeholders to address the abuses on line.
Same as before, strongly disagree, disagree, neither agree nor disagree, agree or strongly agree.  I will take the two minutes while you fill the poll to make a remark that come from the chat.
One, there was a very interesting comment, I think it was regarding the notion that the data protection of individual personal data protection is actually an element of individual self determination and I know there was a very interesting Panel organized by the Swiss authorities a few days ago on this topic.  There was another comment I don't remember who that was who made the highlighted the importance of the distinction between different types of data.
When we talked about data and Data Sovereignty, we tend to think about mostly about personal data and the protections attached to it.  But there are many other elements that are related to other types of data, industrial data, in particular.  And a final comment they wanted to take from the chat was from who didn't formulate exactly this way, but basically indicates there is restrictions or there are restrictions by government but there are also elements of control by a certain number of companies regarding the data that they are storing and the public benefit as well.  I think it's something that Alissa was alluding to as well.  So if we could see the results.
Here again,s we have basically 70 plus percent of people who feel that there is not enough International cooperation between the different stakeholders.  A little bit less than the strong messages we had in the previous one.  But I think it is a message that resonates what was credited at the beginning, the lack of sufficient corporation and coordination among all the stakeholders on the cross‑border legal issues.  So I want to go to the section two and say that, yes, there is a lot of discussion about this information and interference, but there are many other forms of on line views and it's a common challenge for all the different actors who address those.
I wanted to highlight the paradox, though, which is that the actual amount, the proportion of the content from the major platforms is in relative terms very small.  It's less than 0.1% of the enormous amounts of what is being posted.
At the same time because of this enormous volume, the numbers are staggering nonetheless, hundreds of millions that have to be taken down by single plat norms.  So there is a paradox between the high visibility, the local proportion, and at the same time, the huge amount.  And as I said before, the challenge is who sets the rules and who enforces them?
There are many trends and I would like to go to Allison on the fundamental question, which is how to enable the coexistence in chat on line spaces of billions of people who have very different perspectives, values, legal system they belong to.  And Africa is a region that has also a lot of ethnic differences, religious, political potential tensions.
How do you see the debate going in Africa on those issues?  Is there a discussion on expression and addressing the views?  And what role do the major platforms play for a certain way harmonizing?  The rules that apply around the world.
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Thank you.  I think this goes to the fundamental change that is we see in communication and the globalization of communications.  Also there is no longer just about content regulation that can be managed at the domestic level.  It seems complaint systems and even positive regulation around quotas and stuff, language quotas to try and build the public space and the policy.  We are now dealing with something that is entirely ruptured these traditional things and of course the important normative underpinnings of these systems.  So we have competing normative systems that make the implementation of consensus frameworks or even conventions at the regional and global level very problematic.
So we had initiatives from the African Union Commission who had Internet Rights Charter and that had the Convention on Cybersecurity and Data Protection and these are all wonderfully aligned with global conventions and standards and treaties but in fact, their adoption at the national level is absolutely minimal.  So I think the convention is now gone up from 5‑12 or something it's extremely low.  So countries are even, when it is past their ‑‑ not exceeding to it or implementing to it at the national level.  The problem is that very many of these conventions or globally, the conventions around freedom of expression, data protection, are still based on Human Rights, universal Declaration of Rights, rule of law, and things that are not practiced in some of the jurisdictions that are resisting this.
Although they want digital growth, they want the participation and the Continental Free Trade Agreement through digital participation, data sharing of goods, they still are controlling certain, or not exceeding certain rights frameworks.  So it makes the management of the global platforms all the more complicated.  If things aren't even being coordinated or harmonized at a regional level, the difficulties at the International level ‑‑ it's there where it is happening.
In terms of controlling content and diversity, it is pricily these frameworks that are meant to manage and regulate and govern diversity, ethnicity.  These things are not inherently creating tensions.  They create tensions through the manipulation of them and lack of management of them, et cetera, freedom of expression.  Suppressed is we get responses to that.  So I think it's very difficult to speak about the African region, it's very diverse.  Some countries are very strong Constitutions that protect these rights and these frameworks that have very strong content protection.  Anti‑hate speech legislation, et cetera.  And then many, many others who don't.
It brings me again to the point of global cooperation to manage these processes; particularly because the manifestation might be in the content but a lot of the manipulation might be happening at the data level and the data governance level, as we saw with Cambridge Analytica.  So it's important we do have date protections in place.  We do have frameworks for data across border flows, we do have frameworks for taken down of content that is harmful and we are able to mitigate risks through data protection mechanisms and security mechanisms, et cetera.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Thank you.  Sorry for questioning the time, but do you think that African actors, not only governments but others, are sufficiently integrated into the global discussion and the global regulation regarding platforms.  And there is digital services act.  There is notification of sections of ‑‑ these decisions will have impact on all of the users of those platforms internationally and the some actors to drive the same rate worldwide.
In just a couple of words, do you think there is enough participation and how could it be improved?
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Absolutely there isn't.  We have done our own research on multiple stakeholder participation and things like IGF as we are here, but even in other forums.  Not only are Africans not involved in any of these negotiations.  As I said ooh real important they are not siloed into the trade negotiations or e‑Commerce negotiations, because precisely if we get the digital taxation right, that could address a lot of the public Internet Governance we need at the national level.  It's important we engage in these debates.  Half of the countries stand outside of them because they simply are not confronted with the development of their economies in that way.  Others are resisting it.
We not only have to be responsive to it, we have to set the agendas from an African perspective so it is reflecting our interests and we not simply adopting conventions that are based on assumptions, interests, normatives from other areas, but reflect the interests of our own citizens, firms and nations in these debates.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Thank you.  Hearing the notion of bridging silos is music to my ears.  So I couldn't resist picking up on it.
I'm fading to a certain extent because we are really short on time.  So I would like to just give the floor now to ‑‑ for a couple of minutes to be very concise.  Germany has been the pioneer on some elements regarding content moderation and regulation of platforms.  Europe preparing the digital services act.  Can you say to us a couple of words on what is the timeline for the digital services act that will apply regulation and revise the e‑Commerce directive?  And particularly how much does it take into account in your expectation, a differentiation, according to the or responsibilities according to the different types of actors just in a few words.
>> RUDOLPH GRIDL:  Thank you very much.  Can you hear me and see me?  Because I can't see me.  At the beginning of is residents thought we would be dealing with the digital services act during our presidency and now we will have the formal proposal by the Commission towards the end of the year.  So it will be dealing in the council with the digital services act.  So we will have to wait for another two or three weeks for the proposal to be on the table and then we will have the council probably in the first half of next year.
That was for discussion.  Now for the German way, the next GD you did not mention specifically but you said at the forefront, our next GD obligations on the platform operator is concerning hate feeds and other criminal acts.
That has been in place now for three years, more than three years, and we have made some very good experiences, namely that most feared thing did not happen, there was no overblocking.  There was no over‑obligations by the network or by the operators when applying this law.  So we think that it could be a good basis for what we will have to discuss within the digital services act.  On the one hand we need to somehow implicate the platform.  We do not want to give them the rule of the role of legislators or competitive branch.  On the other hand we cannot operate without the platform operators.  And we think the solution is found in the next GD is a quiet balanced one and the evaluation we did was written in the law and it came out in autumn a week ago.
Very clearly it is working.  And I do not have so much time otherwise I would explain to you that it is not something ‑‑ there are no new obligations or no new appreciations that we do impose on the network operators but all is based on the existing Panel probe.  So there are no new Panel codes or no new criminal investigation platforms it's on the basis of the existing law.  I leave it there because we do not have so much time.  Thank you.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Thank you very much.  I think the mess sage an example that shows there are many lessons that can be drawn from the actual intimidation of some of the rules.  I'm very conscious of the time.  I want to give the floor and apologies, I was intending to ask the question regarding the geographic scope of Continental friction, a very important issue and Microsoft has been exposed to that through the right to be indexed.  But I would be remiss if I didn't give the floor to discussions to the Panel.  And I apologize in advance for the length.  Aleksey Goreslavskiy is coming from Russia.  He has been in the administration, the governmental society.
I would like to ask you and say ‑‑
[ Feedback ]
‑‑ the fact that the decision that is taken in one area versus another dimension, in particular there is one of the countries that has date localization rules for the personal data and there was a consequence which is that because some companies didn't localize their data according to that law, their access to the content being blocked in Russia.  That is the case at the moment.  And I understand that it could potentially apply to other platforms that would be the same.
Can you elaborate briefly on one, the rational for the date on organization laws and the constraints of one which requires protection impacting actually content accessibility.
>> ALEKSEY GORESLAVSKIY: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.  Thank you very much for this possibility to answer.  I have some words in Russian for what we are doing here for trust.  The questions and discussion and comments in chat is really interesting.  I would like to first of all support the trust can be achieved in the federal Internet Governance in dig tall corporation, only on unified approaches.
As for your question for some blocked services in Russia.  As I know, there is only one.  LinkedIn, which is blocked in Russia on the basis of data mismanagement.  As you know, in Russia we have some ‑‑ about data localization law.  So LinkedIn is not in order of Russian law of data management.
That is only one reason why LinkedIn is blocked here.  All others are still up.  So what I can briefly two minutes in Russian, what I can say for you about trust in Russia, what we are doing here.  Let me speak two minutes in Russian.
[ Speaking non‑English language ]
Let me finish very briefly in one minute.  So in terms of investment of Russian government in trust, we have a large huge system of incident management here in Russia, which is two years or has been for two years and is ready to hear all comments from social networks from Russian citizens.  If you have ‑‑ you can simply write it down on Facebook or contact or in social message and we can organize a very quick answer from authority who is responsible for that.
So from now on, we have about 200,000 comments in a month on the real cases.  People from our country can simply address to authorities and have brief solutions for the problem.  That was very useful this year because of COVID‑19.  So many ‑‑ this direct communication was very useful for fake news and fighting rumors who distributed around the country.  You know it was the same rumors in all the world all about 5G and so on.
We organized a very huge system of brief answer from authorities.  So that is why the messaging from governance of fleet Russian regions which are 78 from 85.  They are public all on Internet and this year many of them started live video every month, every week, every day, answering all the questions that people have.
So my message was that we invest very ‑‑ much in trust.  So that is why we find all around us the situation for such a quick digitalization.  So the question that we have should be org nides index of communication with trust for all countries, which could be described on a unified basis and should be on all the ‑‑ on the unified platform.
That will be or could be a solution.  Sorry, I probably didn't answer your question properly but, sorry for this issue in translation.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: You're welcome and thank you for making the efforts.  For the sake of time, thank you again.  You were alluding to regarding the cooperation to be able to identify views, is a very large and it is one component in the corporation between the different actors and the questions of distribution of the roles.  Different perspectives on this, the perspective roles of the actors but the way the different stakeholder groups can address the common issue which is addressing the views is something requires specific frameworks.
Whether they are vigorous frameworks or smaller frameworks, depends on the willingness and convergence of different factors.  I want to finish with one element.  I ask you about the consequence of the decision of that localization in Russia on the platform N a certain way there are intended consequences of the GDPR which leads to a certain number of services in the U.S., not serving Europe because they are not interested in U.S. citizen and they don't want to abide by the GDPR.  So the notion of Internet consequences and the notion of connection between different fields inside of, is something as Allison said, we need to bridge the different silos, in other words, practice on the other domains.
Thank you very much.  I have to finalize this Panel as I have been told we have a few minutes of authorization.  Can we have the last poll?  I will move directly to ‑‑ yes.  So digital policies should respect the technical architecture of the Internet.  Strongly disagree, disagree, neither agree or disagree, agree or strongly agree.
And I would like to maybe while you're speaking on or completing the poll.  I would like to ask maybe to rapidly, because of the time, answer the following question: There is a distinction between the fragmentation debate on the existing Internet and another question which is the notion of one is being introduced in particular on behalf of China on the notion of new ideas.  I know the Secretariat cannot take sides of an International organization, but how do you handle what is the current status of the discussion?  Because it's a very polarizing issue and the notion of new ideas, how do the different countries in the ITU address this topic and is there a dirge in it?  The splitting in the community.
>> ATSUKO OKUDA: Thank you.  It's very important question and this is also a link to the poll Number 2, the insufficient International corporation.  As we discussed, I did have a consultation with colleagues in 8Q.  This proposal, a new IP shaping future network was presented by China mobile and China Unicom to the group on standardization strategy in September of 2019.  So basically this is dealt with as part of these questions.  And there were sudden activities, which happened related to this poll.  And eventually there was joint liaison statement issued to all study groups.  As you know, in ITU, we have a number of different study groups looking at this interface between technology and infrastructure and policy.  So, so it was presented to the study groups for future action but I believe that at the moment, what happened is that it's joint liaison statement was issued.  This is where we are at the moment.
Can I also share with you that this data localization and Data Sovereignty issue is not only related to new IP but there are different study groups which are addressing bits and pieces of the topic such as standardization study group on future Cloud Computing, which is about confidence and security in the views of ICT and study group 20, IOT and smart cities.  So what I would like to recommend is that we don't have time to go into the nitty‑gritty of what these study groups came up with, but there is a space Internationally to share your views and research and the policy and positions in the space of ITU and I would like to recommend interested parties to join and discuss and establish the International norms of principles that we thought many participants thought, lacking at this stage.
So I want to give the floor back to you Bertrand.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Thank you very much, Atsuko Okuda this is clearly a topic I didn't want to let out of the space and it's important to follow it.  And I will actually move and ask Alissa briefly to make a few comments in that regard N particular, because in the beginning, you mentioned when you hear this debate about the new IP, it reminds you of some of the challenges you were confronted with, or the community was confronted with from the shift from 4 to 6 and the shift from the one protocol to another is very big and has to be something that is really needed to happen.  Can you elaborate with me on that?
>> ALISSA COOPER: You can't hear me?
>> Yes, we can.
>> ALISSA COOPER: I'm not muted on my end.  So.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Can we make sure that are Alissa is unmuted.
>> ALISSA COOPER: It looks like some people can hear me and some people can't.  I'm going to.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: I can't.  Does everybody hear?
>> ALISSA COOPER: The Panelists can't hear but the attendees can.
>> BERTRAND DE LA CHAPPELLE: Some people can hear and others not.
That's a fragmentation.
>> ALISSA COOPER: It might just be Bertrand who can't hear, maybe.  Perhaps I can give remarks to the people who can hear.  And we can go from there.  So, I think IS one of the places where we really do not want to see any further fragmentation.
There is a small set of core infrastructure that maintains the global unity of the Internet and the IP address in space is one of those, the global domain name system is another and so, we really need that harmonization at the IP layer to allow for data and connectivity to be seamless around the globe.  And so, when the arguments and the motivation to create something which is non‑interoperable with IP and sort of throw away the investment that we had and connecting billions of devices to the IP network would have to be overwhelming in order to justify that level of investment.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-of42-personal-sovereignty-digital-trust-in-the-algorithmic-age^^

>> MOIRA PATTERSON: I'm going get started now, as we are just a few minutes into our slot.  So, let's get started.  Hello, everybody.  My name is Moira Patterson.  I'm the Global Market Affairs and Community Engagement Director for the IEEE Standards Association.  I'll be moderating the Open Forum today and I'm very happy that you all joined us.
IEEE is the world's largest technical professional organization dedicated to advancing technology for the benefit of humanity.  And we are honored to be here with you today as part of this IGF event.
First I want to thank the IGF organizers for organizing the timely and impactful IGF under difficult circumstances, no doubt.  So, we are very happy to be part of it as well.
I also want to thank the IEEE team supporting this session for all the great supports and inputs.  So we would like to welcome and thank you for joining us today.  In a few minutes we'll start this session but I have a few housekeeping items to mention before we get started.
So first off, we will have all of the attendees muted and we will be taking questions using the chat features.  And Q&A features in your Zoom application.  So click on the relevant buttons in the bottom bar of your interface.  Also the Open Forum is being recorded and will be available on the IGF events page and it should be available as soon as the session ends.
We hope this session will be interactive.  We know we have a lot of great attendees who have highly‑relevant experiences and insights to share or questions to ask from different environments and we encourage such interactions.
So please again, mute the Q&A function ‑‑ use the Q&A function along in this session and we'll try to answer as many questions or have as many discussion points as we can accommodate.
So, to learn a bit more about our audience today, and also to get familiar with the chat function, we just want to put a question in the chat and we ask all of you to type in your answers.  So the question is, what stakeholder group do you represent?  So industry, government, Civil Society, what type of organization are you with?  And what country are you joining us from today? 
Just give your answer and we'll read a few of them so we can get a sense of who is on the call with us today.
I am seeing we have someone from Australia today.  Ontario, I believe.  Thank you and welcome.
>> SALMA ABBASI:  And there is another gentleman from Consueloa.
>> MOIRA PATTERSON: Civil Society, et cetera.  U.K.
One of our speakers is from the U.K. but we'll get to that in just a minute.  Excellent.  Thank you for sharing.  And there I see someone from Kenya, Civil Society as well.  Excellent.  Well, thank you all.
As I said, we have one speaker, Dr. Salma in the U.K., and John and I are both based in the U.S.
So we have people from around the world here and we are happy to be here.  So let's get started.  Today we have two other distinguished Panelists and I would like to just give a brief introduction before we start the discussions.  First off we have Dr. Salma Abbasi, and she is a technologist, philanthropist and social activist with a proven track record of visionary leader with dynamic drive and positive other in.  She motivates professionals and Civil Society.  She is the CEO of e‑Worldwide Group, an International company focusing on Developments and Securities.  She is also former Senior Vice President for Technologies and has over 35 years experience in the field of technology, innovation for sustainable development and policy development for economic empowerment.  Also with us is John Havens.  He is Executive Director of the IEEE Global Initiative on Essex and Autonomous and Intelligent Systems.  He helped defined guidelines for beneficial relationships between humans and their increasingly clever machine counterparts.  His mission is to educate, train and empower people involved with developing these future technologies in order to implement ethically aligned design and improve outcomes for all.  In addition to that, John is also Executive Director of the Council on Extended Learning and the Interdisciplinary Group of Experts founded by IEEE Standards Association and MIT.  They Champion responsible participant design data agency and metrics on economic disparity that prioritizes people and the planet over profit and productivity.  So you see, these two very highly‑accomplished expert participants.  I myself, I'm Moira Patterson, and I'm in the IEEE Standards Association.  I oversee some key initiatives related to digital inclusion, identity, data governance as well as looking at children's on line, off line experiences.  I also managed strategic initiative and policy engagements with a focus on Europe and Africa, and engaged in capacity‑building activities and strategic engagement with national standardization organizations.
So this is the team who you will be hearing from today.  And I also want to say that while we are here for this session, the IEEE, the views expressed during the discussion may be our own, the speaker's own and not necessarily those of IEEE.  Keep that in mind.
And with that, I do want to again thank you for being part of this discussion and get started with the context.  So, in the wake of COVID‑19, there has been a dialogue and we would like to say erroneous dialogue, that has emerged that talks about the tensions between privacy and protection around addressing and addressing the COVID‑19 pandemic.
So there is an assumption that people need to give up information such as location, biometric, or medical data and other very sensitive information is really needed to be able to address and combat the pandemic.
But the concern is, is that key Human Rights can be violated in such a context.  So, what we want to discuss really is, is there really a tension or how do we address and balance these needs?
So to get the dialogue started, I want to start ‑‑ we will be talking about three things under this topic, and then take questions in each of them.  So I'll start with the first theme where we do want to stay with this line of thinking.  So during COVID‑19, we have seen how digital technologies have been a lifeline for many people.  Many of you have experiences and we are all here at IGF through this whole technology, so I think we see it as a very real way.
So, people have used digital technology as a lifeline around the world.  So first off, I want to talk about what are the key messages we have relating to digital technologies and personal digitalized entities and data governance?  So just from my point of view, ensuring that the conditions of on line access enable and preserve our personal agency and dignity in way that is empower people, it's very important.  And I think in the off line world or in the physical world, we have levels of agency and trust that are assumed or that are foundational and that are somewhat disappearing in the on line world or can disappear in the on line world where data can be combined and analyzed in new ways and in potentially invasive ways.
And in IEEE we have a number of activities where we are looking at managing exactly that concern through different bit of governance guide lines and things of that nature.  So I want to ask Dr. Salma, how do we reset and address the concerns around a surveillance post‑COVID‑19 in the context of sovereignty, identity and data governance?
>> SALMA ABASSI:  Thank you very much for inviting me to join this excellent Panel and raise the very relevant question in today's times.
I think that there is no doubt that globally there has been a huge acceleration in how technologies are being used by governments to support us during the mitigation and response to COVID‑19.
Many governments opened the ‑‑ in Europe in particular, Belgium, Australia, Italy, U.K. and Germany, are gathering our data through their track and trade systems.  Some governments are actually doing this in a very unethical manner and taking the data ‑‑ I think there are some examples from Ecuador and Israel where data has been taken.  Your medical records, your own personal situation with COVID is being shared with people in the area that you live so that they can avoid you or your ‑‑ the potential threat or spreading the disease.
There is a huge debate at the moment on how is this actually invading your privacy and the doctor/patient ethical Code of Conduct in that space?  What I see is that there is a balance and a conflict here between how much data should be given to address the pandemic and how much data should be protected because we are moving into a very dangerous area of surveillance.
So the question is, how much surveillance is acceptable?  How much privacy do we need to keep for ourselves and how much needs to be given away due to public safety and health concerns?
So policymakers need to recognize that technology and surveillance systems are constructed by Private Sector.  They have ethics.  They have bias issues, all sorts of conflicts going on, which may not necessarily match what we believe as private citizens to be acceptable.  And also, unintentional errors occur which also impact us.  And there are all sorts of examples where we'll acknowledge that the data is being collected by these big giants in the world, tech companies like Google, Facebook, Apple, Amazon, all forming an omni foundation, on line surveillance architecture.  John will probably talk about this as well.
With this, as you know, more and more data is bubbling up every day because of the Internet boom but also because of the pandemic.  Smartphone devices are also being used to gather lots and lots of data and we are unable to really understand exactly how our data is being used.
So there is an importance for us to build a technical task force that really understands how the data is being collected, how the data is being used in a more actable and transparent manner.  And we have to actually regain to reset and understand after the pandemic is over, what are the right things to do and how do we protect ourselves and how do states actually work in this space?
There is a danger with the response data that is out there, that our behaviors our attitudes, our moods, preferences and social society are actually being analyzed every day through AI.  And I know the work that the IT ‑‑ IEEE team has been doing on ethical‑aligned design is helping to bring back efforts in that space.  What we see, as an example,ide like to give is the Government of Estonia, I think that's a Gold Standard that we should actually look to in the future because after they have a huge cyberattack in 2007, the government actually set up a huge infrastructure to protect its security but in a very transparent way where people knew what data was being collected, how was it going to be used, how was it going to be protected and which agency was going to use it.  So it wasn't in Private Sector's hand, it was with the government.  And that is a very important aspect that we need to address.
I think we have to accept that in the long term as life continues, that there will be need for more data to be collected by governments to keep us safe in the future.
This is just the beginning.  Many pandemics in the future are expected.  What we need to do is we need to take hold of our data in such a way when we develop a mechanism where we actually own our data.  We need to take back the responsibility rather than blindly saying, click, yes, take it.  There needs to be an ownership and recognition that our data is our ‑‑ we own our data.  I think we have to realize that the responsibility isn't just in the hands of the government.  It's also in ours.
And I think that as we deal with ‑‑ there is many, many things that I believe that we need to be able to do but the first thing is, we need to have some serious discussions with the Private Sector that is collecting our data and create those kinds of policies and systems that are in place that actually allow the individual to create in terms of reference for their data, where they decide who has their data.  Who is allowed or who are they giving allowances to share that data and when is that data going to be expired?  And when will it not be shared?  It's almost like in terms it of reference in contracts that we need to put in place.  And I believe the Estonia government model is a good one to study to take this forward.
The question was, post‑COVID, the surveillance date.  If you look at how data has been misused and how companies like Facebook, there is a wonderful example of a gentleman who wanted to sell on eBay ‑‑ an actual case.  He put 10 years of his data on eBay to sell and Facebook stopped him and said, wait a minute, our Terms and Conditions say you can't sell your data.  You gave it to me.  So that is a ridiculous example of what happened but on the flip side, the U.S. port has actually stopped and find and sued Facebook from using data that was ‑‑ people were putting data on Facebook for their AI and testing their programs without the permission.
So the law is trying to catch‑up.  But I think that the recent work that is going on in Europe, the EU, is also going to be something we'll talk about later but I think lots of things, but the first thing I'd like to say is we need to own our data and governments need to set policies that actually regain trust with the population.  Thank you.
>> MOIRA PATTERSON: Thank you Salma.  And I know John is very passionate about exactly this topic of Data Sovereignty.  So John, why don't you share with us why the emergence of Data Sovereignty is so essential, especially in the algorithmic age.
>> JOHN HAVENS: Just to build off of Salma Abbasi, who is a dear friend and brilliant.  The phrase, own your data, it's a big term and I completely agree with you, Salma.  I think one aspect of ownership, which is such a beautiful time for all humans to think about, is what does it really mean to own your data anyway?
And I want to start metaphorically because I find that my friends who aren't in technology.  I know this audience is in technology, but I'm starting here to make the metaphor work and get more technical.
In one sense, what is the access to the data that you create?  And how would you even begin to understand why it's important?  So let me give you an example.  Our health data.  I wrote a book, two books ago called, hacking happiness, where I did a lot of research into the quantified self movement.  And these are geeks like me.  They wear a FitBit, they measure their sleep, they measure how many steps they take.  They measure this and that.  And people would sometimes say to them, why are you measuring everything?  Doesn't that take away from your life?  And their answer and their mentality was more, I'm not going to do it every day for the rest of my life.  I'm taking a measure of the data that represents my actions and behaviors that in aggregate really shows the world, at least the digital world, who I am.
In one sense, what we have experienced as humans right now, is this situation where other people, because of advertising and really good opportunities brought by advertising and governments in terms of safety, kind of literally know more about us than we know about ourselves.  And this is either some people can say it's good or bad or whatever else.  IEEE and me included although I'm speaking for John here, but I don't like to come from a place of fear.  It doesn't get work done.
Advancing technology for humanity, the tag line for IEEE is to say how do we frame digital Data Sovereignty.  Let's make it about an opportunity first.  So one aspect of owning your data is owning the narrative or understanding around what it would mean if we had the tools, technologies and the policies to do an example of every ‑‑ whatever person on the call would like to be able to do.  When you go to your doctor, let's say you have a child who is sick with something that is pretty severe, like not to be negative but whatever it is.  And you have to see a bunch of different doctors.  What a gift it would be, and I can speak from America.  Right now today, I have to go to my doctor and then a surgeon and then a specialist and this person and that's of course if I have access to these amazing people.  So I want to be conscious of that.  But they all in general, give me this.  It's a piece of paper, right?  Cool.  Thanks.  But about what could they give?  Now there is the opportunity to give me digital data about those trips.
In aggregate that means I can start to have what is called portability of my data which is instead of a physical piece of paper, the actual data about my child in that example, starts to be grouped in such a way.  Now all this means, I'm still paying my doctor.  I'm happy to pay my doctor.  Happy to pay my insurance.  These deserves that money very much as caregivers.  I have a resemblance of control over my child because at the end of the day, I care most about my child.  But a lot of times, I think there are conversations about data that get kind of hard to understand, for me even, I have been in this space for 10 years.  Data is a big word.  Let's make it more personal.  Because this is how it will work.  This is how we take ownership of our data is to own the narrative first and understand why this is so important.  Your health data.  You have to know when your doctor or your surgeon or trusted whomever givers you data that you can share it with someone easily.
And this is really sometimes technical as much as it is policy or otherwise.  But when you start to think about 10 different doctors and 20 surgeons and this and that, it becomes life or death.  And the question then becomes, if there is all these wonderful technologies that can analyze our activities and behavior for advertising purposes, which that is great.  I'm happy that people are tracking my preferences to know what coffee I want or what have you.  This is well coo.  But the question that I often ask people is, why do you think that the same tools to analyze aren't available for people for things like health and the rest of our lives?
There is it a lot of answers and they come from a positive standpoint.  Let's just say I don't know because I don't want to be negative and someone already pointed out about companies tracking and stuff.  But let me just come from a technical standpoint and expert standpoint.  Every single tool that is used for advertising and tracking that heads been very nuanced for almost a decade, those are all completely available for the individual.  Period.  Meaning is it science fiction to say we can't build a personal algorithmic Terms and Conditions for ourselves.  We absolutely can.
So let's make the positive thing and I'll wrap up this part of my talk, which is to say, this is such an opportunity to say to the advertising world, whomever else, thank you for all these beautiful tools and technologies and ways to track us.  And what I want to have a better experience with my product I'm interested in, that's cool and now all of those companies et cetera, thank you very much for changing all of your priorities to now say, what a gift to the world to go to the caregivers dealing with COVID, to go to the environment, to go to all of these different things where along with now tracking our preferences for what we want to buy, cool, now what a sacrosanct and beautiful time to use all the beautiful technologies to go to every individual in the world.  It sounds impossible buffets book and Google have been flying balloons over Africa for five years to give them Wi‑Fi.  The technology is there.  But the real opportunity is the narrative history and we have to stop saying, it's going to be so hard for people to do these different things.  It really isn't.  The message has to become the only way we will know who we are and have agency and identity and dignity is to go into the immersive era where we are equipped with the tools to speak back to the algorithmic world in the same we are tracked now and it's a wonderful opportunity and I'm very excited about it and I'm so happy we can do it versus just getting angry about things we can't change.  We can change and they need to change.
>> MOIRA PATTERSON: Thank you John and Salma for your perspectives.  And I'm seeing that there is already some dialogue going on, some agreements to some of these points about owning the narrative and also owning data and having some guide lines and controls around that.  But I'm not see anything questions yet so let me move to the second question that we have for discussion and then we'll ask questions and take them later.  Let me keep moving and move to our next theme.
I think it's actually related to what we just discussed.  We are talking about, and I think John to your point about a lot of these technologies have been developed.  How can we make sure they get leveraged in other contexts to make our lives better beyond the specific context you mentioned.  I think that's a good segue into this.  So do you see any changes that are needed and how we fundamentally approach technology development and how we think about solving problems?  And just one thing I want to mention before I extend the question to the other Panelist is that, I'd like to highlight the role of standards in this context because as a standards organization, IEEE of course is very engaged in this space and we see the critical role that standards can play in this space in scaling solutions.
So one thing as the role of standards to empower people, such as standards on digital literacy, IEEE just approved the standard in this space to help measure and create digital literacy frameworks, which then helps empower people with the necessary skills.  But even more fundamentally perhaps, I would say that human dignity needs to be at the core of our thinking.  And building on what was said before, the technology should serve people and people's needs at the very basic level.  People and their communities.  So developing standards to help support that fundamental understanding, I think it will be very important.
And so, I want to ask, related to this question for Dr. Salma, how do we ensure privacy and trust in this environment where data is commercialized in the algorithmic age?
>> SALMA ABBASI: That's a very good question and as I said before, we have a lot to do ourselves.  I think there is no doubt in anybody's mind that today we are turning out ‑‑ I use this word, trillions of bytes of data, and one billion photographs are posted on line on Facebook.  With the smartphones, the Internet of Things, the data being transmitted at high speeds across all sorts of networks, there is large data.  This is a whole business that has, involved and evolving faster every day.  There is a couple of things I think that are really paramount and this is first to acknowledge and understand that this data explosion is there and it is indeed a commodity and the person who is creating, generating this, is us.  So in order to be able to move forward and address the issue of trust, we need to understand that multiple components are playing with the artificial intelligence evolving and the ability of our personal information to be in nanoseconds or less than that, to be able to be analyzed and basically navigate through our data‑mining, deep Machine Learning, our personal information is now being exploited at new levels.
So this issue has been seen to be in a dangerous form when you look at how people are being bombarded and manipulated through specific needs, political or commercial.
I think that first of all, we have to, as I said, as John said as well, we need to agree that we own our data and there is a new narrative that is set by us.  And we have to demand, trust has to be earned but we have to demand our rights.  And I think unless we collaborate collectively with governments and the Private Sector and Civil Society, it is very difficult to be able to shift this huge power, which is in a ‑‑ bigger than the government's if you will, there is a under tone here of risk that is becoming increasingly hostile that manipulate us in every single way you can think of.  And I think that we have to rethink how are we going to give our data to business?  And the Private Sector has to realize that this data is owned by the individual.  What they or how they process it and manipulate it and resell it is something that we need to know and we need to be responsible and supported by the government to have those regulations in place to protect us.  How is it possible we can do all these manipulations and interrogations with manipulation of data and propaganda and promotion, but when it comes to the analysis of the trends in health, we are unable to do that?  When it comes to technology for social good, there is delays, no revenue, no billion dollars a they companies and corporations are earning.  So that has to be pushed by government with the right accountability they is driven by citizen.  And I will go back again and say that we have to be able to develop a balanced method which is allowing the data to be seen and owned by us and used given by our permission.
That is going to require new laws and new regulations to be in place that are enforceable.  The regulations need to be enforced.  Consequences need to be had.  Only when there are consequences will anything change.  You can't have the big 5 sitting in America in Congress and the government saying that so you tell us how should we better regulate you?  That doesn't work.  So governments need to increase their collaboration with think tanks and the people like the IEE and other organizations and agencies to actually increase our negotiation power to build a more balanced ethical understanding of how our data is being used and manipulated.  Only by demonstrating this as the Government of Estonia has done, will we be able to rebuild trust because at the moment, everybody, everybody knows that they are being manipulated.
Examples of the targeted messaging and nudging that is going on commercially to young 9‑year‑olds and 12‑year‑old children is inexcusable.  They then start to pester their parents so right now I'm in London, we are in lockdown and the kids are exposed to the Internet.  The amount of issues that are going on, it's like someone has opened the fire hose and there is nothing to protect the citizens.
So I think the government needs to be held squarely and fully accountable to bring to the table with some serious conversations regarding this, which shouldn't take three years to discuss.  It needs to be done in months, if not sooner.  And I think that one of the regions of the world that have done or are moving in the right direction is the EU.  They have made significant progress in this space and small pockets of activities are happening in the U.S.
And I think the fear and the anger scientists in the context of the facial recognition systems that CCT V cameras, all that bias in the algorithms has been something that literally forced the governments in California and Oregon to take the laws and legislation in place to stop the police body cameras, the facial recognition system.  So I know when we make enough noise, we can pull things back.
And I think that is what has to happen with the balance of commercialization of our data and the ethical aspect of us owning our data.  But we are also responsible to start asking the questions and not blindly clicking.  We have implemented GDP‑N Europe and it's a mess.  There is something there but it is a mess because you didn't click and move.  So we need to do something that is practical to follow as well.  Thank you.
>> MOIRA PATTERSON: Thank you for those insights.  And for really sharing a lot of different examples and highlighting the roles of different actors in this space.  John, how can we rethink our definition of societal success to optimize IA systems, design, to really ramp this up?
>> JOHN HAVENS: And thank you to the comments people have made in the chat.  And forgive me if I'm mispronouncing your name, Gobori (sp), I don't know as much about 5G but I'll speak to the current question and then I'm just not a 5G.
>> SALMA ABBASI: I'll address that later.
>> JOHN HAVENS:  Who governs the Internet and does an Internet Law from one country ‑‑ a lot of great questions.  I'll answer more generally and hopefully with your questions answer them.
I'm really glad that Salma brought off Estonia.  It's a specific country, 20 years old, meaning it was part of the Soviet union.  So I have been to Estonia twice and I'm a huge fan of the work that Estonia has done with Finland.  They have a lot of cross‑border work they are doing and data is digital.  It's not physical.  But the servers where they live, it's a big part of how data happens.  So I bring this up because we are in this fascinating time in humanity where living between the digital and the physical and we keep using status quo kind of terms about our physical reality whereas right now, none of us are actually in the same room together.  We are a combination of bytes and atoms rearranged on the screens you're looking at.
My identity right now is not physical to any of you.  It's virtual.  So I think one thing there, which I think people tend to forget is that we are already in the virtual immersive world.  And the opportunity of Data Sovereignty and Salma mentioned the ownership of data.  Let me give another metaphor which I'm just in the metaphor mood today, I guess.
A lot of talk about privacy, they'll say what have you got to hide?  People use this phrase.  If you're focused on privacy.  And I'd like to give the answer back, what is ours to reveal?  Now what do I mean by that?  I used to work in advertising and PR, top 10 PR firms.  Let me hit you up with exciting advertising facts.  When you track someone on line, there are a lot of great tools to track someone.  And hi clients like Gillette and HP and on Facebook, you pay money, CPM, cost per thousands ‑‑ I think it is.  But basically if I want someone to buy my whatever, razor, and I'm Gillette,  you can pay a certain amount for a cost of acquisition to get the data about them that will help me get them to buy my razor.
Now in one sense, this is fine.  It's like hanging up a sign outside of the store when you walk by, hey, I have razors.  Bob, buy my razor.  However, the difference now is how this is all aggregated and how the data about a person, which gives them information beyond just a shave, is are they male?  Where do they live?  What are their preferences?  What is a portrait of who they are?  What I'm getting back to is, the actual job of a good advertiser is to get to know someone and hit them up with an offer that will bring value to their lives.  So that's not wrong or evil or whatever.  So that is why morality and ethics, I'm careful how to use that term.  It's just what it is.  This is 10 years ago.
Now cut to the present, the opportunity for any company, and an organization there are two things, there is building trust and there is also sustainability of your business.  Now I bring this up because you can buy from data brokers who are not organizations.  These are third parties.  Pictures ‑‑ are you all right Moira?  I thought maybe ‑‑ okay.  Pictures of who is coming in to say how do I get this big group of people to pay for my stuff?
Those portraits, that's where I have my most concern because as pointed out, we don't own the list and in terms of owning our data, there is the ones and the zeros that represent the Code of Our data but the portraits of who we are, these are the analysis and insights about us.  This is what is valuable.  Why?  Because I want John to buy something.  I have this picture of who he is.  I introduced ads into his life, digital or virtual he'll click and buy something.  This whole system, before we get into the economic and I'm not disagreeing with Salma about the legislative side of things.  Here is what smart modern businesses know.
Pretty soon the individual is not needed anymore to track me.  You want to know what a eight a month ago?  I have no idea.  20 other people do and you can buy a list that says what I ate six months ago.  But eventually, if you want trust me, the man, John, you actually have to create systems where I know that you are reaching out to me directly.  It's an old school peer‑to‑peer mindset of the general store.  If Salma walks in and I know she likes black coffee with one sugar, here is your coffee.  Now she trusts me.  Why?  Because she has asked for something, I provided it, she trusts the framing and there it is.
That trust, those frameworks again whatever the physical substantiation of a metaphor, the general store doesn't exist.
This is why we have no trust or the real potential of erosion of trust, is because tracking us from the outside in is great.  That's how governments protect us.  Without data sovereign tools, that as an individual, we can't say back to the world, this is who I am.  And also why this is so critical is eventually, almost now, at least in the states with the current election we just had, if you're not allowed ‑‑ if you don't have a platform to simply say things like, I'm a Democrat.  I'm a Republican.
This is how I want to vote.  And you have a way to know that when you press the button and share that information it is through say block chain or trusted data coverage is structure that you're saying it just in a trusted way.  And this is what Estonia does so beautifully.  Then it actually means democracy doesn't exist and this is, I'm not talking about how news gets to people and all those things.  I mean, literally the channels of in the immersive world like when virtual reality takes over, if right now Moira was like, we are going to take a vote about whatever we just talked about, I have to be able to just press a lot on and know this is going to go right to Moira.  Like an individual IM versus going to the whole group.  It's about clarity.  And technical exactitude.  This is I didn't IEE, the standards I'm working on are a focus on this.
Hold on, before we get into these incredibly important difficult questions and privacy and whatever else, how do we sustain business?  We sustain business because brands need to be able to know they can talk directly to their customers.  Right now they aren't.  If I wanted to know about Salma, the logic is, hold on, Moira, do you know about Salma and ask 40 other people to see if she likes a certain beverage.  You know what I can do?  I can ask Salma, do you like this beverage directly?  And that's cool.  It saves a ton of money too.  So brands who are progressive and smart and want to move beyond the status quo, are realizing that along with these critically important questions of privacy which are essential and Seminole, they are also like, if we don't start to embrace data channels, then actual trust that is two way established through block chain or similar types of channels, we literally will have no way to know and our customers certainly won't know how we will be trustworthy because we haven't built the challenges to try to understand how to hear and listen to them directly.
And legislation by the way, I'm agreeing with some of the folks in the chat.  Like what should governments do?  How should legislation whatever?  I found in the past five years instead of getting angry because it's easy to get angry and frustrated, is to tell businesses, let me ask you something.  Do you believe what you're saying about trust?  Then you have to build the date sovereign channels to allow your customers to speak back to you or it doesn't make a difference that you think you're being trustworthy.  You have not built the tools and empowered them with the tools to actually answer you back.  So what you're saying, which is critically important, being responsible in my design.  My intentions are to build trust.  Those things are wonderful.  That's cool.  Thanks.  But you know what you can also do?  The same structure you had in place for a decade to track advertising.  Learn about date sovereignty and news flash.  You'll save a ton of money.  Cost of acquisition is so much easier to go to Salma, do you like this coffee beverage?  No, I like tea.  Cost of acquisition once the tools are set up, zero.
And now I don't have send her ads that will cost me tens of thousands of dollars and goes into that brand ‑‑ and I'll wrap up.  The brand reached out to me and we had a peer‑to‑peer data exchange.  They did what they said they were going to do and that and only then is when trust exists.  Only then because Salma gets to say they did what they said they were going to do.  They followed up on their action.  Now she has the opportunity to trust because she is being given agency dignity and tools to do so.
>> MOIRA PATTERSON: Thank you, John.  And I think that is really great concrete examples of how the technology can work and can work to really make or create Sarah Wynn‑Williams situation.  So let me quickly jump to the two questions we have.  And I'll start actually with the second one.  Catherine is saying that the need for government regulation, is from but especially in the global South there may be some ‑‑ it may be difficult until whether there is advice to strengthen the enforcement of legislation.  So one thing I want to mention and I'll ask Dr. Salma to say a sentence or two about that because I know she works in this space.  But one point in IEEE we are actually working on a program where we are looking to create a standardization strategy.  So again standards can be tools that help translate principles and requirements to make them implementable by communities.  And we have a program where we are working with a lot of institutions from the African centre organization to smart Africa and one of the key things is to develop a strategy and then a roadmap that outlines some of the ‑‑ specifically in the context of the industrial revolution and that is very relevant in this context and the goal is to give governments tools to access this, knowledge and concrete tools I know other organizations are doing similar things and blueprints being developed for governments as well which may be helpful in this context.  But please feel free to e‑mail later if you want more information but I'll ask Dr. Salma to say a word about that and also tow address the 5G question.
>> SALMA ABBASI: Thank you.  Before we started the Panel I was talking about how difficult it is for countries, particularly in Africa and least Developed Countries that are being pushed by Private Sector and the governments are being pushed by development agencies to accelerate their broadband.  And this morning at 4:00, I was on a webinar with CIS countries and I was talking to them about my experiences in Africa.  And I believe that one of the most important things that we have been doing with the IEE for the last 9 months now is we have been collaborating on organizing a series of targeted webinars across Asia‑Pacific and how to build digital resilience and mitigate the COVID‑19 basically the spread of the pandemic and support the response.  And in that context, we discovered many, many huge gaps, systemic gaps that hopefully we'll be launching a program in a couple of weeks to build the or address the gaps through the missing standards that Moira mentioned.
During the course of these discussions through the webinars, where countries share their experiences and policies and regulations and challenges and testing, tracking, tracing methods, they also share the regulations and how things were modified because of the pandemic to maintain the trust.  And this is South Korea and other countries in the Asia ma civic.  What we established in June was a collaboration between Asia‑Pacific and Africa.  And we built the bridge of south to south collaboration to accelerate the adoption of standards and policies and regulations that were working there because I'm very sensitive as a person who works heavily in Africa, particularly in Nigeria and in Garner, that we are all quick to adopt technologies and we haven't got maturity in our infrastructures.  So the only thing I can say to you is as Moira was saying, by sharing knowledge from other countries, adopting and localizing what works for you to make sure that your citizens are actually protected and you're not going to be exploited by technology companies who are going to come in and take everybody's data.  But I think this is a very good topic for future discussion in this area.
As for 5G, there has been huge concerns.  I remember in the early days if you remember, some may remember, there used to be ‑‑ this is the size of my speaker at the moment but it used to be the mobile phone for Motorola.  And I used to have terrible my grains in the 80s and 90s and I would went to see my doctor and said I don't know what is wrong with you, I think it's your mobile phone.
There used to be a massive headache on the same side I used my phone.  And I think that now with Wi‑Fi and everybody wants Wi‑Fi so there is no public space you can go to where you're not being X‑rayed.  You tell me.  The proof is in the pudding.  I think there is a lot of research going on in that area.  But the evidence is weak at the moment.  And I think that there are consequences to health with technology and as John was saying, the advancements of humanity 3 technology is what we are looking ‑‑ through technology ‑ what the IEES working on.  I'm running over but I have so much to say.  I'm going to pop my e‑mail down in here because we can chat later.  Sorry, back to you.
>> MOIRA PATTERSON:  These conference are so interesting, we have taken a little bit of interest time.  I will ask us to contain our passion and keep it to two minutes because I know we want to highlight these last themes because they are important and we can always continue via e‑mail later.  So the last thing is looking into the future.  And what do you view as one of the key important technology developments that you think will impact and enable personal sovereignty and the on line off line experiences?  And one thing that I would like to highlight is children and really looking at the needs of children in this space.  And finding or recognizing and acknowledging we need to have solutions and services and products for them that take into consideration their evolving capacities and their needs, the fact that they are growing up in an on line off line world that they have different capacities and different maturity levels.  And then we need to balance the need to protect them with the need to let them thrive in this space and look at holistic and inclusive ways to design these tools.  So that is a space where IEEE is looking at making an impact and, working with global stakeholders, including Dr. Salma who is also passionate about this topic.
So with that, Dr. Salma, let me hand it over to you and what is one key development that you think is going to be critical in protecting the free will in a digital society?
>> SALMA ABBASI: I'll try to say this very quickly.  I think there needs to be a paradigm shift towards our view of our data.  We need to reappropriate our data and stop giving it away for free.  As I said before, we have billion photos on Facebook a day.  We are the original producers.  They turn around and sell it for billions of dollars and we who are the producers get zero.  Until we get this in our heads we won't be safe.  We have to understand that human beings are actually being degraded and we are just objects, to be commercially exploited by the hypocapitalism running around with these Internet companies so‑called to make our lives easy.
The first thing, one of the first things we have to do, stop being lazy.  Don't just keep swallowing it.  We need to get back and say, wait a minute.  What that means and how that translates is that we have to turn around and say that we are ‑‑ own our data.  Reappropriate.  I need give you one example.  I love examples.  This is it an American company and it's an American personal data collection company called axiom.  I'll put the name there it advertising 360 review of your customer.  They gather our data, our behavior, our status.  In the 80s, these are stuff HR could never ask.  Are you married?  How many kids do you?  This knows your kids, job, hobbies, how much money you make so they can target you and they have 70 categories to measure you.  And then if you don't fall in 70 categories, they throw you away.  They individual a dump pile.  It's called waste.  We have analyzed this to the 'enth degree.  You can not imagine how this is reading about what it is about us it's an awful situation to be in which is we don't want our children to be that way where they are going to be exploited.
We need to bring back the monetization and the ownership of our data just like it's an asset.  If any of you own houses, you have a physical property asset, look at yourself data that way.  If we have that paradigm shift and we own our data, we will be able to say, these are the Terms and Conditions.
This is the contract I'm making with you.  I'm allowing you to use my data.  This as John said, people frighten you by saying, so what do you want to hide?  My name is Salma Abbasi.  I could be a terrorist.  What am I trying to hide?  It's ridiculous.  We should not be pushed into guilt to think we want to hide.  Excuse me, my privacy whatever I do is my business.  What I wish to share with you, if I want John to be able to buy me a cup of tea, it's my business with John.  I don't like coffee.  That's it.  His business is my friend to know.
So we need to be able to understand and define the contractual terms particularly for our children who we give freely here is a tablet, play with it, go quietly in the corner.  We don't see what they are doing on Facebook and other social medias.  We need to be able to stop giving away our information to these AI grinders with these algorithms that are trying to process and analyze and predict our behavior and how they can sell or manipulate our minds.
We need to understand in these Terms and Conditions who will be giving our information to, how freely do we want to give them to?  In John's case who wants to give freely to all hospitals, all medical companies.  How long they should have it for and what should be the price?  Our data should be sold at.  And most importantly, a termination clause.  This is how we can regain the trust because we will know after six months or three months after the pandemic is over, all of us and our data will be destroyed.  Again, I'm going to talk to final conclusion, I'm going to talk to what is happening in Europe with the AI committee.
The former Martin Schulz laid the foundation to engage multiple stakeholders to discuss and build the resilience in our data.  And we need to just wake up and participate.  The IEES an excellent platform to discuss and one of the questions of who owns the Internet, we do.  We are the users of the Internet.  Internet Government Forum, this Governance Forum is a perfect flat form to voice, consolidate and collaborate today to actually make sure we can protect our children from the invisible dangers on the Internet it's much more dangerous than risky for us to have our children in their bedrooms on line.  We are out of time.  I'll stop there.  Back to you.
>> MOIRA PATTERSON:  And thank you for all this extra context.  And thank you for answering the questions along the way too.  So well done.  Let's give John a chance to talk about extended reality which I know is a topic near and dear to his heart, that is getting a lot of attention and opportunity and the data space.
>> JOHN HAVENS: 60 seconds?  We are at 2:30.  Just to build on what Salma said, complete yes.  And I think it's more and more an urgency that is just required it's binary.  And all the stuff that Salma said is said.  We can get angry or ‑‑ it's true ‑‑ but extended reality is the idea of the immersive web and a lot of people probably know what it means.  We are already in it, right now.  Right now.  Hello.  I'm not in the room with you.  This is extended reality.  During COVID, how many hours a week do you all spend here?  What is going to happen soon, many gamers right now in second life or games are spending 50‑60 hours a week in games.  And when we have our glasses have augmented reality and we see digital on top of whatever, the point is, that pretty soon our physical reality may not be the main place where we spend our conscious lives.  So there is a binary choice here.  Either the system continues to track us and that's it and all the ‑‑ let's say what it is, negative stuff, only expands.  It only becomes more concern oriented.
Or, what a beautiful opportunity just to simply say, before you put that helmet on, that is an Oculus rift helmet that is owned by Facebook because Facebook owned Oculus rift, hold on.  All the great stuff about that game, you'll still have it but here is the digital Terms and Conditions that you can write for yourself with your family, with your kids that simply says, these are my Terms and Conditions.  And the government is doing their stuff.  Businesses want to sell.  Cool.  When you put on that helmet, the second something happens where maybe whomever, whatever actor algorithm supports do something that you're child or you weren't wanting, there is simply a way to say, hold on, these are my Terms and Conditions.  It doesn't mean they'll be honored.  Ownership is a big complex discussion.  But the point is you're in the mix.  So the dream for me is we are in the mix because it's either we are or we aren't.  That's the extended reality, we either extend economic and all the other realities that we are not as humans fully present.  Or, we say once and for all, to Salma's points, here is our rights.  Instead of it coming ‑‑ I'm not saying that about you, because I shouldn't rage.  But hey, everyone else, what age is it?  5 years old?  4 years old?  The tracking isn't working for all of us because it's mainly working for a very small few of whomever.
And the technology is so amazing.  We have all these great standards.  IEEE is doing so much good work.  This is where we need all the Partners to simply say we can either be angry or we can just get the work done and the work is protecting our kids, honoring our dignity, taking all the tools that are available for advertisers in a certain small group of society and saying, thank you for developing all this stuff.  Now give it to us as well.  That's it.  It's actually not that hard T really isn't.  The hard part is the ideological, political and all these other struggles and the demand can also come from okay, everybody, give us what we need to protect our kids well.  Extended reality will do that because either it will be complete loss of everything, agency, et cetera, or complete gain.  So I'm working for B.  And thank you for the opportunity to be here today.
>> MOIRA PATTERSON: Thank you, John and for ending on that positive note.  So I want to reiterate a few things as we wrap up.  So, if you were interested in any of the topics or activities that John, Dr. Salma or I highlighted, contact us.  We all put our e‑mails in the chat and there are many ways to get engaged.  IEEE is looking to make these things implement age and practical.  So it's helping create the solutions and be able to scale them and role them out broadly.  So, that is part of putting us in the mix as John said, and helping build trust.  So, feel free to reach out to us.  I saw one question on Child Online Safety and I know John already highlighted IEEE is doing work in that space.  So reach out to us.  And also Dr. Salma is one of the leaders or the leaders of the child on line protection work.  Also reach out to her on that.
And with all of that  I want to again thank everybody for attending, for your time and interest and your questions.  I want to thank our Panelists, the IGF people and IEEE team also supporting us and coordinating us to make this event a success.  So thank you for your time.  Feel free to reach out and also feel free to check out our boots on line, which I believe has also been shared in the chat.  Looking forward to connecting in the future, everybody.  Thank you.
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-parliamentary-roundtable^^

>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Welcome to today's Parliamentary Roundtable as part of the IGF 2020.  And continuing this theme of virtual meetings, we are going to discuss today not just in a virtual setting but how the Internet affects Parliamentarians and view of political trust.  We have got wide ranging discussions and discussions from Panelists from all around the world.  When hoping to do in the next 90 minutes is tease out the conversation about Internet and trust.  Of course what we can't do in the current setting is discuss anything around the Internet and politics and Parliament without bringing up the subject of the COVID‑19 pandemic.  So, we are going to focus a little bit in our discussion as well on how parliaments responded to the pandemic.
We have seen really in our work in the Inter Parliamentary Union, that parliaments went from a standing start, how do you turn yourself into a virtual Parliament?  How do you as a tradition alley physical institution operate remotely and increasingly have to rely on digital technology and remote connections when not only your members, but your support staff aren't able to be physically press innocent so we spent nine months seeing parliaments becoming different in a number of countries and we have gone through a period of radical and forced innovation to emerge perhaps nine months in without answers but with certainly some new solutions.
And what we are hoping to do today is drill down into the conversation about where particle investments a role in terms of Internet Governance and this is a two‑sided conversation.  Parliaments ultimately are the institutions that make law and we have a lot of ongoing discussions and a lot within the IGF about the legal frameworks we operate in and the Internet needs to operate in.
National legislation no longer is significant in some cases because it gets over taken by other jurisdictions where sites are hosted, where data is stored, and the complexity that the Internet has brought to us and brought to legislators, is well documented.
The other side of this is, as legislators, our MPs are required to know complex technical issues as well as issues of trust and privacy.  We are also required to operate globally and we have seen a number of parliaments work together to try and understand how the Internet has impacted a number of us social and political structures.
So I hope that in the conversation today, which as a follow‑up from last year where we introduced the parliamentary roundtable, we can start to tease out a little bit about how the Internet affects the life of politicians.  How it affects the public's view of trust and our politicians, but also what it is that members of Parliament, and our legislators can do to sensibly manage the flow of information to understand issues of digital literally and information literacy and how they can be advocates for a positive future on the Internet.
Today's discussion is co‑hosted by the Inter Parliamentary Union and the United Nation Department of Economic and social affairs.  So what I'd like to do is call on the Under Secretary general of the United Nations Department of Economic and social affairs Mr. Zhenmin Liu to give us a short welcome.  Over to you.
>> ZHENMIN LIU: Thank you.  Your Honorable Members of Parliament from around the world, Excellencies and ladies and gentlemen, welcome you all to this parliamentary roundtable, a special highlight of this year's Internet of governance forum.
Due to the COVID‑19 pandemic, this IGF is convened entirely virtually.  By the United Nations.  I think my gratitude to Parliamentary Union for co‑hosting this roundtable with the United Nation of department and economic and social affairs.  Also the Government of Germany for organizing the first‑ever parliamentary session since last year.  The session sends a strong message for national parliaments to cooperate and exchange Best Practices in the Internet‑related Public Policy issues.  This year, we are grappling with devastating impact of COVID‑19 pandemic.  And has laid bear our increasing reliance on the Internet in so many ways.  Critical that the United Nations and global community work together to ensure meaningful access for all people to the Internet.  This can be achieved with the effective public policies and our enhanced Internet Governance.  Indeed, these resonates with this roundtable building trust in a time of COVID‑19 response and the post‑COVID‑19 recovery.
Clearly, national parliamentary institutions play a critical role not only do they contribute to regulatory frameworks but effectively use of the Internet as a global public good.  They also act as leaders and advocates for achieving sustainable developable goals.  And budgetary and oversight functions in their predictions, natural Parliament also have responsibility to define how people and organizations interact in the inclusive and entrusted manner, especially in this fast expanding digital space.
Roadmap for digital corporation, record for more actionable outcomes through high‑level sessions at the Internet Governance Forum with specific reference to this parliamentary track.  I urge you to respond to this and I wish you engaging fruitful session.  I thank you.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Sorry, I was having a connection problem there.  I'm sitting in the remote wilds of the Scottish islands and sometimes the Internet just decides to stop itself.
Thank you very much for that and I'd like to call on Mr. Martin Chungong, the Secretary General of the Inter Parliamentary Union.  Martin?
>> MARTIN CHUNGONG: Thank you for moderating this session.  Mr. Under‑Secretary‑General, dear valued Partner of the Inter Parliamentary Union, distinguished members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, it gives me great pleasure to address this opening segment of the parliamentary session organized on the occasion of the Internet Governance Forum.
I am delighted that we are organizing this event with our valued Partners of the United Nations Department of Economics and Social Affairs and I would like to use the opportunity also to thank the Government of Poland and its Parliament for their support.
We have not been able to make physically this year, but I hope that next year we'll have ample opportunity, the health pandemic willing, for us to meet in person.
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Under‑Secretary‑General, you have just referred to last year's Internet Governance Forum during which parliamentarians called for more cooperation between parliaments for them to come together in order to exchange Best Practices for dealing with Internet‑related Public Policy issues.  I'm delighted to say that the IPU is proud to sponsor this second Parliamentary Roundtable to allow parliamentarians and other stakeholders to do just that, share in good practice.
I'm also delighted that the voice of parliamentarians is now beginning to have a platform during the Internet Governance Forum.  This form of transparent inclusive and multi‑stakeholder discussion on the Internet and digital policy is critical for advancing trust in digital technologies and for fostering trust in the work of Parliament.
The IPU is of course strongly focused on strengthening Parliament and through our Center for Innovation and Parliament, we and our participating parliaments are proud to be able to provide good practice, promote good practice, and digital innovation.  This role has shown through amidst the pandemic where our networks have been used to support parliaments and share experiences globally on virtual and hybrid parliaments and enabling our democracy to function in these difficult and challenging times.
Parliaments must play a robust role in our Democratic systems.  But they are not untouched by the world around them.  The Internet has been a transformative tool for knowledge, information and communication, and it has also been a dangerous and destructive too, fueling this information and conspiracy.
It is up to parliaments and parliamentarians and legislators to take this issues onboard and then show that legislation supports a creatable access and digital literacy and also that it protects citizens of societies from harm and attempts to sub vert democracy.
As a force for good, the Internet is potentially unparalleled.  Only if we can control the dangerous flow of this information.  We must, as citizens, be able to trust what we see on line just as we must be able to trust the legislators acting on our behalf.
The Internet has done damage to this bond of trust and it is imperative that parliamentarians and legislators work proactively to rebuild and strengthen first in democracy as well as to ensure that citizens can feel safe on line and trust the information they find.
We must understand how information is spread, how social networks operate and how to counter the negative impact that ranges from this information to cyberattack on our public bodies.  You're commend the Members of Parliament attending this meeting today and I see that many of them ‑‑ we have, if I look at the screen here, some 160 participants participating in this meeting.  And as I said, I commend them for being at the forefront of the debate, at the forefront of the conversation on building trust in this new digital age.  And I hope that they will respond to the call for actionable accounts.
I wish you very fruitful deliberations and I can assure you that the IPU will be prepared to support any recommendations that come out of your deliberations as we move forward with concrete actions.  Thank you very much.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you very much for those Welcoming Remarks and to Zhenmin Liu thank you for your welcome.  To set the scene for this evening's discussion, I'd like to introduce a member of ‑‑ and he will introduce to us a video that bondo stock has prepared to outline the events of the first parliamentary roundtable last year.  Mr. Hoferlin, over to you.
>> MANUEL HOFERLIN:  I'm very excited to be here and excited to announce that video with some reviews of the IGF last year in Berlin and Germany.  Last year we had this meeting from national parliamentarians it was an emotion day because we called out some of you.  So let us see the video and enjoy.
[ Video playing ]
 
>> MANUEL HOFERLIN:  Thank you for Manuel for trues that video for preparing that video.  And it set us up very nicely for a discussion we want to have this evening.  And the rolls that politicians can play in determining how we have an effective and accessible Internet for all.  So I'm going to call on our Panelists to join us now in the conversation to make sure you have all got your video on.  Manuel Höferlin from Germany will stay with us.  And I'm hoping that ‑‑ from Nigeria has managed to connect and join us.  We haven't had time to check the connection yet so hopefully that works.  Mattia Fantinati from Italy and Krzysztof from Poland.  I welcome you all to this Parliamentary Roundtable and I'm going to start with Margarita Escobar, if I may.  You talked a lot in there about the role of Parliament and parliamentarians as the lawmakers and how important that was and you mentioned in the video that it's important for parliaments to be able to connect and engage.  I'd like to you reflect very, very briefly ‑‑ I'm going to ask all the participants to participate maximum of two minutes because of time, on how you think the Internet has changed the relationship with parliaments, particularly in the sense of the COVID‑19 pandemic.  We had to move to virtual hybrid parliaments.  We haven't been able to be able to be physically present in the same way.  Perhaps you could give short reflections on how you think the restrictions have changed the relationship between Parliament, and parliamentarians and whether this is a opportunity to create something more open and transparent.  Margarita over to you.
>> MARGARITA ESCOBAR:  [ Muted ]
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: I'm not seeing margarita in here.  I'm still seeing your video live and active.  Can I go with you to ask you ‑‑
>> MARGARITA ESCOBAR: There we go.  I was saying thank you very much, Andy for this introduction and Manuel, thank you for the wonderful video.  As I look back and think about this year, I'm very happy to tell you that I brought the spirit of Jimmy Schulz asked us to do in the Jimmy Schulz call.  In Berlin, that COVID was around the corner as we left Berlin, and then everything was pushed very, very fast to moving through the Internet, digital era.
I think the COVID‑19, trying to answer your question, gave us an opportunity to get closer between parliamentarians and our stakeholders.  Now for example, I have just finished a meeting with Civil Society because we are starting the ‑‑ a digital law that is on personal data protection.  But also it forced us to introduce a new Bill regarding universal Internet access as a human right.  And this is another issue that we are starting very strongly near El Salvador.  Otherwise, a lot of people could be left behind and a lot of poverty could be centered in those areas without Internet access.
COVID‑19 presented us the opportunity to get trust back to politicians.  Having politicians and technical people working together through virtual platforms, through Internet, I am very happy that I said that a year ago at the IGF in Berlin.  Now, I can tell you, because of the practice that we have here in El Salvador, that is the right thing to do.
COVID also has isolated our humanity and isolated that human touch.
That will remain a challenge for the future.  Internet can help us be more transparent, we build trust, started Bills in a more consultative manner, but we have the problem of the personal contact.  And that is yet to be seen.  As to the misinformation systems that I also are in place in Internet, we have a big challenge there.  We don't know how to approach this issue.
What we are doing is, I took from Berlin, the Declaration of Human Rights in Internet, and what we are doing here is, taking that Declaration of Human Rights and Internet, and trying to change it into a bill.  We don't know,will end up.  How we will work it out, but it has been introduced in our legislation and we are going to be starting that aspect of Internet.
So, I think it's my two minutes.  A multi‑stakeholder approach is one to include trust.  Politicians and technical people building laws and another way to increase trust.  And third, we need to continue working on this information aspects of Internet.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you very much, Margarita.  Krzysztof, can I go to you and ask you the same question?  Particularly focusing on how you think digital technologies can help us facilitate more transparency and inclusive communication.
>> KRZYSZTOF GAWKOWSKI: Thank you this is very interesting.  We strongly support universal access to the Internet.  COVID has showed us how important it is in our lives and every day provide access to the Internet and it is only for the users themselves but also for the more economy.  There is so much to be done here through digital education and actualization of society to such case as Cyber Security data protection and user himself.
The current technology development including the spread of Internet and also recently the pandemic has resulted in the transfer of many forms of life to digital space.  This is a first for government.  This make it necessary to develop digital skill even faster.  The current digital transformation will lead in the near future to the experience of some profession as well as to transformation of others and the creation of the nuance.
Then the ability to use digital tools simply and necessarily in the labor market and it will be a great role of the government, Parliament, to digital exclusion, as much as possible.  This is my opinion.  Thank you.  And thank you.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you for that.  You were present at the IGF last year like Margarita and had interesting comments.  I would particularly like the comment you made which was perhaps more of a technical one but I think it's very, very interesting.  You said the discussion about representing parliaments and parliamentarians that perhaps it was a bad idea to have a technical representative.  What really mattered was members of parliament talking to themselves and among themselves and sharing that information.  And I'd like, if you wouldn't mind, just elaborate on that a little bit and talk about how it's not just important that parliamentarians talk to systems or their own country but the global dialogue and why that matters.
>> MANUEL HOFERLIN:  And thank you very much.  It's a very good point.  I think last year, we just found out there are many Parliamentarians all around the world who just are wondering how is Internet Governance working around in their nation areas and their nations.  So we as parliamentarians often look at our own country and do our things in our organization or in the wider area like the European Union with you normally as parliamentarians you not often talk to others around the world and it's a another kind of exchange of thinking, of possibilities, what can you learn from other countries they have the same problems and ideas all over the world.  It's interesting to come together.
Like Margarita say in one room.  Now we are in virtual room but it is better than nothing.  So I'm excited to see you maybe next year, hope so next year in one room.  And just let me ‑‑ I'd like to encourage the idea of informal parliamentarian workgroup.  Just that can develop and gather ideas from the IGF.  So that's also maybe the possibility to stay in touch around the year and not only have the IGF once a year.  I'd like to offer coordination with your help.  As Margarita said last year, I think it would be a great chance to say in contact and to exchange a lot of views and I would be glad if we parliamentarians could enforce our last year's good work from all over the world and also in the future IGF.  For example with Margarita's help and I think most of you are interested in staying together and I think last word from me, that is the idea of what Jimmy Schulz thought about as we found out that he always wondered why on all of the IGFs are so many representatives from the governments and so few parliamentarians.  And so let us change this.  I think it will be a great approach.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you.  That's a very generous offer to lead on that.  And I can certainly echo in the last nine months, the value of networking is there for us all to see in the inter parliamentary union and the centre innovationing and Parliament where I'm based.  We seen the networks we have built around other matters just come to the fore in helping to solve problems of the pandemic and bringing parliaments together.  So I think that technical level, as an elective member level, it is a very, very good offer.  Mr. Mattia Fantinati from Italy, I'd like to bring you on next.  I'd like you to think a little bit in terms of what we can do around connecting Parliament with citizen and it is how the Internet helps that in the context of more marginalized groups, and particularly those that have more challenging access to information to the Internet.
>> MATTIA FANTINATI: Thank you for inviting me and I'd like to respond to your question.  This is a topic that is just not COVID‑19.  It's something more.  I wanted to say this in two minutes about my ‑‑
[ Distorted audio ]
‑‑ I think it is a issue because if I have to just a little spot on what is happening in Europe and the times now look for democracy, as system, as the face of the kind of ‑‑ and we have at the same time privacy and COVID pandemic.  Vast majority unrepresented.
I think for very often a lack of legitimacy.  So the citizens sends me out of institutions and something very far and there is a huge void.  Just because we the Internet can give the people the instruments to develop critical thinking and the separate can get it together in one platform in one environment.  Every citizen will be going on about something but in a single.
[ Distorted audio ]
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you, Mattia Fantinati.  Alexander, I'm going to try and take Mattia's point forward a little bit and ask you about ‑‑ we are talking about how to better connect Parliament to parliamentarians and citizens together.  Mattia was drawing on the challenge that some people have connecting.  It's not a level playing field.  Could you reflect for a couple of minutes on how you, as a politician, think about how you connect to people and make sure in your own work you don't create a new elite of digitally literal citizens and leave others behind.  And how that challenge plays out for you in your role as a member of Parliament.  Over to you.
>> ALEXANDER HINSHTEYN: [ Speaking in non‑English language ] 
 
‑‑ that is why I believe that people suffer from criminals from other jurisdictions they commit crimes also against your citizens in your territory and is it also possible our criminals are also destroying your citizens just as Russian citizens are at harm by criminals who commit crimes from the territory of some other countries.
This politics is just about criminal activity.  So a very important stage in the development of the different International instruments in the area of the information security as well as fight against cybersecurity as the abduction of the revolution of the General Assembly of the United Nation on the counteracting of information technologies to commit crime.  I believe that initiative of other document was counter Russian Federation so the cooperation in cyberspace is incredibly important, that is why we have to work together in the area of fight against cybercrime.
This document is quite well distributed over the United Nation.  I like to recommend for you to consider the draft document which can be refined but should become a catalyzer for the development of unified methods to fight against Internet technologies as well as cybercrime and fortunately, I have to conclude my address now.  We can see that Internet units people but it is also an instrument that can cause harm and suffering. It does not only bring people together but it can also bring negativity.  I believe that everyone understands how it works.
Unfortunately Internet and different problems connected with coronavirus, they also for folks are negative, they trigger negative tendency and we are all over the word, we have to act against it.  Thank you very much for your attention and if you have any problems, and any questions, I can answer them.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you.  I think the summary there is that we heard some interesting discussions on how the Internet is a good thing for many of us with a number of caveats and a number of negatives.  Marina from the European Parliament, I'm going to give you the task of summarizing as quickly as you can, really, what you have just heard in the last 25 minutes of discussion.  Over to you.
>> MARINA KALJURANEL: Thank you.  I'll try to do my best.  I am very grateful to all the participants and it was interesting that many same topics, many same priorities were mentioned by almost all of our speakers.  We should take advantage over the tragedy.  It has brought digitalization to the top of political agenda.  We should keep it there and work with that.  Yes, there are benefits like remote working and remote schooling.  There are negative sides like cybercrime, and cyberhygiene.  Each and every person has to do much more about cyberhygiene than previously.  Maybe to add to my Russian colleague, I agree.  International corporation is crucial and I would undermine the  conventions we already have of cybercrime.  It's the convention which is open to all countries who exceed.  Cooperation has to be on all level and this year we celebrate the 75th Anniversary of the United Nation and I think it's very timely that the United Nations has attached so much attention to digitalization.  I have the privilege to serve on the Secretary General's high‑level Panel on cooperation, security and trust, other keywords.
From there to regional cooperation and I like the idea of cooperation among parliamentarians.  When we talk about multi‑stakeholders, we mention government, we mention Academia, Private Sector, industry, IT.  We do not mention paltition specifically.  But would argue that parliamentarians who have been elected by people should have a say‑so I very much support that idea.
I'm wearing today a double hat.  I'm a member of European Parliament and I'm from Estonia, a country that has had, for 30 years, the privilege of on line so e‑Life has its benefits.  We have the benefits of open, transparent society, on line voting, but everything is possible if people trust.  Trust is the word that was repeated by so many colleagues.  Trust between government and Private Sector.  Trust between citizens and service providers.  Trust between citizens and government.  Because if there is no trust, our people will not be able to take advantage of the digital benefits.  And earning trust, building trust, that is something where I would argue politicians and members of Parliament, are well positioned.
And my very last remark representing the European Parliament, I'm really happy that in next budget we have digitalization high on political agenda from all perspectives, being it data strategy, fight against corruption, being it protection of Human Rights on line.  So all of those aspects are equally important.  So I trade my best but I'm sure many right things will be said and colleagues, a pleasure to see you all. Ore not face‑to‑face.  This time on line but it is not the last time we are meeting and talking.  Thank you.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: That was very passionate and I appreciate the brief summary of the power of the Internet to change the way that we see democracy in our representation.  Florence Levy from Nicaragua, I'm going to call you on to reflect on what you have heard in the last session.  And particularly just picking up on your thoughts on trust.
>> FLORENCE LEVY:  Good morning everyone and good afternoon and good evening.  Greetings from our beautiful country from Nicaragua.
Last year, we had a chance to take part in the meeting that took place in Berlin, in Germany.  And we took an active part in it.  I would like to say that what we had today, as well as yesterday, during all of the sessions of this IGF meeting, shows that as parliamentarians we have to be more conscious and aware of the social context and the economic context.
Access to Internet is essential.  It has to be provided everywhere in all the countries of the world, yet we know that in some countries, that access is not perfect and I'm talking about Developing Countries here.  I would also like to mention the health issues during the pandemic.  This is where it is absolutely essential to have a strong model of Health Care System also available on line because that will allow us to take care of our citizens and of the families.  So, it's a huge difference to know that Health Care System is free of charge or perhaps you have to pay for it.  And another issue is you have to face the reality, and that reality is different in different countries.
It's important to know what sort of approach is going to allow us to appropriate coordination of activities within the Health Care System at the same time minding the economy.  For a country like ours, for Nicaragua, 40% of our citizens live in rural areas.  80% of urban dwellers work in the shadow economy.  So we have to remember that.  And we cannot fully lock our economy down.  And the Parliament has to bear that in mind and has to develop its strategies accordingly.  So it's important to find creative ways of working further on and developing a better economy.  This is something the Parliament needs to bear in mind always and in Nicaragua we can basically not afford not to work.  However, we have to reinvent our work.  We have to find a different way to perform our duties on line, remotely, of course, and other important issues.
And how to maintain communications?  I think that Internet is providing huge support here.  I think it was said yesterday during one of the sessions is about communicating not just among parliamentarians but also in a cross‑border manner.  I'm talking about International communication among all sides, all parties.  In Latin America, we have the Parliament in Nicaragua and an assembly for Latin America and we have to take care of bilateral relations and intercontinental relations it's essential the communication is ongoing.  Another issue I would like to mention is the use of technology.  Of course technology is becoming essential.  It's becoming very, very important.  And under the circumstances, communication is also key consultations.  Wherever we adopt a legal institution, we have to consult it with others.  We are not able to convene in a single room with all stakeholders.  We have to do it on line.  We have to use the Internet to achieve it.  Another issue I would like to mention is the broadcasting of Parliament meetings on T.V., on line, or social media.  This is something that we are only just learning yet we are already practicing it because we want to make sure that our citizens trust the Parliament, that their trust is maintained.  In our country, our legal acts are already published in a digital form.  We have to bear in mind interpretation, translation and interpretation.  Many Parliament members need an interpreter in order to be able to send their message to the citizens in multiple languages.  I'm talking about multi‑lingual countries here.  And I think there is going to come a time when we will come back to physical meetings but we will have to remember biosecurity.
This is not only true of the parliaments but true of the entire societies, the societies that will have to adapt to their new normal, to the new reality.  We also have to utilize local media, radio stations, T.V. stations, local ones.  We cannot only rely on the Internet because not everywhere the majority of citizens have access to the Internet and are fully connected.
And here I mostly talk about remote areas.  Rural areas where the digital infrastructure is still lacking.  I would also like to mention that as present, for instance, going to ‑‑ what my Russian colleague said, so increasing cybercrime, this is something that we see in our country as well.  We are introducing certain legal stipulations to prevent that phenomenon.  We have to consult on that and also have to pass these solutions, the legislation as soon as possible in order to protect our Internet users.  Internet security is a huge challenge.
Another one we are now facing, another challenge, is digital literacy.  Parliamentarians ‑‑ perhaps we need to have younger parliamentarians but every single Parliamentarian needs to know how to use, for instance teleconferencing software.  You have to invest in that as well, investing in training and invest in digital infrastructure because we have to know that that situation can come back.  It can reoccur or it can take a long time still and we have to remember that when designing our budgets.
All digital issues are goings to be more and more present in our life.  Cybercrime is a huge challenge, as I said before.  And I am happy that we are talking about that as well here in this forum.  We also need to exchange information among parliaments when it comes to legislation regarding these issues.  We can learn from one another.  We can follow what we do.  We can look for good legislative examples wherever they might be.  So we have to keep analyzing this it's becoming key also on a global level.  We will need digital technologies ever more and we will depend on them to a greater extent to finish what I would like to say that we should get even more involved in the work to implement International conventions focusing on cybercrime and other activities on line.
That's why inter parliamentary collaboration is so important.  Thank you.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you very much.  That was Florence leafy from Nicaragua.  There is a clear challenge we need to be thinking collaboratively and not working individually.
Time is running away on us so I'm going to just reshape this session a little bit dynamically.  What I'm going to do is ask original contributors, very quickly, in one minute to summarize a voluntary commitment that their institution wants to make to try and take the role of parliamentarians forward in terms of the Internet Governance space.  And I'm going to start, if I may, with Margarita.  So if I could ask you in just one minute to summarize the commitment that you would like to make around parliamentarians and IGF.
>> MARGARITA ESCOBAR:  [ Muted ]
  Thank you.  I think we need to understand that the presumption of good faith will not be enough to build trust.  We need to construct a blueprint and to work on it on democracy on Human Rights, on line, fight against corruption and the power of the moral authority.  We need to work on security systems on line that can be shared among all parliamentarians.
Also I think the future will challenge the U.N. to put us together to work on a new blueprint for development that can carry basic points of access to technology, access to Internet, access to financial resources to develop digital infrastructure.  In those contraries that have no access.  As well as building this new approach of development.  Access to new educational tools through technology.  Those are really challenging times for humanity.  I appreciate very much the benefits of Internet but I also recognize the challenges for Developing Countries as El Salvador is.
And finally I'd like to leave reflection on all of you and that is a question, highway do we perceive history?  Doe we perceive history as something of the past that belonged to others?  Or history as now and we?  I think that poses an important question to all of us.  If we perceive history as now and not as yesterday and as we and not others, I think we will be building the humanity that we all wish to have with this wonderful Internet.
So my commitment is to continue to work on this issues in my own territory, my own square meter in El Salvador, as legislation and legislator.  And also to keep alive the Schulz spirit we are so grateful for and shown in Berlin last year.  So thank you to all of you: I look forward and continue working with all of you.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you, Margarita.  That was fabulous.  And I think that call to arms at the end is very, very important.  And that will drive us forward.  Manuel Höferlin, can I ask to you suggest perhaps something you might do?  And I'm going ask you for the elevator pitch on this one as briefly as possible, please.
>> MANUEL HÖFERLIN: So, yes, now the audio is on.  So, thank you very much.  I think as Margarita said, the National Cooperation is extremely important if we want to share the viewing on the same topic.  If you see the big questions we have in digitalization all around the world, there are different views and everybody can learn from each other.  Not only in one direction.  And I think this is a very important thing if you exchange the point of view and this discuss it in an equal ‑‑ on the same field as parliamentarians.  I'm a Chairman of the Committee of the Digital Agenda and I would like to push this informal cooperation or workgroup between the parliaments, just to exchange our point of views in digital questions in general so we will have special topics.  But I think it's mostly important to network more between parliamentarians in several digitalization questions.
So we can learn from each other and we can learn from our own countries just because we learned the point of view from the other side of the world and so let us use the Internet to stay stronger together and to make virtual room I and hope sometime we will meet in a real room, but in the meanwhile let us be in the great Internet network together and change our opinions and let's talk about it.  That would be what Jimmy Schulz would want for us.  That's what I would like to push.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you very much, Manuel Höferlin.  I think it would be a pleasure for us all to be sitting in the same room and hopefully that will come about very soon.  Mattia Fantinati I'm going to you now.  I asked the others to make a short commitment.  Can I ask you to do the same?  And can I ask you to think about it in the context of how that might appear to the citizens as well, not just for MP, but citizens and I'm sorry to pop that on you in really one minute.  But over to you.
>> MATTIA FANTINATI: Yes, I don't know if I have a solution but we have to put the problem in the centre and.
[ Distorted audio ]
It's really important theme that emphasizes three aspects.  Rise for everyone because it is the future of the Internet T doesn't belong to a particularly segment, but it is belonging to everyone.  So government, companies and citizens.  So let's share with government and share ‑‑ I'm staying positive.  Thank you very much.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you very much, Mattia.  We are running short on time.  I'm going to ask Mr. Hasanul Hag from Bangladesh who kindly joined us as an observer in this, to perhaps just very, very briefly, Mr. HAG, to reflect on those commitments you heard.
>> HASANUL HAG:  Can you hear me?  Thank you very much.  Most COVID situation is exposed the ongoing socioeconomic political structure of the world and the countries.  To that extent, I think what we have here, we need to consider the situation from the mounting situation, look at the post COVID situation.  Number 2, let us focus on capabilities.  How to apply these technologies in the digital divide in the case of e‑Learning, e‑Governance and e‑Health, so everybody can participate.
Access to equality, quality health for all levels.  Here I see we have to get very important, how to develop the capabilities.  Access to emerging technologies which is rocking the boat in this evolution.  That is very important.
How we cooperate in the task for knowledge transfer and to implement all of these things because involvement system needs to inform and need to become more simple and agile.  Cultivate and targeted programs, physical, social, mental and financial well‑being.  And let us develop human‑centric qualities.  For that, we need to enact new laws to reform the government.  Already discussed here, I add yes, we need to go for certain global events and certain laws at the national level.  What parliamentary needs to act very quickly.  Here are global level to check the cybercrime and global cybercrime but we also need global implement and data.
We need global emerging economies of Internet.  So these are the areas where we need to emphasize.  At the same time, at the local level, we need to emphasize certain very important laws discussed access to Internet should be universal human right it's a fundamental right, we should be able to choose and in post‑COVID situation, exposed the weaknesses of the Society so we need to work for universal health care, universal education, universal food insecurity system and universal safety net.  All these centers should be have basic fundamental Human Rights to inactivate in the Constitution and the government is bound to ensure these areas so the digital divide and the social divide is wiped out.
For all of these, the application is very important.  So, how you apply Internet to relief the social and digital divide, that is the job of the parliamentarians in the country also.  So I don't go further, I concentrate in the post illusion and passed to evolution and so we are entering the domination of the machines.  How to make the domination of the machines more human.  So that is a very important thing where Parliament need to focus.
We have said that and I maintain that while we are living in a glass house, which is transparent but in that glass house, you learn life exists here.  So managing cyberspace is very important.  Very important.  So I hope we need a safe Internet.  Trustworthy Internet.  And for that, we need to have an agreement on the standardization of technology.  Thank you very much.
>> ANDY WILLIAMSON: Thank you.  That was a really good intervention at the end and I think promoting the inclusivity of the Internet is very, very important.  And talking of inclusivity, I'm going to try now to ask Francesco who had his hand raised for quite a while to make an announcement.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-ws107248-educational-opportunities-challenges-in-times-of-crisis^^

 
>> THIAGO MORAES: Hello, everyone.  I'm very happy to host this session, moderate this session with IGF 2020, its name, as you see on the screen, Educational Opportunities & Challenges in Times of Crisis.  This session is a joint effort of several organizations, and before presenting today's schedule, I would like to thank the effort of the IGF organization on assisting us during all of the preparations for this session, as well as Mariane who is assisting us as online moderator and the Rapporteur of this session.
The goal of this meeting is to debate and reflect on the impact of the current pandemic on educational sector.  With the crisis, many communities around the globe have needed to move teaching and learning to online environments and transition has not been smooth as one would desire.
According to UNESCO school closures negatively impacted student learning outcomes.  The digital divide is a big concern.  Lack of access to technology and to the educational resources can prevent students, particularly in rural areas or from disadvantaged or low‑economic status families to benefit from online education.  Although the use of distance learning programs in open educational resource and platforms can mitigate the disruption of the education, other problems may be intensified such as hacking and cybercrime.
On this session, we aim to find some answers for three issues.  First, what impact the COVID‑19 crisis will have on education and what will be the long‑term consequence for the effected restrictions with the adoption of community and the public at large.
Second, has this digital transformation to the education sector worsened the quality and polarization in our societies?  Third, what digital strategies and policies should be implemented to mitigate the negative impacts.
To answer these questions we brought today amazing specialists from different regions that will share their experiences in tackling this challenge.  Our agenda will proceed as follows:  First of all, we'll listen to Mr. Alfredo Calderon presenting from Puerto Rico A3‑time fellow, mentor and coach and volunteer on the ICANN fellowship selection Committee.  He's served as an academic program coordination for the North American School of Internet governance, currently he's cofounder of the School of Internet governance and selves as a second three‑year term as a member of the Board of Directors of the Internet Society.
Next we'll hear from Gloria Alaneme on the realities of Nigeria, a lecturer and online facilitator in the Department of Accounting and business administration, distance learning institute at University of Lagos.  Having worked in the united bank for Africa and women any Gloria, before joining the service of the University in 2007.  She specializes in strategic management with a focus on knowledge management and competitive advantage and has over the years conducted research in business administration and the partnership management and distance education.
Our third case study will be presented by Sona Baghiyan, giving us the experience from Armenia.  She has a keen interest in human computer interaction and believes in the importance of keeping values along with technological and scientific advancement.  She has recently undertaken a digital education research project aimed at exploring online environments and identifying digital tools and platforms, most suitable to the needs of the Armenia education community.  Moving on, we'll listen to Dr. Tel Amiel, raising issues on surveillance during the pandemic, he's a professor from the University of Brazil where he coordinates the UNESCO Chair in distance education.  He's a professor at the University as well in master and leadership and open education.  He was coordination of the UNESCO Chair in open education where he worked as a research coordinator.  He conducts research in public education and teacher training with the intersection between open education and educational technology.
Last but not least, Mr. Glenn McKnight will tell us about the School of Internet governance experience, the virtual school, he comes from Canada and was active in capacity building and training in the opensource community build environment and schools of internet governance.  He has a passion to share his experience with the good, the bad and the ugly.
As you can see, we have a full and diverse team of experts with us today and we'll learn a lot.  Don't worry, after the presentations, we'll have a few minutes to hear from our audience on any questions and also your opinions so anything that you may want to share with us on the topic in hand.  Without further ado, I would like to give the floor to Alfredo Calderon.
>> ALFREDO CALDERON: Thank you for that introduction and wonderful initial comments on what we're going to be covering.
As you can see, I'm going to talk a little bit about what happened in Puerto Rico due to COVID‑19 and what the government and especially the Department of Education has done.  In order do that, let me give you some background information, Puerto Rico is an island in the Caribbean with about 3.2 million habitants, it is 11,870 kilometers square, with 78 municipalities and in terms of the K to 12 student population, it has around 280,000 students.  But besides that, at the University level, from bachelor's to PhD and post‑doc, we have close to 2,000 students as well.  From sinkholes from K through 12, we have 856 schools and 30,000 teachers from K through 12:00.
Having said that, we can also share with you the distribution, how the island has it municipalities as I mentioned, 78, it has 7 regions that are called educational system regions so you can see that there are distributed as you see, including these small islands at the left ‑‑ at the right lower side.
Besides that, I need to give you sort of background information regarding what happened before COVID‑19 because here in Puerto Rico, we had a special situation.  On Monday, January 5, we had a 5.8 earthquake.  On the next day, early in the morning, we had a 6.4 magnitude earthquake.  Now, due to that, schools couldn't begin as was scheduled on January 12th of this year.  You can see some of the structures that were impacted, and most people in the southern part of the island especially decided to sleep outside their structure, their home, because they were not secure.
After that, the government started inspecting all the schools and the structures to see if we could go back to normality, and then on March 13 we started getting all of the news about COVID and the government decided to go to a full lockdown.  On March 16 we had a full lockdown and we had a curfew.  No public, private organizations were working here in the island for a few months.
Having said that, what happened last semester?  Last semester the government, especially the Department of Education found out that students and teachers didn't have the adequate equipment, technological equipment to have distance learning or relearning available.  They decided last semester, when I say last semester, I'm talking about March to May of 2020, they decided to lend devices to students.  They had some tablets and some laptops and they gave out 130,000 devices loaned to students and teachers.  They also decided to give teacher some training on teaching online, keeping in mind that at that time only high school students could take one course online if they went through a process and were adequately prepared to take an online course.
What happened?  Because of the delay in the equipment, due to the lack of training of teachers of online teaching, all students were promoted.  On May 30th, all students were promoted even though they didn't have the adequate academic content or performed accordingly.
What happened during August of this year, 2020 to 2021?  First of all, the Department of Education decided to use the public television system to offer courses to high school students, students from grade 9 through 12 were able to take some courses using the public broadcasting service and a special channel that we rehabilitated.
Also students from high school were able to take some courses using a learning management system which is in this case Moodle, but only high school students.  For the other group of students, especially those from K to 8th grade, the Department of Education and the government in order to keep teaching, They decided to use a videoconferencing system.  That was part of the summer training that most teaches had to learn how to use Microsoft teams which was the platform that the Department of Education had available for a few years and was not using to teach combined, they were just using it for organizational and administrative issues or meetings and so forth.
Finally, they decided to use models that parents had to go to the school, pick up, take home, sit down with their kids, review the material and then go become to school, turn them in to the teachers that were imparting the courses.  That was also a challenge.
If you recall, I told you that students from high school, 9 through 12 could take online courses and then there was another issue, the issue was the internet access.  Not all students, because we were not prepared for having such a long time without imparting face‑to‑face teaching in a classroom, there wasn't a census to measure how many students or determine how many students actually had internet access.  What happened, when school started in August, in October they did a census and asked internet provider for a discount for teachers and students to have internet access at a lower cost.  The result was, using funds that the government received from the federal government through the CARES Act, they gave each student or teacher a voucher, a subsidy of $400 through October to May to have an unlimited data plan to so that they could import their courses using that service.
The other issue, it was ‑‑ and I mention this as well, not all students had devices so besides the 100,000 devices that were given out to students and teachers, the Department of Education gave out vouchers to those going to University for the first time, they gave out $1,000 vouchers for first year University students.  You see the advertising and announcement that the Department of Education did to get people involved.  The thing is, although they gave out these vouchers, only 30% of the students that had the vouchers used them.
The other issue that came up, the way teachers were teaching online, using videoconferencing, using the online management system that they had, it didn't take into account these three aspects, child's ages, the computer literacy that they had ‑‑ I say they had, I'm talking about teaches, students, even the parents ‑‑ and then all teaches that were teaching online assumed that all disciplines could be taught using a learning management system or platform and deliver the content online.
Finally, the parent or guardians didn't have a support system so they learned that they had lack of skills using technology and they decided to give special webinars to parents and guardians but keep in mind they didn't have access to internet so they had to use TV space as well and they tried to use Microsoft 365 and the Microsoft Teams platform do that.
The other difficulty they found was that some parents had to go to work and they were unable to supervise the teaching and learning process because after the pandemic started, about four months down the road, the government started opening partially and people had to go back to work, but students were still not in the classroom.  Who would supervise them in the teaching, learning process?  They also needed to provide some sort of assistance to aid them, the students, and they hired more staff, and there you see some of the initiatives that the Department of Education locally did.
Concluding remarks, and this is just the start of the discussion when we go in the Q&A, online and blended learning will increase substantially post‑COVID‑19 is my impression.  We need more support for instructors, that's essentially if we want quality online learning.  We know how to do quality online learning and blended learning in higher education, but we can also learn from emergency learning online, which is what happened with the COVID‑19.
We were not prepared with the processes and infrastructure in place to do that from day one.
COVID‑19 did something positive, it showed the need for students learning online, evaluating the performance the traditional way, COVID‑19 also resulted in innovative teaching but the thing is, and this is a question that I'm launching to each one of you, will it stick?  Will we keep innovating when we teach?  The other remarks I want to make and let other people comment and speak on these issues, we're beginning to see the advantage of using multimedia and open educational resources for teaching and learning.  Are we going to implement them throughout the system or is that really up to each one of the instructors or teaches.
There's something that I'm bored a little bit about, it has to do with we need more attention to online access and we'll be speaking on that as well.  We need more flexible learning spaces.  It doesn't really have to be just a learning management system for a platform to teach, there has to be other way, other spaces, other strategies we can use and there is lessons learned for administrators that are the ones that give certain instructions to all of us and finally we need more and better data to evaluate what our student population from K through 12 at University level needs in order to have an adequate education system in place especially when we have these emergencies.  Those are my initial remarks and I will give back the floor.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you for that brief, but deep overview of what's been going on in Puerto Rico.
Before moving on, I would like to remember, this is an interactive session, please, if you have any questions, anything for the next speaker, use the Q&A chat and even the other chat, we will be gathering all of the questions so after we can move to the second part of this meeting.
Were the challenges the same or different in other parts of the world?  We'll listen now to Dr. Gloria Alaneme who will bring us a bit of the reality in what happened in Nigeria.
Gloria, the room is yours. 
>> GLORIA ALANEME: Good afternoon, everyone.  Good afternoon, everyone.  I'm talking about learning, online learning in the Nigeria experience and I'm going to be looking from different COVID periods and probably the way forward.  By the way, in Nigeria, it is a country in the West Africa region and we're a population of 200 million people and we have an estimated number of students, about 40 million that cuts across primary to tertiary institutions.  Now, eLearning, online learning, I want to make a clarification so that we understand what we're talking about.
eLearning, like I said, it is powered by digital technology while online learning could be partly or solely ‑‑ poured through the internet, but for me, the forms of learning, it is distance learning, which I'll be centralizing on.  We know that there were challenges of access to the tertiary institutions essentially.  Now for Nigeria, its policy, access to education is free, every child has the right to have equal educational opportunities, not minding if they're disabled or not but for everyone each according to his or her ability.  There is also equal access for everybody to educational opportunities, all citizens, that's including the old and the young, everybody has that access to education.  Like I said, if we do know, while there isn't time, we have ‑‑ we have been called the poor capital of the world, I don't think that's correct, as an issue of poverty, inadequate facilities into admission to higher institutions that necessitated a part‑time program and distance learning programs, but we have.
Now talking about the mode of learning for preCOVID‑19 I would like to say that essentially what is predominant in Nigeria, from primary to tertiary, in private and public institutions is face‑to‑face, traditional classroom setting where everybody sees a teacher and they talk.  Even the correspondence, when we have them, it is ‑‑ it is in the past, we have had this distance learning, from 2009, we're all using face‑to‑face irrespective of names, but then they were using prepared models that were handed out to students to read on their own while they would come together at the learning centers to come together and learn.  At some point, I think in 2003 when we opened up the University of Nigeria, when it was set up and the University of Legos, it was renamed the correspondence studies to this type of learning and we had a bit of a mix of eLearning, using, you know, materials like the CD, DVD, what have you, in addition to the printed models given to the students.  We see it as a mix, a blend of learning.
However, in 2009, the Nigeria international University commission set guidelines for proper distance learning operation in Nigeria because it was seen as purely as part time learning since they still converged in learning centers.
As for the primary, the secondary school, there was distance learning, access, it is for everyone, although we have challenges, even though students wouldn't be in school, it is understandable.  No 2010 we had opened the University of the UK, the British council and the Nigerian University center, they trained train the trainer for six universities and they did really this practice of trans learning to an extent.
In essence, looking at the preCOVID period, eLearning and online learning was basely for distance learners and very few private universities that could, afford, you know, some of those technologies and what have you, but there was a challenge to that.  Even in Nigeria, eLearning, online learning, those that passed through that medium, they were looked down upon.  There was discrimination.  Even in employment, because people didn't believe in the idea of learning outside the classrooms and all of that.  All right.
Even during that period of the preCOVID, the learners had challenges, we had eLearning and online learning and some of those challenges I listed here, we had the issue of internet access and low bandwidth, we had the issue of lack of devices and facilities, some students, learners were unable to use their Internet Protocol and it was a very important challenge, the supply, that's always been there.  Then when models were handed to students, nobody took appropriate care to make sure that they were written in the languages that the students would understand, it was more like tutor‑centered rather than learner centered.  What we thought, you know, with the train the trainers, after 2010 and things began to improve.
In all of this, the challenges are just mentioned, physically challenged, the non‑physically challenged all face these challenges.  What we know is that the challenges is for learners with special needs, you know, it is also there and I will say that it is not particular to Nigeria, we have it also in other pardons of the world.  There was this inadequate provision for the physically challenged.  We have had very few teachers that were trained to handle their issues and there was limited technology to learning.  The software testers, you can imagine in my own University at some point, you know, for the blind students, learners, we had to during the exam, you know, ask a lecturer to read out the questions while the student, you know, writes or types on their machines.  We have had situations where physical buildings, they were no ramps not allowing movement for knows wheelchair.
For the teachers, they had their own challenges.  Most of them were untrained or inadequately trained in this type of learning for eTeaching and learning.  We know that Internet Protocol, you know, keeps evolving, so they needed to be trained on how to use the ICTs.  In some ways, they were not even available to use, we had limited facilities to use and most lecturers to, they used facilities like I mentioned.  For the institution, sometimes to be around people, you have people coming to the distance learning centers and if there is any opportunity for training on all of that, why should those actually use some of these materials that they have learned.
When you go back to facilitator cults, you discover that the institution goes back to square 1.  This was because there was ‑‑ there was no autonomy for distance learning centers for the universities.  When I mean by universities, we have the regular conventional students and the distance learning all in one school, it is not a single world and there was no autonomy for them and therefore they couldn't make decisions on their own to provide adequate resources and facilities.  The government, it was difficult for them to provide, a professor was not even there, nobody looked at that probably on online or eLearning because we believe so much in the classroom teaching.
Talking about the policy on online education, I don't think anyone had one existing.  I didn't see any.  We had this ineffective revolution of the Telecom operators who were operating on their own with high prices and then during the COVID‑19 period the University had told us that 13.2 million school children   were out of school.  Why?  Because some were poor.  Some, because of gender gaps, others because of religion and regional factors and everybody was aware of the problem we went through with all of the activities.
It was assumed that with this COVID, that a number of school children had increased so much and the educational landscape was interrupted.  Nigeria was prepared through other nodes but we had no provision for online or eLearning.  More so, the inequality gap, the learning disparity widened for the poor and the rich.  The rich, of course, they could afford remote learning because they're in private schools, you know, the parents could afford internet and data and what have you, and the children in public, local private schools, they were the worst hit because there was no access to data for them, they had to really manage with the radio and TV broadcast which was at some time even disrupted, there was a program fixed for a particular time and there was no light so, there is no way to listen to the program and it had a challenge as well because the feedback, it was missing, you could listen to the program but you have money to call through the phone, get through on the speaker, ask questions, otherwise you just go with it.  There was no feedback.
Then we have the distance learners that will continue their eLearning.  The University lecturer, they had issues with the government, they were on strike, they were still on strike, so University students, it was but for private universities and parents spent so much during that period of time to provide facilities for their children like talked about ‑‑ it was talked about.  In our country, it was an experience where there was a total lockdown, and most of the organizations, they were not paying workers, so they had to, you know, provide for children to learn online and all of that, at some point I had forgotten about it.  Now again, the country of Nigeria revealed the unpreparedness of most learners because we had a poll trying to find out if this is the best way, trying to learn where we were and most would have preferred the face‑to‑face and were ready to wait until the COVID was over, the reason, we were yet to establish this.
There was training for teachers in the primary, secondary schools by the federal government and the state governments to teach them tore to at least stay in touch with their students with WhatsApp, Telegram and I can't tell you how far they have gone with that.
With assisted learners online, you know, with assignment, most of them do not even have guardians and then there was an issue of the poor cybersecurity, there was some programs there.  You will find a mother, a mother doing interventions, coming in from everywhere and bridging whatever is being taught.
Those were some of the challenges that we had found.
There was a way forward.
For me, I think we need an orientation of our mindset.  Everybody.  The teachers, the learner, policymakers how we should, you know, give instructional delivery right now.  It is no longer business as usual.  It is not just a classroom.  We have to look for other means.  Now teachers and learners need to be trained.  Internet Protocol keeps changing and evolving.  We need to be in tune with what's happening around the world and follow suit.
The government, it needs to provide mobile data packaging, guidance, devices for students free if they can, maybe online then for those that cannot afford it.  We also need to provide the facilities at all levels of education, not just tertiary and the broadbands for TV and radio stations across the 36 districts of Nigeria needs to be expanded for wider reach.  Some of those pupils in the remote villages, they couldn't even tune in to the radios and all of that.
Again, Nigeria is so blessed with sunlight.  We have the wonders of sunlight!  Nothing stops us from using our solar‑powered education, we have off loaded them with offline materials and sent to vulnerable communities and disadvantaged people.  The government needs to give finances to distance learning centers this would ease decision making and the ability to provide resources that they need to run the institutes properly and teaches us still who should handle the challenged learner, we need more of them trained so that they can.
Very importantly, we need the software test converter, although we have some now, I think since 2018 we have been able to get some of those for offline students and whatever, we need more of that technology.  Again, it is important that we have cybersecurity so that people will be willing to draw out, you know, their materials and all of that knowing that they're safe and secure for them and not just anybody hacking into it.
Thank you very much.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.  It was very nice to see all of the challenges that you have had, but also the ideas that you give.
Maybe in the second time we'll discuss some of that.
The third case study today, we'll listen to Sona Baghiyan giving us the reality of Armenia. 
>> SONA BAGHIYAN: Good afternoon.  I'm Sona Baghiyan.  I will speak on behalf of Safer Internet Armenia and present initial outcomes from the digital outcome survey carried out among school children in Armenia.  The aim of our research is to identify measures aimed to include the inclusion of the distance learning programs.  The first stage of the research is aimed to examine technological, association logical, psychological challenges occurring in the life studies.  In a late tertiary institutions stage we project the distance learning platform suitable to the needs of Armenia I'd occasion community and providing support to students and parents on the tools.  Our aim is to find solutions on how to increase students motivation during our studies and how to actively monitor the learning process.
Next slide, please.
The first phase of research was implemented from July to September of 2020.  It was aimed at identifying the most common challenges students face during remote studies.  We have surveyed approximately 1,000 school children age 6 to 17 and reached around a third of schools in Armenia capital city and provinces.
One of the obvious problems related ‑‑ revealed by the survey was lack of access to connected activities and device, inability of parents to support children in home schooling.  Around 20% of children have not been actively participating in distance learning program.  Mostly because of lack of devices, but also because of absence of necessary conditions at home.
Next slide, please.
About 60% of surveyed school children have found online classes more exhausting than traditional face‑to‑face learning.  Survey has also revealed that a bigger portion of children tend to prefer shorter online lessons compared to traditional 45‑minutes online classes.
Over 34% of students mentioned that during online classes their concentration on the learning subject reduced compared to face‑to‑face learning.  Approximately a third of respondents said that when schools moved online they became less interested in their classes.  Only 1 in 7 students said that during online classes nothing distracted him or her from the learning process.
A set of questions was dedicated to critical thinking and browsing skills.  A bigger portion of surveyed students mentioned that they had experienced difficulties in finding required information and inserting filtering information for importance.  They said it is difficult to data mine which information is trustworthy.  Some students mentioned that information overload is a destructing factor.  They said there is so much information that I can get lost, my attention is distracted and finally I find myself reading materials not related to my lesson.
A quarter of surveyed students mentioned that finding required materials have become more time consuming compared to prior COVID period.
Next slide.
The problem of being distracted is emphasized by almost all participants of the survey.  A big majority of surveyed young people, over 70% of them said that reading or browsing websites not related to the lesson material took up to one quarter of their lesson time.
Over 20% of respondents said that they spent only relevant websites from a quarter to a half of the total time of the online classroom activity.
A big part of the survey, it is dedicated to skills.  Young people tend to believe that they have sufficient digital skills for online learning.  A larger number of children think that their teachers possess up to date skills for teaching remotely.  A quarter of children think that rules of conduct are kept at an average level during online classes and the majority of respondents say that the behavior and conduct is good or excellent.
Next slide, please.
Surprisingly, cyber-attacks have been mentioned by a very small percentage of surveyed students.  Only 7.2% of students said their online classes have been a victim of a cyber-attack.  The vast majority of survey participants, over 80% used Zoom for classes and over 60% of them used applications for group responses.  The information translation to distance learning was assessed satisfactory.  More than 40% of respondents said that the response was good or excellent.  The proportion of those that said changes were average or unsatisfactory, it was equal to a third of respondents from the statement.
Next slide, please.
The impacts of this global crisis will be felt for year, if not generations.  One of the obvious problems was the lack of access to connectivity and devices or inability of parents to support children during home schooling, thus, according to UNICEF, in Armenia, around 20% of children have not been able to actively participate in distance learning.  Mostly because of lack of devices, but also because of absence of necessary conditions at home.
Even when children are participating in distance education, the question is how many of them have benefited.  Especially the younger children for whom learning online is not a viable option.
As the survey demonstrated, the inability to concentrate has been mentioned most frequently.  The problem has derived from difficulty to focus on educational activity to an inability to COVID information overload.  On the other hand, young people have become exposed to mass media and social media for 24 hours a day.  The most important conclusion and advice of these stages it is to be more critical of information received by various sources.
We will continue our research and we will also reach many thousands of school children displaced from South Armenia by war, 33,000 children are deprived of their right to education due to the war.  At a later stage we also used the research outcomes to develop new technological solutions which could best serve the interest and the needs of education community bringing people together around the positive goal of education.
Thank you very much.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.  It is very nice to see this very important survey and stat number what I have found similar numbers in other regions..  Also it was very nice, the approach of giving focus to our children, are they learning with this approach that's being taken. 
We'll now talk about surveillance and that context with eLearning.
Professor, please. 
>> TEL AMIEL: Thank you.
Just to make sure that you're hearing me well.
>> THIAGO MORAES: We can listen to you but can't see you.  Of course, if you prefer to go on audio, that's fine.
>> TEL AMIEL: That's okay.  I have my presentation as well.
Thank you to the organizers for this opportunity.  It is great to share this space with so many interesting presentations, wonderful colleagues.
I would like to take the 5, 6 minutes I have to talk a bit about some of the work we have been doing and some things we're worried about here in Brazil especially times of pandemic.
We have a project called Education Under Vigilance.  What we're worried about in the context of Brazil, but globally, it is how the pandemic has managed to accelerate our adoption of technologies and infrastructures without the due concern for what will happen after and what the risks are in adopting the technologies.
I would like to briefly go over some of these points.
I think most of you, especially now with so many ‑‑ with so much news around Google, Apple, other businesses both in the U.S. and around Europe, Amazon, I think you're all aware of this name, GAFAM, speaking to Google, Amazon, Facebook, and in other corners of the world, other groups would be included in this group, it is businesses that are mostly connected to collecting data and they benefit a lot from collecting data although they may have other aspects of the business that provide revenue.  Data is a very important way for them to organize themselves and to generate profit.  Our concern has been we have seen a great movement in not only Brazil but around the world and we have seen as mentioned in the beginning by Alfredo Calderon, the adoption of platforms like Microsoft 365, in many countries, school systems, it has come about because of the pandemic and there are many reasons for us to worry about these businesses joining or gathering data from our students and teachers.  For a lot of very well‑known reasons, I'll try to briefly mention them here.
The first, there is a massive amount of data collection and metadata collection and analysis.
Businesses like Google, for example, they may be very much vested in this for advertising purposes which we think is comparable to what we do in education and other businesses such as Microsoft may not be directly related to this and used in providing advertising, for example, but are very much interested in collecting this for betterment of products.  When the services are provided for free, as they have been for many educational systems and institution, they give us a false notion that we're getting something without giving anything back in return.  Mostly what we do, we give back data and metadata and that's in the form of research data from higher institution, the way that people teach, the behaviors that they have online while teaching and learning, massive amounts of video data and all sorts of other things that we're generating all the time.  This leads to a lot of issues.  The first one, we feed algorithm, we know that they have been a big problem for us in terms of the obvious manifestation of fake new, feeding algorithm, training algorithms is something that the data can do and it selves to lead to the production of educational products that we may need to buy in the future.  Feeding algorithms in massive amounts of data for neural networks is something that we do involuntarily with these supposedly free services.  We have seen platform loyalty, this is a motto in educational technologists for the past 50, 60 year, when you start providing these services to a very young populous, you know, kids, schools, they get familiar with these products and they see these products in the businesses that this were working in the future and there is a cycle of keeping these platforms in the mindset and the collective mindset of people and they just know how to use one thing and keep using it.  As we adopt these ‑‑ we sort of reduce the services and people are used to using one thing and then they didn't even know other opportunities exist.  People when they associate an online editing platform for documents, they think of Google Drive, whatever Google Docs offers, they don't know of the many, many other options that are viable that exist because of this platform loyalty that it builds up.
There is growing evidence of algorithmic prejudice and content removable, we see platforms as they centralize the service, they can be arbitrators in what stays and what is removed, that's a big problem.
Net neutrality, 0 rate something a big problem, especially in poorer countries as in the case with Brazil.  When you have very little access to other platforms, because the cellphone plan is over, you'll be directed to using things like WhatsApp, Facebook, those are the things that you can access without going into the consumption that you have on your plan for your cellphone.  This is a big issue for many countries as citizens of many times think that the only thing that the internet is either Facebook or WhatsApp or anything else.  That's been growing in education to the ironic point that some students don't even have access to their school platform or the University platform, but they do have access to Instagram, for example, in a time of pandemic.
Finally, this leads to massive concentration of power which is the subject of many lawsuits in many countries and I won't need to go into that.
I don't have a lot of time.  I would like to rent you with some data from the project that we're conducting through the open education initiative and other colleagues from the north part of Brazil, they have education vigilance, it is based on a script that was developed in this project by colleagues and what it does, it automatically pings these servers from all of these institutions and state educational systems and municipal educational systems and gets become information and we analyze to see school students and institutions have adopted these ‑‑ in the case of Brazil, Google and Microsoft predominantly.  It is an opensource script, anybody can use it, the data is open and licensed and anybody can use this script to map out this presence of these institutions in their country.  We're expanding thousand to cover all of Latin America and the data is available by the end of the year.
It is an automatic mapping and what we do to verify this data, it is that what we go through this equivalent of a Freedom of Information act in the United States.  We verify this data by asking specifically qualitatively so to speak to get ‑‑ to make sure that the data on the script is reliable.  We have done this for all public education institutions in Brazil which are approximately 150 state systems for school systems and now we have just recently last week mapped out all cities with over 500,000 people and the data to us, quite shocking, if you just consider public education, institution, higher education institutions and state, we're looking at 75% of these systems have already adopted either Google as Microsoft as an educational solution and a platform and the number has been growing over the pandemic.  If you look at the whole group of state, municipal, with over 500,000 inhabitants and the public higher institutional systems, the number is changing, the number goes down because municipalities take care of the young students, the first cycle of basic education, 1st through 8th grade.
Still, in that cohort, the youngest of the youngest, about a third of the school system and cities adopted these platforms which should be cause for immense worry in terms of privacy, diligence, collection of data, especially because as the platforms say in their terms of use, it is the responsibility of the school system, it is the responsibility of the institutions to guarantee that the students and the parents and they're responsible for the students, they are aware and sign off on the use of the platforms n causes great concern to us.  We keep tracking that data and we hope other also continue to track.
This data from municipality, it is fairly fresh, new, quite interesting to look at.
We have this data disaggregated for anyone that's interested in looking at it.  It is particularly worrisome for us, we know from a national survey that's done yearly that students use these platforms, they use Facebook in the form of WhatsApp, but they also use in the form of Facebook itself not only do they have a profile there in larger numbers but, say, for example, for WhatsApp, 61% of them say that they use it in school and most of the times I would say if not all of the times, the school systems have no idea what's in line in terms of data and privacy and they use it as a de facto platform as things I mentioned in the beginning.
To end on a lighter note, we have done a lot of action, especially partnership with UNESCO in Brazil to show alternative, a thing we have done, we're about to launch a project called Free Choice, it is a site that shows a ton of alternatives that could be used for software, educational resources, especially open educational resources that both school system administrators and teachers could look at, not only for their own use, but maybe institutions, they would be willing to adopt instead of using close platforms or free platforms to use something that they control.
We're trying to get people to understand that, the consequences of using these platforms.
In light of some of what colleagues mentioned, an important thing that we have, we have to teach.  We have to let people understand these topic, in connection with everything else we have discussed in terms of professional development for teaching, we have to bring in this agenda of digital, citizenship rights to the discussion in the pandemic and we're building a specialization course A post graduate course with the Ministry of Education for teachers and a nationwide course which we'll talk about open education and digital rights and we're currently running the first course for teachers for in‑service teachers for basic education which is called the open education leader course and we have 75 students enrolled in the first cohort and we'll have two more next year and we talk about the issues of technology, digital culture, open education, OER and the framework of digital rights and we now have a map of opensource solutions in Brazil so administrators know where to go if they want to provide alternative sources and work with businesses that provide these services and we have a testing platform so that people can use these different things instead of proprietary free software without knowing the risks and experimenting and finding out what's the better or viable solution for it.
Thank you for the time.  I'll leave with you some links here that may be useful and that you are interested in this and I'll be glad to participate in the next phase of the conversation.
Thank you.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.  It is very important to bring this and to remember we have several challenges, not always related to digital learning and skills, but as you said in the presentation, surveillance, our privacy, it is an important challenge inside of this environment of distance education.
Before I give room for the last speaker of the day, I would like to incentivize everyone participating to share opinions, impressions, sending questions to Q&A, in the second part, we really expect to listen more about your impressions and maybe experiences in the regions about what's been going on.
Glenn, I give you the floor.  Let's listen now about the School of Internet governance, I myself are very curious to listen about that.
>> GLENN McKIGHT: Sure.  Great.  Thank you.
I would like my slides to be put in the center panel, if I may.
Fantastic presentations at this stage.
My presentation will be fairly short.  Again, I want to do a focus on a case study similar to what Alfredo Calderon started this session on.  Basically, the concept was conceived in back in May, it is a relatively new concept back in May, 2020.  It was a result of the concern of our two founders, myself and Alfredo.
We saw that there was a lack of comprehensive virtual platforms for basic, holistic academic content on internet governance could be found and we found that there is a lot of organizations that we're doing things and they didn't have it in a cohesive track A roadmap for students to do.  COVID‑19, the pandemic basically provided an opportunity, it ex pa indicted the process of research, cure curating the launch, we looked to core issues to create an online school.  We wanted it to be, A, cost effective, we wanted a proven, tested platform, we wanted it to be expandable and opensource obviously going back to the previous presentation as an example and we wanted to work with larger communities to develop the tool that we ended up using that had additional add‑ins and plug‑ins.  Next slide, please.
After a lot of research, we decided on using massive open online course platform, a MOOC, it provide as free online training and what we have is, it is a cradle to grave approach.  We needed something that would handle all of the student registrations, monitoring the students in terms of completion of each module, we needed that structure so that it not only was viewable and technology agnostic, whether you're using a desktop, an iPad, your phone, that it would be viewable and ‑‑ from any platform.  Mobile accessibility, that was key thing.  We needed ‑‑ and again, quizzes were part of this.  They were not ‑‑ people did not have to do the quizzes.  This is a user‑focused approach as much as a facilitator approach.  If a person that's a very busy person doesn't need a piece of paper, we open it up to them, if we don't ‑‑ we don't force them to do the quizzes, if they don't want a completion ‑‑ can you go back to the last slide.  I have a couple more points to talk about.  Okay.
Basically, the quizzes were important, but as I stated, the person is not obligated do the quizzes or to get the certificate of completion.  We just ask them to participate in terms of the next things.  The innovation forum is very, very important.  It is a chance for people to meet each other.  We found that such a high‑level of participants, the first program, the first group of four, we limited it to 100 students and one of the first things we ask for, it is please introduce yourself and we want to facilitate people who are doing similar things in different countries to actually lean on each other.  That's our role as facilitator, we're not teachers, we could you rated wonderful material and we constantly ask for additional material to be added to the poll.  One of the things that we have, it is an ability to do live chats throughout the entire program with each other if they're discussing a session and then once a week we have selected speakers on a topic associated with the nine modules and it is a live chat and we use a big blue button as the platform and you may not be familiar, it is similar to blue Jean but it is a tool bundled with Moodle.  As I said, one of the things that we provide is a certificate of completion.
Next slide.
Key features:  As I stated, there is 100 students and our first two modules, they're completely booked and it is the second module, it is starting in the 23rd of September, our first group is finishing this week and we have a turnaround time for the students to start group number B.  We have opportunities for people to join and I think Alfredo can correct me on this, group C is almost completely full as well but I'm providing the links to registration form so that we're taking a waiting list if other spots do get freed up and then we have group D.  Our plan, they're after this each gripe goes through the process, we send an evaluation and do a final report.
We owe it to the community but also ow it to the people who sponsored us as part of our sponsorship agreements.  The sponsors we get allow us to do this course for free.  Next slide.
So as I state, it is a free program.  Next slide.
So this is a quick look of what it looks like on the left side.  You can see the different modules, we have 9 modules and it includes an opportunity for people who are not aware and if new schools come onboard, we'll add it to the overall poll, this score does not replace the face‑to‑face scores.  This is a program that's a fantastic preamble to somebody that may be looking at doing a face‑to‑face school, for example, I'm speaking and it is 6 tomorrow morning on the internet actors on the Ghana school, supporting that school and myself and Alfredo, we're very happy to work with any school, we're both members of the DC coalition of schools on internet governance and we have done a lot of work on the taxonomy but also we have created a guide to how to run a school.
Our emphasis here, it is that this is fantastic preamble for anyone who is looking at taking a face‑to‑face school.
I want to showcase the sponsors that helped us do this we have two platinum, we have PIR and we have Verisign, Arin, and we have ICANN, CIRA and lastly we have AFLIAS.
Next slide, if you want to learn more about our school, you can go to virtualsig.org or the Facebook site and the actual link to the site, which you can't get in, you need an ID and password, it is Internet Governance Virtual School.  I forgot to mention, every time we do a live session with one of our guest speaker, we convert that into a video and we have a play list on YouTube as well.
That's it for me.
I'll turn it back over to Thiago Maraes. 
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.
It is exciting.  The whole initiative.  Congratulations to you and Alfredo for starting it.  I definitely will share with my colleagues.  I am pretty sure that some people may be interested in following this course.  I think that's a nice factor of having a virtual school, that we can have a global team of students that participate.
In this next part that we're starting now, we don't have many minutes left.
Anyone that wants to speak, if you want to have your 2 minutes of fame, and just give your impressions, share your experience, that's very important for us as well.  We know the issues has not stopped in Nigeria, Armenia, Puerto Rico, Brazil, Canada.  There are many other regions of the world that we do believe that might have similar or even different problems that we cannot tackle.  I will still see if anyone wants to promote as a panelist, you just need to send your requests in the chat so that we don't waste these few minutes that we have left I will continue with the discussion, bringing holistic questions for some of our speakers and I will leave ‑‑ if you want to bring this question, try to answer it, the first one, I would like to bridge is tackling different educational needs.  How do we tackle them when we have, for example, different groups of students, basic students like children, students at universities and special needs and different learning curves and different fields of studies.  This has been said before, that you cannot use the same methodology for teaching math and language.
If you would like to share your impressions on that.
>> ALFREDO CALDERON: If I may?
>> THIAGO MORAES: Yes.
>> ALFREDO CALDERON: I shared this comment on the chat.  Here in Puerto Rico, actually last month a team and I, we submitted to our local Department of Education a proposal to train close to 5,000 special education teachers.  Following Gloria's comment that Internet Protocol, although it might be out there, not all teachers have the skills to use them adequately and if we add to that, that we have even the traditional classroom teachers that teach math, science, English, Spanish, so forth, they don't actually use the adequate Internet Protocol tools or technologies to teach.  They usually think that with a PowerPoint slide show they can teach everything when that's only a means and it is just a strategy.  It is not the whole purpose to use PowerPoint to teach everything and that's why we have students who are sometimes overloaded with things they have to read, things they have to look for, because teachers don't have the adequate strategies to do that.
My guess is that we need something like what Tel mentioned, a repository, a place where all teachers can go to and find resources that they can use.  Do they have to be in different languages?  Yes.
Do they have to be adapted, adaptable to different circumstances as special ED students that have some sort of disability that we need to pay attention to?  Yes, we need.
It is a matter of raising sort of a proposal to the government to establish some policy that nationwide, internationally we can have a place to go to and find the resources we need to enhance the teaching skills of our teachers.  That's my humble opinion.
Thank you.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you, Alfredo.
Does anyone else want to share impressions on the question?
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA:  Thank you.  Hello everyone here.
I want to share some thoughts about the situation.  I'm ‑‑ it is really, really good to know that most of our countries, no matter where the regions we are, we are having similar situations.
I will say two things.  One regarding to the access, in many foreign countries, particularly the Global South, the main problem is the fixed internet connections, they're near about 10 to 20% at most.  Most of the communications for internet are basically mobile services and, of course, the prices of mobile service, they're really high and really difficult for the students to actually get to internet.  That one is something that needs to be resolved in the future.
The other part, it is about the process about the model of education.  As we all know, no one was prepared for this pandemic, no one was prepared for this situation, so most of the universities, most of the schools, it was actually to overcome the situation, trying not to stop the educational activities and they did all of their efforts to do that.
Of course, it is really not feasible to change a face‑to‑face mod until just a few weeks, to change to an online model.  It is really difficult.
I think that's something that we need to reflect in the future what all our institutions, educational institutions like universities, students, schools, they need to be prepared.  Hopefully they will not have this kind of situation in the future.  We need to actually perhaps have a mixed approach for the future.  I'm one of the persons that believe that nothing is going to be the same in the future.  That's going to be the same in the following months, no matter if we just go again to face‑to‑face classes, we will still have this other model to integrate and to combine with the conventional models.  Thank you very much.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.
Does any other panelists want to share impressions on what Roberto has said?
>> ALFREDO CALDERON: Yes, you have the floor. 
>> VRIKSON ACOSTA:  Civil Society, GRULAC, from Venezuela.  I would like to mention a couple of things.  First, regarding the virtual school with Glen and Alfredo that run, it is a critical one.  I know several internet governance schools and you usually go for three day, one day, one week and of course they show information but the virtual schools, it is very interesting and they have said, okay, but I think it will be very good.  I have a good feeling for that school, that they will grow very good and I'm available to help in any way that I can.
Maybe what Alfredo mentioned, the pandemic, it caught everybody without preparation and the education practice, it is very troubled.  Several weeks ago I did a dialogue, Roberto also did it, on the internet by Missions Publiques and we showed a special session in Venezuela regarding education in pandemic times.
The information I got, it is very troubling.  The parents even have to be taught how to use tools such as WhatsApp, Telegram, whatever, in order to review how their children are being engaged from the teachers.  Nobody is prepared, nobody is prepared and nobody ‑‑ yes.  It is trouble, it is very trouble.  I think what Alfredo mentioned maybe, it is maybe time to prepare a repository of Best Practices to show everywhere.  If not, everybody will be doing everything they want and that's not what we want to accomplish.
Thank you very much.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.
It is nice that he was very interested in the Virtual School of the Internet Governance.  I don't know if Glen, Alfredo wants to comment on what's been said?
>> ALFREDO CALDERON: Yes.
I do have a couple of comments.  Vrickson is a student that's completed the course.  He's going to be in a commencement event we're having on November 20th.  Congratulations, Vrickson for that.  He's been very, very ‑‑ how should I say ‑‑ vocal in the sense that, yes, it is a great experience and it is the first school where we have students from all over the world and they have free access to all of the content and they can download the content and they can use it anyway they want, that we have used a creative common license.  For those that don't know what that mean, you can freely use the content, and if we need to get some permission from somebody, we also try to do that in order to share the resources free of cost.
The other thing is, eventually, and I don't recall if we mentioned it, but we're going to expand the school, we're going to have a Spanish version eventually, we'll have a French version eventually, and anybody from any region of the world that has a concern about the language, would like to help us translate the content into their language, feel free to contact us and we'll try to see how we can make that happen.
That takes me to the point that was made, we still have to think globally, like Tel made, we have to start building and I hate to mention, this repository, we have resources in different languages, not only to educate teachers but the administrators, also the governments of the world that the open educational resources are there and right now we have to go out to look for them.
If we have a central repository so that we could find everything we need to teach with open resources, that would be great.  Thank you. 
>> THIAGO MORAES: That's awesome.  I was thinking about that.  An interesting characteristic of the virtual School of Internet governance, it is capacity to replicate itself and to have its version and trying to reach more and more people so that's very nice.  And I'll talk to my colleagues and when we have time, we'll maybe create a Spanish version for Latin Americans, it is unfortunate that we have only 8 minutes left which means that we need to move for the final remarks.
I'll make a roundtable again.  Each of you, share your final impressions and we'll end this amazing session.
>> ALFREDO CALDERON: The next steps, we have a great group of panelists, speakers that are doing wonderful things in the country.  If we can find a way ting a great all of this information, if we can find a way to share the information with the governments of our countries, because we're talking based on our experience and the things that we're trying to do.  If we can become one voice, as a group, that would be great.  Thank you.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.
>> GLORIA ALANEME: For me, I want to respond to the question, you know, talking about using the same means, reaching out to our learners irrespective of age and you will of that.  I don't think we have to do that.
What's most important, we should look at the category, the target group, first as a primary schools, they commit to it, the television and radio, the secondary schools, they make do with television, radio and they have internet and why tertiary should use internet, unlike a Civil Society organization in my country as suggested, they're sustainable education and enterprise development and they suggest what had we call TREE:  
The T is for you to teach any means you can use to reach your target audience to teach them, use that.  
The reach, how you could reach them to ensure that they have learned, use that as well.
Engage, it is not about talking to them alone.  They also need responses, feedback, because if you talk and they don't respond, that means that you just had information and learning has not taken place.  Okay.
And then you have what do you call it, the testing and evaluation.  You need to test the right exams and tests, whatever we saw, I think what should be appropriate, it is whatever mean, whatever mode you want to use to ensure that those four points, at least achieved.
Thank you. 
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.
>> GLENN McKIGHT: Yes.  Thank you.
Again, from our experience, we have created something that's a self‑directed program that's focused on adults.  These are people that are busy, they have challenges in terms of COVID‑19 in terms of deployment and other issues, so we just basically wanted to give something and it resonates with people who see it as something that we're trying to do.  Most important is that the students who were in the program, they are meeting each other, learning from each other because if ire doing stuff on cybersecurity laws, Zimbabwe, you may be meeting somebody in Trinidad that's dealing with similar issues.  If we can facilitate that, that's not going to be something that will show up in our evaluation surveys as a tangible learning result in our taxonomy.  I think it is ‑‑ it is one of our goals.  Our goals is to provide a platform that people learn, when they want to learn it, how they want to learn it.
It is not a teacher‑focused program.  That's basically very different than maybe some other courses that we have looked at.  I really strongly support the idea of open education resources and open sources.
Thank you.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.
>> SONA BAGHIYAN: I think the last remark is that we should create a platform which will best serve the interests and the needs of Armenia educational community.  It was a platform that would benefit and motivate all students.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.
>> TEL AMIEL: An important thing we have learned, most of these things, they're in terms of collective action, we can't expect our teachers and our students to just on their own make these choices individually, although we can hope that this happens and we can help foster this movement.  The most important thing is we can work collectively in the regions and then, of course, if possible, in larger scale to make these things happen.  Most of the things here that we're talking about, it is dependent on this and influencing larger bodies that can make informed decisions regarding these topics to move forward collectively.
>> THIAGO MORAES: Thank you.
Once again, I would like to thank everyone, starting with the IGF organization.  Thank you.  Thank you to everyone from the team whose been assisting us since the beginning.
I don't think this global virtual online session would be able without your support.  I would like to thank the team for the session, I'm amazed we managed to make this merge of the agreement and our other speakers, I ‑‑ thank you.  Thank you.
So, and of course, the audience, because it is very important for us to see you interacting with us, participating, giving your opinions.  If anyone wants to follow our organization, also feel free, and I really think that after today we'll be able to reflect on this challenge and also to build support because there are many opportunities here to share. 
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-ws152-cultural-processes-in-the-age-of-the-digital-revolution^^

>> DAVID WRIGHT: It is 10 past 2:00 and I think we will make a start if that is okay.  This is IGF Workshop on Cultural Processes in the Age of the Digital Revolution.  My name is David Wright and it's my pleasure and privilege to moderate this particular workshop and so I wish everybody a good afternoon, indeed good morning, or good evening from wherever you join us from.
We're going to start off on this 90‑minute workshop.  By way of introduction, the Internet is a complex process that is very closely related to social development.  Recognizing the extent of the Internet is as crucial for everyone to learn, to govern the digital revolution in everyday lives.  COVID‑19 restrictions have only amplified this turning to the home into remotely‑connected school and a workplace.
This workshop will focus on the human media practices and analyze what steps must be taken in building good digital citizenship.  We are going to hear from five distinguished Panelists followed by debate discussion and will turn to you as an audience with questions during the debate and later on during the debate and ask that you have a browser ready and if you can just in terms of preparation, open the browser and go to kahoot.it or alternatively, if you have a mobile device, download and install the Kahoot App.
We will pose some questions and enable some extra participation and also so we can get some sense of your reactions to the questions and form an integral part to the debate and discussions towards the end.
We also encourage you to post questions in the Q&A box that was just a moment ago explained to you.  So please do use that Q&A box to post questions that you wish to pose to the Panelists or comments that you have in terms of anything, any insights you may have, or contributions that you may wish to make during both the Panelist contribution and also the debate section.
So without any further adieu, we will make a start.  So we are going to hear from the distinguished Panelists and by way to start us off, the introductory speech is going to be from Professor Miroslaw Filiciak on human media practices in the digital age with the special focus on digital life in the shadows of the pandemic.  Professor Miroslaw Filiciak is a media researcher, the Dean of the faculty and arts and social sciences and the Director of the Institute of Humanities in Warsaw, Poland, interested in theory of media studies, archeology of media and relations 22 media technology and cultural practices.  Principal investigator on numerous research projects focused on topics such as mediated cultural participation, social circulation of media content or collecting restoring and emulating old technical media.  Co‑research includes endographic study of smartphone and its uses, and collaborates with numerous public cultural, educational and research institutions, businesses and NGOs.  Professor Miroslaw Filiciak, the floor is yours.
>> MIROSLAW FILICIAK: Thank you very much for this great introduction it's great to be here so thank you very much for this opportunity.  During my short speech, I will focus on the tension between two factors which are, from my perspective, very important for contemporary media discussions landscape.  So the first one is paradigm shift within academic perspective on Internet.  The fact that during the last ‑‑ thing we discuss Internet‑related processes become more and more critical and this approach is more and more critical, but at the same time, we have this discussion within the pandemic context, so even if we are aware of media‑centric approach, which for example researchers like Nick Calgary write about (?) dangerous different biases connected with the fact that we put media in the centre of our reflection of the social world.
Nowadays media became very, very necessary and it's our communication.  So even if most researchers start to think of Internet as a set of elastic tools open to very different practices and shaped mostly by the users, and even if we think today more in terms of media, how they were designed, what they allow us to do, not just what we can do with them, nowadays we have to admit that Internet services will be rather more or less present in many areas of our lives, and I think that this pandemic situation is another milestone in this Internet inclusion and more and more areas of our lives.
And I'd like to start with reference to some very, very basic insights of Toms and Martina, from the block, "Platform society" in which the authors describe this very unique qualities of contemporary Internet, because of course we always use the term, Internet.  But it's a bunch of very different services and those services change in times.  So I think that nowadays the discussion about Internet we are discussing that platforms mostly and the platforms on society.
And the first of those factors is the verification which is systemic capturing user's data and transforming into commodity.  So nowadays much change our companies co‑modify our communication, let's say, and our identities.  And selection W selection is part of this process is taken by interfaces and algorithms.  So I think the good starting point to show it's less about empowerment of users, more about how we are programmed by platforms, how we are used by platforms that we are products and also kind of new field that is exploited.  So it's less about empowerment and more about exploitation.  So we have a dramatic start for this discussion in terms of current situation, pandemic situation; but being optimistic myself and also I think that if we think about academic research, I think that it should not just be about critical analysis of current situation but also about maybe utopia.
So I think we can use this situation of COVID pandemic as great catalyst for discussions about Internet and also kind of reflexivity exercise which is going off our houses nowadays, very different areas of the world.  So we need to reflect how to be critical but also how to be constructive, how can we imagine better futures with media?
And I think that one of the very important factors of this discussion, from the one side we try to be critical, from the second side the situation is you know, doesn't allow us to go away from media.  However, we have to use it more and more.  We have to deconstruct.  We have to start to deconstruct of all of those masking metaphors, for example, Cloud metaphor, which is about immaterial processes which are going on somewhere in this immaterial space.
I think that that ‑‑ we think of material processes of communication creates problem for social discussion and we have to remember that even those material processes are embedded in material infrastructure.  So we have to deal with lack of language for discussion for fruitful critic of media.  And without those social discussions, there will be no real political pressure for redesigning Internet as a whole or designing some very particular services by privately and of the companies.  So we need to use this pandemic as a reflective moment to discuss for example, digital gap, because digital exclusions nowadays become again very, very visible.
An example when it comes to remote education.  But also other inequalities.  Connected, for example, with gender issues because during the lockdown we are a society that women are impacted more profound way.  And we also ‑‑ other aspects we can reflect on is the fact discussion on privacy and the fact that more of our private lives and our private spaces become public now.  I'm at my home at the moment.  So it's not a private space anymore.  I have to now work from my home.  So it's from the one perspective, it's pretty problematic but I think it shows that this discussion about what is private and what is public is not just about big tech companies collecting our data.
Maybe it's a good moment to reflect on it.  And of course, we are this very weird, maybe, moment of digitalization processes.  So we observe, in Poland we have a lot of data about retro digitalization, the fact that people are longing for manual labor, baking bread as a practice as such, to move from screens and all of those material processes.  This situation shows us longing for tactile and material importance ever face‑to‑face contact and importance of informal.
For example, important for productive processes or learning processes are all those informal meetings, those water cooler conversations.  Even if it is very hard moment for discussion about media deals and how can we create this less toxic media ecosystem and maybe it's not a bad idea to use this ecological metaphors and thinking as marshal McCluin (sp) started about media as a part of our ecologic ecosystem and how to make this media, immaterial space like material ecosystem more liveable.  Most important problems are top‑down regulations for which we need the social discussion and the political pressure.  And of course until part of the process is individual's fears, competences and making the digital gap less visible or not as broad as now.
And I think that this COVID situation gives us also great examples of new inspirations and one of those examples could be an example how Taiwan has fight the pandemic, very, very effective way and even if it's not something very easily exportable at other countries, because political situations.  In Taiwan it's very specific one.
But I think nevertheless, it can be treated as great example how participation platforms, which are very popular in Taiwan can scale what is our every day practice with media because many of us use those use media platforms to establish those small networks but most of those networks works within our small bubbles.  And I think that this Taiwan example, one of many, probably you can find, gives us hope and gives us examples that we can use media platforms for public good and for better lives of everyone, not just privileged ones or not just very, very small ‑‑ and for the moment that's all.  Thank you very much.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Thank you very much for that.  Impeccable timing I would add as well.  Thank you very much.  And if I may move on to hear from the next speaker, Anna Rlywczynska will talk about the Digital Family, Safe Internet Centre U.K. charity with GFL.  And I am the Coordinator of the U.K. Safe Internet Centre and so, for me to introduce Anna is a great privilege because Anna is the codeveloper and coordinator of the Polish Safe Internet Centre and the manager of the NASK Digital Education Development.  We have very similar professional obligations and objectives.  She is a graduate of the University of Warsaw, Faculty of Journalism and Political Science with a major in Media and a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Social Sciences and Humanities.  Since 2006, Anna has been working as the overall coordinator for the Polish Safe Internet Centre.  An expert in the field of kids and youth on line content and media.  She lectured a series of conferences, the Author of articles, tools and social campaigns dedicated to the on line safety of youngest users.  In recent years, she has been involved with the works of expert groups under agencies, ECSO, European Cybersecurity Organization, as well as Safe Internet for Children launched in 2018.  Since 2003, co‑organizer of the Secure Conference Dedicated to Network Security since 2007, she has been one of the founders and organizers of the Annual International Conference Keeping Children and Young People Safe on Line, which is run every September and I should add as well having had the privilege of participating in that conference to a landmark annual event.  So please do look out for that one as well.  So, Anna, without further adieu, the floor is indeed yours.
>> ANNA RYWCZYNSKA: Thank you for that introduction.  I think will start soon.  Going from this very broad perspective, introduced at the beginning of our workshop I will go more narrow to this digital family and I'd like to start with a small thought.  In the latest research, we could see questions that probably have never or very rarely have been as before.  Such questions as how long are your kids on line because of the remote school?  How long your family is on line because of the on line education?  In which cases you have to support your child because of the remote school.  So these are things and issues I think that appears for really, really the first time globally.  And somehow suddenly forced families to use Internet in a completely different way and together.
The title of my presentation, the digital family, goes from my study and research that I did in 2018 and it was the research on families and about the data context and the Internet‑related practices that they have at home.  And using this term, digital family, I meant the family that is somehow immersed in this digitalized reality and depending on the capitals possessed on developed, manage this Internet at home in a way possible for them.  And manage and create the Internet‑related practices.
And during this research as a result of this research, it was possible to see to isolate some patterns of interactions with technology, within families N short, to mothers.  One mother positive and the other dysfunctional and it was possible to try to describe those models, while the positive would be a model characterized as the one with compliance in approach to the Internet at home.  Together with the sense that network works for us, that we use it effectively to meet our needs and to dysfunctional would be the model where there is a huge conflict in a family in a way how we manage data and the deficits in other parts of life due to the network.
So the sense the network is taking something from us and we lose something because of it.  And not to focus a little bit on the conflicts because it's really crucial.  3‑10 houses have rules on the address to kids.  And it's very, very important.  We cannot teach kids by saying them what to do.  We have to show them what to do.  We have to give examples.  Over 40% of respondents say that Internet does not help them, does not support the relations at home that they have, and 30% believe that family members have been on line for too long and kids sleep not enough and that have too little time for other activities.  So these are those flicks and problems we find in those dysfunctional models.
What is really interesting is that the multitude of devices is not so much important.  We could see families and houses absolutely filled up to ceiling with the technology.  With devices.  And in this house, the Internet wasn't the dominant feature at all.  And we could see houses with very little devices but absolutely overloaded and by technology and spending more and more and most of the time on line.
So coming back with what I said at the very beginning, what was mostly interesting, what is most interesting is that now I think parents will be more involved in what kids do on line because before, in interviews and in interactions with parents we could hear okay, my kid is very on line, spends lots of time on line i a time killer but now I think after those weeks at home they might say, my child is on line for hours because they talk to friends, because they play on line games, because they watch pranks on YouTube.  So because of the time of the pandemic, I think it made us more observe kids, what they are really doing at home.  So this is really we talk about some advantages of the pandemic.  I would say that we have to be more focused on what really kids do on line and before it was more like they spare time and we treated it like a time killer and only like an entertainment.  And now we have to be more focused on the media and focus on what they really make it possible for us.  So social interactions, opportunities to have contact with culture, to search for information.  So this is what I think would be really changed.
But on the other hand, many, many problems intensified.  Lack of parental knowledge, better relationship between household members, economy problems, strategies.  These are all problems we could see that when you increase in those months and if we now talk about the galloping digital revolution, we have to remember that not all of people can keep up to this digital revolution.  And I think this time revolution to us is very, very different.
What is really needs to be done is on the level of the public policies, is to secure accessibility together with the holistic digital educational digital citizenship education and it really shows us very deep, deep problems that we still have worldwide.  Thank you.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Again, impeccable timing.  Thank you very much.  Next to speak is Janice Richardson looking at Digital Practices in the Time of COVID‑19.  Now before, by way of introduction, I have known Janice for over 10 years.  I've had the pleasure of working on a number of significant projects, which we have participated in together.  In deed, Janice's energy and passion knows no boundaries.  If any of you are watching that will know Janice will note when it comes to protecting children on line.  By way of formal introduction, Janice is a project innovator and educational expert and author.  Founder of the Safe Internet Day event which is marked in some 140 or 150 countries across the world.  She coordinated the European Commission in Safe Network from 2004‑2014, of which both Anna and I are coordinators, and founded the EC‑funded Enable Initiative tackling bullying through social and emotional skill development for 2014‑2016.  She runs an EU‑wide Youth Council, advisor to several European International organizations, six on Faceblook, and worked with governments in Middle East and North Africa region as well as other parts of Africa.  Coauthored a dozen books and 21st Century literacy, six of which are published by the Council of Europe.  That is quite a bio, Janice, the floor is yours.
>> JANICE RICHARDSON: Thank you.  And good afternoon everyone.  I will now share my screen because I do want to talk about the COVID experience.  First of all, let me tell you, yes, this has been a huge paradigm shift in society.  I don't think we have known such a shift over the last 30‑40 years.  Suddenly children had to be educated at home and although we are trying to push teachers to go on line with technology as a way to empower children in the classroom, now they were forced to.
I think the family is important.  When we are talking about society and digital citizenship competences, we have to talk about the family because that's where the values and the attitudes are developed in a child and on those can they build their competences.  Since last year we have been working on a survey for the Council of Europe, digital citizenship education survey for families.  We were about to launch in April when suddenly COVID struck.
We therefore launched in May on the 15th of May but we added some questions about how families were tackling the COVID situation.  And I think they are very ‑‑ the very interesting responses we got from more than 21,000 parents in 47 countries across the European continent.  First of all, we are not surprised.  The biggest challenge that parents had was organizing their work organization with what their children were minute to be doing and essentially ‑‑ meant to be doing, and balancing this screen time with physical at this point I.  Suddenly this became very important for parents.  They realized that general well‑being during the crisis not only due to the stress of the crisis but the stress of being indoors in some countries with only one hour a day outside of the House, were having a huge impact on children.
I think it actually pushed families that had poor habits into even poorer habits and families who were already thinking of these issues dug much deeper and tried to understand what is going on.
The next question was, many schools reacted to the crisis so what was your experience and your children's experience with this?  Or what's it been so far because the survey ended in June.  Now surprisingly enough, we see that in 5% of countries, children had already had some experience, prizing because 5% is not very much ‑‑ surprising ‑‑ but this experience came mainly in Greece and yet Greece is one of the countries who responded most to the fact that their Internet connectivity and devices of course, created barriers to learning so there are real discrepancies which we are investigating now.
We also heard that parents thought they were coping well but the red line here, you see that parents think that the distance learning offered by schools left a lot of room for improvement.  Parents also had the problem of not having enough experience to engage their children in distance learning well, was it the fault of the families or in fact many, many schools don't understand what distance learning should be and how it can be a means of empowerment.
We also left an open question and here comes the most interesting responses.  Children with special needs throughout the whole COVID period, just simply didn't see their learning supporter, didn't have any extra help and parents were really through to their own devices more than they had ever been.
Many parents consider that teachers don't have the right Pedagogical strategies and when I look what the is going on in teacher training college, I'm not the least bit surprised.  Children's well‑being was really issue as well as the poorly organized remote classes.  Children learned more between the age of zero and 5 years old than any other period in their lives.  Once again, we see that children who love learning flew with this opportunity by being able to organize their own time, their own resources.  On the other hand, Germany, Finland, Russia, also did surveys where would children going to learn?
In Germany 80% were going to YouTube to learn.  So I think this shows a lot of gabs in our society.  I think that it shows a lot of issues that we really need to start digging deeply into.  I hope this has given you some food for thought and I thank the Council of Europe for having promoted this research, supporting it, by actually interviewing one‑on‑one parents that have more information.  Thank you.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Many thanks, Janice.  Again, great timing.  This is going to make moderation of this Panel fairly easy.  Next to speak is Dr. Anna Kalinowska.  How You Self Govern in a Hyperconnected World.  Anna is a cultural studies expert, a graduate of bachelor, masters and Ph.D. of the University of SWPS, in the process of defending ‑‑ temporarily due to COVID‑19, her thesis is Media Practice As the Technology of Self.  She has 10 years of research experience in the cultural politics and digital culture fields also in developing the scientific and commercial research in these areas.
Her specialization dimensions are the network sociology, user identity and the adaptation of the technologies of self concept into the digital age.  Anna, the floor is yours.
>> ANNA KALINOWSKA: Okay.  I shared my presentation with you.  It's okay?  David?
>> DAVID WRIGHT: It is indeed, yes, thank you very much.
>> ANNA KALINOWSKA: So I would like to tell you about some theoretical themes with research implementations.  So I would like to present this as identity adjustment tools in a disconnected reality.
What I'm about to present is based of my Ph.D. thesis and research.  The concept itself was introduced by Michelle FOUCAULT in the early 80s.  Technologies of the self permit individuals to effect by their own means or with the help of others a certain number of operations on their own bodies and souls.  And what is the most important?  Technologies of the self transform the self in order to attain a certain state of happiness, purity, wisdom, perfection or immortality.
Technologies of the self established a framework for tools and material with ratification for physical spaces.  In my speech, I will show you that the original concept however acquires an update due to presence of digitalization of reality and the common trend of social networking.
Nowadays digital tools are modern accusations of co‑network concept.  This could be smartphones or Mobile Apps where technologic, social media and like dynamics of creation space, network self.  All of them are constantly correct in our personal data.  The identification process as mentioned earlier, which all of us produce in our routine in individual context.
How we perceive physical space through our data or could reach other people's senses as well as emotions.  This could lead to many polarizations such as perception of one's appearance based on Instagram or Google street view.  How for example development on the road.
They also have another life consisting of manual outer cultural and complexity, for example diaries, diets or sports.  As the results of my research showed that the digital network Clouds were only the third most popular choice as method of recording information.
What's more, high discord without manifestations are related to physical space activities like individual sport plannings or active hobby doings.  On the other hand, one of the important factors is believed that the individuals desire to leave footprint after self.  It is a kind of legacy the age of social networks that can be entirely created.  So it could be explained that the users have a wheel of presence, several social media identities.
Now last but not least, we can also identify as with our devices.  One of my data responder makes excellent example of it.  She said, for me a smartphone is like mini‑me.  And for example, when my phone is discharged, it goes by me of course.  The phone cannot be charged by itself.  It is a miniversion of what is going on with me in this time.
And my first recommendation, especially in this time of pandemic and network compassion could be to keep our digital self in discipline when our houses became a stage of every day dimensions of living like home, work, relations of self and determination.  Thank you very much.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Anna, thank you very much for that contribution, as well.  It is really important that we involve young people in these debates and if I may now just turn to Philippine for a comment about what you have heard.  16‑year‑old Philipine is enrolled in a bilingual program in Paris where she will sit the OIB exam in 2023 to complete dual degrees in French and English.  She was recently one of nine students in France to be chosen to do internship with the French Prime Minister.  She has been speaking internationally since the age of 12 when she was invited to speak at the Council of Europe conference on digital citizenship and net safety for children.  At the IGF in 2018 she was a Panelist in the session led by major social media providers along with 17 other your Europeans in the EU council for digital good, Philippine strives to make the Internet a better place.  In 2019's, 2020, the Council coauthored a digital activity book to be used in primary schools.  Philippine, that is a mighty impressive set of things you have achieved already.  If I could ask you to make some comments about the things you heard already.  The floor is yours.
>> PHILIPPINE BALMADIER: So I think that one of the hardest parts of the COVID part was that things were more on line and we had to face more of what people thought about us.  So more people, more young people were posting and talking about their lives on social medias, which also brought on a lot of social anxiety because everyone got afraid of opinions and focused on likes.  And I think that was actually one of the hardest parts for me because basically social media used to be a safe space for us, except that with the COVID period, it became more difficult, something that I used to really enjoy became actually quite detrimental to me.
I don't think like social media anymore.  And I think there is a problem with it.  And I think that with on line learning, the main problem was from what my teachers had told me, was that we ‑‑ they did not know the tools.  And that the schools didn't know the tools.  So it was very hard for the students to learn and to communicate with each other via these Apps because our teachers didn't know how to use them so we didn't have many on line classes and at the end, we weren't able to communicate and we didn't learn as much.
And I also think that like Professor Miroslaw Filiciak said, that we weren't taught constructive and critical thinking, which I think was one of the main problems for the pandemic is because we weren't able to use those tools to function correctly.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Philippine, thank you very much.  Yes, so some really important reflections which we may well come back to.
So thanks to all the Panelists for their insights and indeed their contributions.  We will now turn to the debate and indeed, I have some questions to each of the Panelists and if I can turn to them in turn, I have two questions each.  First turning to Professor Miroslaw Filiciak.  I will others as well.  We will be asking questions using Kahoot after some of these questions which I'll introduce.  Professor Miroslaw Filiciak will be able to answer how the pandemic influenced our on line presence, social interaction and our functioning in the real world?
>> MIROSLAW FILICIAK: Okay, so I think it's a great question.  I tried answer briefly.  I think of course there is always this answer is too early to say.  But to be honest, I think that I know where many projects, many ongoing projects and we already have some data and I think it's not something we should wait for some big project which we address our problems because I firmly believe that every knowledge is situated, situated in many context.  So I think that we have many quality and quantitative data.  So I don't think we should wait for anything, for some new data.  We are aware of how on line traffics are.  We can observe people spend much more time on line and so I think it's already have those insights.
And of course I think that the resolution of our ‑‑ of this knowledge can be improved with some time so we review data but I think that we have enough information at the moment.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: I think that is quite a rare response for someone in Academia that we have got enough research and enough data.  That is not often the response you hear.  But it's fascinating to hear I agree clamoring for lots of research and insights is where lots of people are at the moment.
In terms of if I could reach out to all attendees.  Everyone listening.  Just a reminder if you do have got a reaction or indeed response or a question for panelists, then please do put that in the Q&A which will be down to the bottom of your bar there.  So click on Q&A and make points, add contributions, insights, and like I said, questions.  So please do insert those in there.
Now, this was the point at which we were going to ask a question using Kahoot but I suspect that question has been asked.  Andrezej, can we reopen that particular question?  If we can, can you launch and share the screen?  If you could go to kahoot.it or if you stored the App, what it will ask you for is a game pin.  And what can you see there is the game pin, 3269454.  So if you insert that when we start the quiz or the question ‑‑ start the quiz then the question will appear.
The first question is, on average, how many hours is it okay for a 13‑year‑old to spend on line outside of school?  So I would encourage people to go to Kahoot.I.
And that number is being inserted into the chat as well.  So there you can see the question.  On average, how many hours is it okay for a 13‑year‑old to spend on line outside of school?  So it's one or lessor two or three or 4 hours?
While that is still open, I'm going to move us on.  Okay.  We got a reaction and a response already.  So two hours is what we think.  Two hours for a 13‑year‑old is what our audience thinks.  Andrezej we will come back to question number 2 in a moment.
Next I turn to Janice, back to you.  So in terms of questions, you have been working for many years on building digital citizenship among children and young people.  Do you think that after the pandemic experience we'll be one step closer or one step further back in this process?  What do you think?
>> JANICE RICHARDSON: I honestly think that we are not really moving very far in advance or back at the moment.  As I said, families who understand citizenship and citizenship in the ding tall world seem to reinforce their knowledge whereas others just carried on their own way.  And now I understand much more why.  In the Council of Europe survey, we discover that 1‑3 families actually think about the impact that technology can have on their children.  And we also see that 1‑3 families, 36%, to be exact, actually don't talk to their children about what it means to be a respectful citizen.  And I think that citizenship was really tried during the COVID period and we saw some of our world leaders showing this behavior, becoming non citizens.
We also now understand why.  We are so used to talking about the issue, that sometimes we forget to talk about the strategies.  So I'd like to see a lot more talk about the strategies, about what we are expecting of families, what the outcomes should be, a bigger call for action and more transparency on what the anticipated outcomes should be and if we manage that with parents and society in general, maybe we can say next year that we're all moving that little step ahead.
One step forward is always clearly what we are all ‑‑ what we want to strive for and we want to aim for.  Absolutely.  Thank you very much.  If I could come back to Kahoot for question number 2.  Andrezej, again, if you could share the screen, please.  Again, it's the same pin number.
Question number 2 is, the web brings us closer or further away?  The options are, we have three ones, the same pin code, and so it puts us further away to our loved ones, supports our relationship with our loved ones or brings us closer to our extended family and friends.
What do we think?  The Internet brings us closer or further away?  It would be interesting to get dimensions Arnold age responses around this one as well.  But that's perhaps for another workshop, I'm sure.
Now we have 42, 43 people on the Panel.  I'm not going to wait until 60.  Andrezej, if we could close that so we can get a reaction.
There we go.  It brings us closer to extended friends and family.  And I'm going to invite towards the end Panelists to make an observation, Philippine, especially you.  I'm just going to tee you up for it for a little bit later in terms of observations.  So closer to friends and family.
Andrezej, thank you very much.  Next I'm going to turn to Anna for your question, or your first question.  Is it possible based on your research to identify the main factor or indeed factors that make parents prepare their children for effective and wise use of the Internet?  What do you think?
>> ANNA RYWCZYNSKA: Thank you for this question.  Before pandemic, 18% of 1‑3‑year‑old kids were in front of the television over three hours.  Moreover, 55% of 14‑16‑year‑olds was over three hours on the Internet after school.  Not at school but after school.  Almost half of patients, 45% of parents were over three hours on the Internet after work.
This is important, that's why I'm emphasizing it's after work.  So if we collect this data with the newly‑published research ‑‑ it's really very interesting report and I hope it's available also in English.  Very precise and very interesting report.  So if we connect this data with this report, that says that 47% of young people said that they significantly raised time that they are on time apart from education.  So if we imagine they were on line three hours after school and they now increased this time, but they are not speaking about how long they are studying remotely, but how long they are on line after, it means that we are totally over loaded by technology.
And for example, I also put it here because for me it was very, very interesting that 55% of teachers said that they are on before or any other activities such as sports, anything that help them to improve their well‑being.  They feel like they are constantly on line.  So looking that the data, we can be absolutely sure that we have to focus on quality of our Internet usage because now it's kind of our new normal existence.  We have to be on line.  We can't be now off line and do something with more like deeply.
So, I can share with you some factors that come from interviews parents and some Professor practice that we have.  There are some factors and situation that is support us and if I could list some of them.  For sure we will be sense of responsibility for supporting the chart and using technology, very important.  Child really needs our support.  Setting rules but as I said before, rules that I would like to call family members because then it's okay a parent cannot be on line 3 hours or 4 hours after work and expect his child not to be on line, to be doing some Legos, yes?  It doesn't work like that.
Attentiveness to needs of children that the relationship with peers.  This is also very important.  We cannot look at the Internet as okay, like I said before, thank you we have to look at this as a social environment of kids.  Without this, they would be really, really very lonely.  Talking about opportunities and threats on line.  Let's remember about the problems cyberbullying had.  It was very, very interesting what Philippine said.
That social media is somehow are also overloading us and we have problems with social media and cyberbullying is also increasing now so we have to remember that our kids when they are with friends on line that also can find some problems there.
Work on relationship at home.  I think it's a key to all problems and all needs that we have in this moment.  Keeping balance in your activities.  This also so important and Janice from your research it was also very, very interesting that people that parents start real to see more that it is so needed like support and activities and I can from my perspective, I can tell you that this we can't in the Forrest, I haven't seen so many people ever in my life.  The Forrest was full, absolutely full of people.
So yes, somehow we tried to find that those activities are really important and just not to get crazy only being at our screens.  Of course let's do sometimes Internet detox.  Maybe even once a week, one day, a few hours, just try to stay away from the network.
And at the end, I would like to emphasize that conflicts regarding Internet usage at home within families happened most frequently with the families focus on time and not on the quality.  So we really have to be now very focused on what we do on line and not so much how long because now we are just, we don't have much more options actually.  Thank you.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Thank you, Anna.  Just to my point there, yes, I think particularly it's not can I go on line and connect on line?  I think we are on line.  And connected all the time.  And just as well so taking a break is a really important thing.  We should remind lots of people and I'd like to extend to attendees take a break but just not until the end of this workshop.  You got 30 minutes.  So 30 minutes left and then you can perhaps take a break.
Thank you very much.  So Anna Kalinowska if I could turn to you now for your first question.  This question is, does the web help someone interfere with the achievements of life goals?
>> ANNA KALINOWSKA: Thank you for this question.  I think that depends because what could help us as well as overall does.  For sure, it helps and gives us very much inspirations and help to achieve our goals, help to plan our dreams, but also the various types of tools like worksheets, network tools, applications and for example Google packet or Zoom communicator.
But on the other hand, the content, what we had from the web could interfere with our daily routine because it is impossible to check this all websites and all and I think we could create our subjective choice and verification strategy to not think down in this work environment, I think.  Thank you very much.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Thank you very much.  One further question for each Panelist and then Philippine I'll come to you for comment as well.  If I could just return to Professor Miroslaw Filiciak if I may just to put you on the standby.  And your second question, the question we have here for you is, what do you think is the Internet a mirror or a door to a different cultural process?
>> MIROSLAW FILICIAK: I think it's definitely more mirror because I think it's maybe like 20 years ago Internet was a different reality to virtual worlds and door to the another dimension.  But I think now we can assume it is more like maybe even glass because I think ‑‑ and also connects my previous answer because I think it's now the problems we have regarding Internet are not very different problems, new kinds of problems, which is from some kind of other reality.  It's magnifying class.  We have this same problem because for example for me, digital gap is another dimension of social inequalities.  We have to fight against this.  So I think from one perspective, it's of course kind of a scary reflection because of course we as humanity.  And resolving this utilization of problems.  But at the same time, we have some data and we have some ideas how to fight against them.  So I think from this perspective, there is kind of hope that we know those problems and maybe I don't know it's okay because I think that we got great observation from participants of our Panel and I know it would be okay if I could address it now?  Because I think it somehow connects.
Citizenship is not age‑defined and we consider children ‑‑ they are us and we are them.  And it's a great comment.  But it's also about age but it's also about the Internet versus the real citizenship.  I think that those borders doesn't exist.  And of course in context of age definition and how we discuss this problems with youngsters, we have to be very aware now and not patronize and I'm grateful that Philippine is with us so we are not just bunch of elders talking about the young people but we have also this young voice.  And of course the situation we are discussing, the COVID situation is not just about Internet problems.  For example, in Poland, we have new limitations for freedom of movement for young people and it's also I think the issue of citizenship in the broader context and we have to be very, very aware of the problems because of the demographic situation.
And many European countries population gets older and political terms it will be more and more difficult for young people to make their voice be heard.  And because the majority will be older so I think it's a very, very important issue and we have to be very careful and we have to just talk here so thank you for this.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: It reminded me as well ‑‑ please any of the attendees, I encourage you to make comments.  Thank you very much for posting that in the chat.  There are specific questions, observations, comments, contributions, insights that any of you have, please do add those in.
Just in terms of the last question, is the Internet a mirror or door, it seems it may be a mirrored door with magnifying elements to it as well.  So, very good.  Janice if I could turn to you now.  Is profiling replacing pluralism on line?  Are children growing up on the limited media diet?  What do you think?
>> JANICE RICHARDSON: Very interesting question.  I do think that profiling is replacing pluralism.  Children are getting far too much Internet, far too soon.  We are shaping the way they speak.  We are shaking what they are thinking by the very fact that they are watching the same cartoons and then we see this repeated with the logos on their clothing and this is creating greater social in equalities.  The rich are getting richer and getting fewer and the poor are getting poorer.  And social mobility, it seems to me, is reducing through Internet.  I notice especially with the elections, when families seem to go in the same direction nowadays, one starts reading a certain type of Internet and another one uses the same computer and therefore gets the same news.
And I find it very concerting.  If I think back, it used to be really great to rebel against what your parents thought.  They would be social for example.  New ideas and you would bring them into the family and this was the physical meal time discussion.  It seems that this is wanning because people are getting the same information and the more we look at this information that comes up on our screen, the more of it we get.  But I would also like to respond to, is citizenship age defined?  Well, it is in a way.  Empathy, for example, when a child is born, he looks into the parent's eyes as he is getting fed and something called mirror neurons, if you're familiar with the work of Nicholas par, for example, are triggered and the child learns to express a certain number of things by feeling what the parent is feeling and yet now, a das, I see mothers feeding their child with their mobile phone in their hand looking at the mobile phone.
So if you don't, and in many experiments on this, if a child doesn't develop empathy, if he doesn't develop cooperation and respect in eldest childhood, it is far, far ‑‑ earliest ‑‑ more difficult afterwards.  There are lots of experiments on empathy but no one has really had any great success in pushing this to the fore.  Now how can we be a citizen if we don't have empathy and if we don't think of the rights of others around us?  So I think it's progressive.  If you take a look at the Council of Europe website, you will see there are 20 competences divided into values, attitudes, skills and knowledge and understanding and there is a central circle which begins when the child is born and then a second circle when the child is 10 or 11, 12 and then finally more complicated elements like being able to face ambiguity and cultural openness.
So that is my thought on that question.  Sorry, I was a bit long on that one.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: That is a reminder about younger children.  It's a really important one.  And it is a beautiful segue as well into questioning in 3.  So Andrezej, if I could prompt or if you could share the screen and if everybody could reach for their browser and back to the Kahoot quiz.  We have question Number 3.  Where do children build their values and attitudes that give them in on line activities?  Where do we goat?
Home, at school, through friends and peers and through media.  This is not exclusive.  Perhaps it's where they most will build their values and attitudes.  It's a beautiful segue in terms of those responses that you made.  Perhaps this is changing as well the influence.  But that is another workshop and another time to respond to that someone says at home and at school.  You can't do blue and red it's one or the other, I'm afraid.  So it's the primary way you think children will build their values.  So please do chime in.
We have nine responses and 38 people.  There is quite a few more to be had.  But because of time, Andrezej, thank you very much.  We'll see how we respond.  So nobody at school or through media but mostly through friends and peers and also at home.  How children acquire values sorry, just making a note so it reminds me for later on.  Andrezej, thank you very much very much.  If we could just move on now.  Now I'm turning to Anna for your question.
So the web, there is a question for you, your final question.  The web brings us closer or further away?
What do we think?
>> ANNA RYWCZYNSKA: At the end I will come to the poll we had a few moments ago.  I would like to start with a question I heard recently, how we would manage today if there was no Internet.  And I think that there is no answer to this question because Internet is so deeply entered our everyday life that if it didn't exist, the world would look completely different.  So you wouldn't be used to the opportunities that Internet brought us.  And like first responding, I would say, yes, the Internet brought us closer and it's kind of objective truth, yes.  It brought us closer.
But the only question is, what emotion comes with this?  What emotion do we have in us?  How do we react with this Internet?  And it's very good question to the people who they feel Internet brings them closer and with whom separates them.  So we are talking a lot about this private and public space  today, and like the Professor said, but somehow I have a feeling as a humanity, this private public blurring brought us together, brought us closer.  I have this impression when we had some practice meetings before IGF and it was many people collecting from all over the world.  Not like usually from those usual office spaces that are mostly the same, like hotels or things like that, but like our offices, but from homes.
And now suddenly you could see someone in his surrounding and even to look through the window in Ghana and Finland and Australia.  And it was something like strong feeling of being somehow together in this whole problems that we have right now.  Sometimes occasionally you could even glance at waving cat's tail somewhere, or when I'm speaking all the time, my hampster is running now because I forgot to take him off.  The lives really enters our professional life.  But it is very, very interesting on how people feel about Internet between their closest people they live with.
And I would like to go to the research done in 2018, by the institute I work for, NASK, and there was the data I gave him my first presentation.  Almost 40 people, both young people and both their carrier's, it was like same answer.  Almost 40% of people said, the Internet separates us from the closest people we live together at home.  But of course brings us closer to further friends and further family and some opportunities there.  So, actually the only people we feel separated from are the people that we live with us.  And this is extremely interesting to see happen after the pandemic when we ask the same questions and could see this in this poll, many people said that doesn't separate them from the people they live with.
And I think somehow we started to use technology to communicate with people, that you usually don't have to communicate on line.  With the grandparents, with the parents don't live with us at home.  With sisters and brother if we don't live with us at home.  And now it may be changes this feeling we have in us that Internet have this possibility to bring us together also with our closest people because sometimes like now we don't have other options to be with them.
So I think it's very interesting topic and I think we would see a huge difference in this inner emotions of people after this pandemic that we are going through right now.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Thank you very much.  Insightful around whether you're connected to people closest or if it connects people that are further away and that balance for having contrast, perhaps.
So finally, I appreciate your comments in the chat and I encourage Panelists to have a look at the questions and comments.  Maybe.
We will come back to that given time.  For the time being, you're an expert in technologies of self.  Please explain, what is this?  Did the digital revolution spawn this concept or did it exist before?
>> ANNA KALINOWSKA: I said in my presentation that it has existed from early 80s.  And it's populated by others as a individual controlled pattern.  What is it in one sentence?  The tools and the methods which could help us to achieve our goals and the ration ‑‑ the rest of our lives because we could set some goals or some patterns to do and if we go daily routine by this, by to become more perfect in this and more developed in this, for example, in diets, in doing sports, or even in education or our educational goals, it can be done.
So, the technologies of the south has for example recording our diaries in manually.  Or doing reflexative activities, thinking about what can I do to improve myself?  But in my opinion, the digitalization gives us a new and better opportunities to express, how to put control or improvement ourselves and in the other hand, this concept highlighted meanings of the technology in the face context because from the ancient Greek, the techna means crafts to ability and logos means work, order and inner sounding.
So in my point of view, the technologies is related to give the perfect order in our life.  Thank you.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Thank you very much.  If I could turn to the final question, the final Kahoot question.  Thank you for sharing the screen, Andrezej.  We can see the final question is, do you allow digital control yourself?  So please reach for your browser or your App and answer this question.  No, I think I am free, I don't have Facebook and Instagram, et cetera, or I will control how digital tools control myself or, in most cases I don't bother which data my Apps know about me.
The pin is 3269454 on the kahoot.it App.  We could close now, please, Andrezej.  We'll get a sense it is, we, most people feel in control.  I guess the audience we have here is probably not representative of the population in the broadest sense given by you definition you're at the IGF but it's really interesting to see your views as ab audience.  So thank you very much for that.
Andrezej, thank you.  If you could close that, stop sharing, that would be wonderful.  So Philippine, for the final time, we have only 5 minutes.  If I could just turn to your for your comments, insights and observations about all you have heard, particularly from the responses from the Panelists.  Give us your perspective of what you have heard and correct as well some of our esteemed Panelists too.  Thank you.
>> PHILIPPINE BALMADIER: So first I'd like to answer the question.  I think we become more vulnerable passing through the door but I think this vulnerability helps us to learn about ourselves but also to learn about others.  It makes us more open and more accepting of other people's views.
And to go back to the Kahoot question, I think it supports our relationships with loved ones because since the confinement, I have had Zoom meetings with my entire family and we have done cooking classes and which we hadn't done before.  And I think it was really an amazing experience for me because it really made me feel more connected to my family even though they are at the other continents and other half of the worlds.
And I would like to say, to answer Anna, I do think that parents should set an example for their children.  I don't think that parents can say, oh, you have to be on your phone less than two hours a day.  But then after be on their phone constantly.  I mean, I can relate to this personally because I believe that ‑‑ I don't see how you can teach children, especially teenagers or young children, to be independent and to follow rules when the parents don't follow them themselves.  Ting makes it really difficult to learn.
And I think that going back to Janice said about empathy.  I find it also very difficult that many teenagers don't have empathy.  I think that from my experience, most people that bullied others were teenagers and I think that schools have not necessarily ‑‑ have done a bad job educating people in this, especially children because when you're children, you learn, and then after at some point, your view changes.  But I think that as you grow up, you need to have the basis of when you were younger, which a lot of people didn't learn because you can't expect parents to teach their children about empathy because they might not be empathetic people.  So I think it's very important for schools to educate them.  I personally haven't learned that at school but I have been very lucky to have parents that have taught me about that and to have life experience that have taught me about that.  So thank you very much.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Thank you very much.  The one thing I would add is, you have an assured a very bright future so when you become President, Prime Minister or whatever it is, please remember us all in the decisions that you take when you start leading a country.  You're future is very bright.  Thank you very much.
Just quickly, we have only got two minutes left.  Finally, if I could just turn to the Panelists ‑‑ before I do, thank you for your questions and it sounds like the Panelists have given you a response.  Anything that makes you happy.  I'm delighted with that.  You should feel congratulated to that.
A final point I wish to ask all the Panel activities express one voluntary commitment they would undertake during the next 12 months before the next IGF, which hopefully will be in person in 12 months times, to raise awareness about the issues we talked about.  So we have only got one minute, so Professor Miroslaw Filiciak, we turn quickly to you.  What is your point?
>> MIROSLAW FILICIAK: So I think we will discuss more the tools we use in our University with the students, not just make it remote tools for our communication but we will reflect on the tools itself and impact on the process of education.  Thank you.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Thank you very much.  And Anna?  Your voluntary commitments what will you do?
>> ANNA RYWCZYNSKA: For sure with the institute I work for, we will continue with the work to secure kids from Internet threats and to try to be more with them and help them with cyberbullying and on line problems.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Wonderful.  Thank you very much.  Janice, how about your commitment?  Janice, you're on mute, sorry.
>> JANICE RICHARDSON: Sorry.  Promote remote learning but in a much more exciting way so that children can usury moat learning as a means of learning at their own pace and teachers can really understand of the value that they can be inside of remote learning, not as replacement but as enrichment to empower.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Thank you very much.  And finally Anna Kalinowska.
>> ANNA KALINOWSKA: I think with our scientific and non‑profit organization environmentally could think about how to reach digital zen in the age of social control.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: Thank you very much.  Philippine, have you got anything you wish to add in terms of commitment?
>> PHILIPPINE BALMADIER: Yes, so I am class representative at my school for my class and I'd like to raise awareness for mental health because I find that especially during the COVID period and confinement, that has completely degraded a lot of people.  A lot have come to me and said their grades have significantly dropped and their mental state is absolutely awful.  So, I'm going to try my best to work on that and I have already made myself able to talk to them and also talk to teachers about it so they understand, because I think that teachers play a big part in that.
>> DAVID WRIGHT: That is a wonderful place to finish.  So thank you for that and indeed thank you to all of the Panelists.  We have overrun by a couple of minutes but I wish to add my gratitude and thanks to my wonderful Panelists and it's been my pleasure to moderate.  It's clear that it's a fascinating subject and the pandemic is merely amplified the issues we just debated.  I hope you have found this helpful and stimulating.  I wish you well for the rest of the IGF.  When we close the session, you will be sent through automatically to leave any particular feedback.  It leads me to close this particular workshop and again, my thanks.  Have a great rest of the day.  Thank you very much.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-ws194-governing-cross-border-data-flow-sustainable-development^^

>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Good evening, good morning, depending on where you are.  Let me thank our speakers, A, to host us on dataflows, privacy and impact on ITES and a host of related subject issues.  Let me thank our speakers for their time and for their interest to speak on the subject.
So in my intro remarks I will be very brief and I will touch upon a few major findings, a study in partnership with the U.S. India problems advance.  It looked at not just the dataflow but more in the Indian context that we are now debating a Parliament, which is called data pro technician.  It could be enacted but the debate is going on.
So there are broadly two schools of thought in this cross‑border dataflow on various walks of life.  So what we have done, we have looked at the impact of the measures which have been ‑‑ in this prediction of India, on our digital exports.  Of course I come to this point and I'm ready to talk later on and also we have looked at a few other things like employment generation and ‑‑ now if I look at the India current data protection regime, cross‑border dataflows, it is fairly non restricted.
What we have found, we have also ran as part of missions of our data protection, we have also looked at the provisions of data protection in many other countries.  And we found that if this bill is enacted, that India's data protection regime will become a little bit more restricted like the European Union; not as restrictive as let's say Viet Nam, of course China and Russia, they are very, very restrictive.  But more like ‑‑ but suddenly not as less restrictive.
And the impact on our digital export will be negative, which means it's not going to be a huge impact, in terms of percentage it won't be that huge but the impact will be large.
There is another school of thought in India who says if we have a data protection language like what we have been proposed, then we get more and more investment for the setting up of data centre.  More and more employment generation and of course that will depend on various other factors broadly speaking ease of doing business Internet business ecosystem and various other factors.  So that during ‑‑ the jury is still out.  We must keep in mind it's not a blanket protection.  So we have divided the data under three broad heads, personal safety, privacy and all of these aspects and it is those data which we think are important, for us and they are being protected most as compared to more common data.
So we have done this work with the USIBC and have been very kind and active in this work.  We have presented our findings before the many parliamentarians, including our parliamentary dealing with the subject and we hope that many offer accommodations.  So in this brief intro, let me now request Jay Gullish.  He was working in New Delhi and Jay is living the work on data‑related topics and subjects.  I understand Jay is going to talk about the Internet Ecosystem and how does it evolve over time?  What kind of lessons you can draw from the history of revolution?  And what lessons we can draw in today's context cross‑border dataflows, not just for our digital exports, but the overall economy including jobs and health organizations and things like that.  So you have about 25 minutes.
>> JAY GULLISH: Thank you very much.  I really appreciate the opportunity.  I want to thank my colleagues and speakers on the line as well for your time.  I'm really excited about participating in the IGF.  I want to thank the organizers as well.  I know these are major programs to put together and superbly done and bringing critically important issues forward within a global, multi‑stakeholder debate.  So thank you to everybody in the background who make today possible.
Where I want to start today is emphasizing the importance of privacy and cross‑border dataflows within the policy making environment.  This is the latest issue that has come into the Digital Economy that really is going to be foundational.  The decisions we make in the next year or two or three, will set the stage about the overall digital ecosystem going forward, how much benefit do we globally derive?  What innovation comes out?  How do people and governments work together?  How do we build trust within the Internet environment?
What I'd like to do is put some context into where are we today and how did we get here.  A lot of people think that a lot of the recent activities are sort of the beginning but it's actually ‑‑ we are in the middle of the journey here together.  Looking forward, we have to figure out how information about individuals, about information under contract and the outsourcing environment, how information derived in an AI environment, how machine‑driven information whether personal or autonomous gets fed into the industrialization.  There is a lot of really difficult questions that we have to ask ourselves about information and data about people and how it's going to ultimately be used within the economic environment to create the things I think we all want.
We all want economic growth.  We all want increased investment.  We all want innovation.  We all want social benefit and the financial derivatives that comes to individuals, companies and ultimately governments as well within tax environments.  How did we get here?
I'm old enough to have visibility of where we started.  The Internet in its current formation had a slow start in the 1970s, 80s and 90s.  It was very foundational.  In the 1990s, you saw a massive boom of the Internet based around infrastructure development.  Many, many new connections or nodes coming in.  Many individuals and organizations coming on line.  I think if you take a point in time like 1996 or 1998, it was not uncommon for people not to have an Internet account or for companies not to have a website.  Just take a moment and think about that.  Imagine a major company not having a website.  Imagine someone in the professional environment not having an e‑mail.
So if you go back 20 years ago, that's kind of the environment where we were at.  And so you had a massive investment that went into infrastructure and embedding the Internet into the IT environment.  And that was called the dot‑com boom.  And around 1999 there was a shift.  It took a little bit of time but the bubble burst and it had to do with an antitrust case, had to do with web browsers.  I don't want to get into the details of the policy decisions there, but as the dot‑com bubble burst and the economy took a downturn, a lot of the investment became stranded and lost and the Internet Ecosystem basically evolved.
Then it started to add what I call the social layer.  So the second iteration, the first iteration was foundational based on some of the protocols, based on infrastructure.  And the second iteration was besides a lot social media that in essence predicated an understanding of the user that you got free service, whether it was Free Internet, free news, free chatting and all of that stuff, with the understanding that information was being gathered and had some value on the back end.
Now, something else happened in this generation as well.  The Internet was designed to maximize availability and access and did not really build in, in the early days, an understanding of the downsides, whether cybersecurity, or cyberbullying, and those sorts of pieces.  And so as the second generation evolved, social media layer got developed significantly, and really drove an incredible amount of innovation, economic growth, investment and the this phase really lasted 10‑15 years into just the more recent past where we started to see a significant uptick in cybersecurity breaches.  We saw the creation and formation of the dark web.  We saw people's data being sold, being utilized, we saw some cultural changes around cyberbullying, violent extreme on line and some of the ills created around this social layer.
And then we had a very major shift and that's where we are today where there was this realization that we needed some sort of security‑driven environment based on some risk analysis of various threats and costs.  But also we started to see this privacy element where people became increasingly concerned about the quantity of data, about the quality of that, and how it was being use to not only influence individuals but collectively use in more and larger activities around the elections and things of that nature.
And so, that's where we find ourselves right now.  We are toggling into what I call the privacy‑driven environment where we are going to have the Internet that will be more secure technically.  We are going to have a greater understanding of some of the cultural benefits but also the limitations and how people utilize it, and there is also a whole privacy element that is being fed into the need for cross‑border data.
As we talk about this today, as a group, I think there is a couple of key things to realize.  That the benefits of the Internet in a Digital Economy over the last 20 or 30 years, have been massive.  And we cannot underestimate that.  And looking forward as we move in going forward, I think it's fairly clear that again, going forward, the economic, social benefits are going to be massive.  So when we need to optimize that, we need to find the right tools, regulations, to provide enough flexibility that the inherent innovation areas of connectivity can continue.
And the privacy and cross‑border data flows are the decisions that will ultimately define that mechanism.  I'll say two or three things.  One, the movement of data has been incredibly beneficial T will continue to be beneficial.  Soy we have to find the right mechanisms to allow that to continue.  Any time there is man dates or movement for the reciprocity, that's going to create barriers and minimize, reduce the value of this.
Secondly, we need to rebuild trust.  Trust between the end users and people who have that data, but also the companies and the countries perhaps seeking to access that information for legitimate lawful purposes.  And so we need to build trust.  The last thing I would say is this is not inherent to any one country.  My country, the United States, is going through privacy regulation.  We need to get it right.
Many countries are looking at it.  We all need to get right.  But we needs to get right together.  And have some flexibility to understand that each country has its own context for privacy but at its core there has to be interoperabilities, particularly those countries that have major economic activities that is tied to the United States, India, our allies in Asia and Europe.  We need to figure this out.
The very last thing I would say when it comes new policies and new regulations, it's always easier tightening the screws than it is to loosen the screws.  We need a system to add additional layers of regulation, compliance, whatever mechanism going fished.  We don't have all the answers.  So if we try to create a really constrained environment right now, we will have trouble unwinding it when we realize f we realize that we need that flexibility.
So with that, I'm really excited to hear from our other speakers today and looking forward to questions and just want to emphasize that getting our digital relationship right across the countries, across the globe will be crit duel maximizing the optimizing continued value that the Digital Economy has provided and afforded us.  Thank you again and look forward to further discussions.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you for taking us through these per suspect and I was aspects and dimensions.  The Internet‑based economy.  This takes me back to the initial days even before the establishment, the early 90s or Mid 90s.
That time we also had been discussing a number of issues without having much understanding of what those issues are and what the impacts are with various sections of the Society.
The reason why I'm saying this is that it's not just the technical persons, it's not just the International limitations, it's not just the think tanks or Private Sector.  It is also important for the Civil Society to have at least some understanding on many of these issues.  I understand that this year's Internet Governance is discussing a large number of them.  The important point is our relationship given the fact that many of these issues are ‑‑
So with that, let me now request joy to pick up from what Jay has said in the context of our discussion about cross‑border date flows and particularly in African country.  So over to joy.  You have about 10‑12 minutes.  Thank you.
>> JOY KATGEKWA: Thank you very much.  I'm pleased to be part of this important conversation.  Thank you for including me.  My name is Joy Katgekwa and I'm the strategic Advisor to the Assistant Secretary general and Director of the Regional Bureau of Africa.  I come to this conversation really as a trade exert and someone who spent most of my career trying to do the link between trade and development.
And I think when we talk about cross‑border dataflows, we are really talking about how trade can work for development.  And so many times in situations of this nature, it's almost easier to take away the complexity and try to look at the issue for what it is.  When we talk about cross‑border dataflows, what are we talking about?  The 80 of the transactions cross‑border to make their way seamlessly.  We are talking about a situation where for years on end, we spoke about the early years T has already been accepted, acknowledged, 245 cross‑border dataflows are critical for the movement of goods and services.  When you look at your services agreement at the WTO in terms of mode 1 and 2, you're looking at that possibility of goods to cross borders in a sort of seamless manner.
So in a sense, the importance of cross‑border dataflows is well understood.  When you look at India and I'd like to congratulate this important study you put out, it's always easier to explain this point when you look also at the numbers.  What does your study tell us?  It tells us that if there are restrictions as to dataflows, exports will drop by 19%.  GDP will drop by 36 billion.  And a value of 0.34%.  Behind those percentages of people.  Behind those are jobs and innovation and reduction in investments.
When we are amidst the last leg of a decade of action, pushing forward sustainable development, trying to lift people out of poverty, and understanding critically that trade is a critical means of implementation, then we do understand that we have to manage this situation carefully.  Here we are in a COVID environment where if we had any questions before, as to the implications of digitalization, the Digital Economy, and cross‑border trade flows within that, if we had any theoretical ‑‑ as to importance, it quickly shifted from the theory space smack into how we live our lives, and smack how we do our business, smack into how we trade across borders.
And so in a sense, COVID demonstrated to us it is in escapable for us to find that right balance on how to live rich cross‑border trade flows, for sustainable development.  When we look at health for example, the amount of services that have gone across to various levels of recipients have been only promoted, harnessed, leveraged by the possibility of digitalization.  Let's look at the same example from the converse way.  Here we are sitting in New York in my case for example, my children will go to school on line.  Where I come from in Africa, it's only the privileged to be able to make that transition to the on line learning.  So early in the pandemic when we used to track these numbers, ting came wrought a figure that spoke about 333 million African children out of school.  And the whole implications of that for the girls and for the boys.
So the whole idea of digitalization and its ability to contribute to sustainable development, or put differently, scale back the reversal by an absence of capacities is where the development question is.  And that's where I'd like to sit wait it.  So to conclude on that point, it's moot whether we should be investing in cross‑border dataflows because the economy in which we live, the development we are pursuing, is inextricably linked to that.  Live health and live education and look ate e‑Commerce.  The businesses managed to stay afloat are the ones who managed to my great to the digital space.
It's a critical development point for cross‑border dataflows and therefore what is the issue?  The issue is about how to democratize that space.  And hire I'd like to take us to the key findings of a recent report that analyzes the Digital Economy.  And of course it's in the context of hitting the Regional Office of Africa so quite familiar with these issues.  The problem with the space in which cross‑border dataflows operate is precisely because you have a yawning gap in the digital divide.  You have a marketplace and a business model where there is only a few dominating, seven key owners of the platform.  So Microsoft, Apple, Facebook, WhatsApp and so forth.
Africa owns only 1.3% of this platform.  1‑5 people has access to Internet.  So it's a question of inclusivity if we are talking about Sustainable Development Goals.  How do we ensure this promise of digitalization for sustainable development reaches everybody?  And this is where we need to touch on that which is holding back the capacity of this new wave to contribute to the Sustainable Development Goals.
And we do that by tackling the question of how is data owned?  How is data mind?  And how is data ad value on and then how is data therefore exported?  So that is increases the value component of the exports of African countries?  What the report tells us is that many of the African countries will give the data for free because it is being mind because of your participation in the platforms but the collection, the value addition that creates a product, that then comes back to you to buy s where the real value is.  So how can Africa capture those parts as well?  This is the critical development question.
When I was coming to this conversation, I was pleased to have a friend from Kampalao who said they just established the first data collection centre in Uganda.  It is my hope that we don't use it as an opportunity to localize in terms of restriction, but certainly to start to think about how to capture some of that value, create product that can then enhance our exports.
The final point I'd like to make how do we correct some of the ruins understanding that cross‑border dataflows are critical for development, the second pill of the augmentation being there is a problem with the temptation of capacity.  Not everybody is involved so the way we are going it is promoting exclusion, even if the numbers are coming also on the side of exclusion.  What then do we do?
I'd like to say two points.  We must invest as heavily as we have in trying to understand the new dynamics.  We must invest in the capacities, extend the reach, because it's now very clear to everybody that it's not a matter of choice or luxury, it's a critical matter of survival if we are talking about the core of basic services.
We talked about health, education.  So we must invest in those capacities to strengthen the ability of more women, youth, enterprises, to be part of this revolution.  The second point I'd like to say is we have to think about competition and the rules framework that can get us there because while you think about dominance, the owners of the digital platforms tell us a situation of this arrangement.  How do we ensure we are managing that from the perspective of competition and policy in order to ensure that there is fairness in the market?  Because for now, even if there is parts that are participating, it is certainly true that there is some larger play.
The third and last point is the question of regulation.  Regulation is this place where when you think about many of the advancements Africa made, and Africa is indeed leading the fourth Industrial Revolution in some areas, not at least areas around mobile management, innovations come from the continent and spread world over.  There is an interesting approach to regulation in this area, which is that if we think about people, if we think about protection, consumer protection, think about safety, we must also think about regulation from the lense of facilitation.  That not all regulation and control.  Not all regulation is about collecting taxes.  Many of the these great innovations coming out of Africa came from a type of regulation that some call sandbox but really put simply this idea of we don't understand it, but let's watch and then when we need to come, we will.
So there is a need of a mix‑and‑match in terms of how you approach regulation in this area.  So you ensure that the capacities are created, they are bigger, the market is operating in a more fair manner introducing new players but you're not stifling the possibility of advancement movement.  Thank you very much.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you, joy.  Thank you for that.  I would just like to highlight a few key points that joy has made.  First is that numbers will be more small, participation may be small but there are stories behind them, there are people behind them.  We shouldn't just talk about beginners.  We should also think about the possible losers and how we can help them to gain from all of this development.
Very rightly emphasized on and contextualize this whole thing.  In a manner we should have a positive agenda.  It's not a question of restrictions or ideation.  Liberalization or things like that.  It's not a question of this or that.  It has to be this and that.  Now keeping this context in mind, a question which is going in my mind is that, are we missing the bus?  Are we going to miss the bus?
When we talk about the various elements of this fourth Industrial Revolution, Internet and others.  And this COVID‑19, it is also taught us or highlighted to us, that things which are going to take place over a fairly long time, I would say ‑‑ are taking place in a short time, 3‑5 months.  Changes.
So there are good aspects of it and there are challenging aspects.  Not bad but I would use the word challenging.
So she used the term democratization of the Internet space.  How to enable our small and medium enterprises who are actually the backbone of our economy?  In getting advantages of these changes.  So I know that there are various agencies working on it.  UNDP have projects to help, not just ‑‑ but to help.  Develop countries.  To not just to come up with challenges with all the changes which are taking place, but also to take advantage of these changes.  So before I hand it over to Raymond, we are very pleased to have you with us in today's meeting.  Let me also analyze a very important point in the context of what we are just wanting to speak about it's not a question of having this regulation or that regulation.  We need to been optimal regulations.  We also need to think about that dominance may not be bad, per se, but dominance is definitely there.  Profit is not a bad word.  Profiteering is a bad word.
So here we are seeing it, this new economic Internet based where maybe once they think they are getting things free of cost but actually they are not.  There are other aspects; which we need to take into account to understand consumer behavior, to understand the impact on consumer behavior.
So let me now request Raymond for talking on the subject, 10‑12 minutes.  Raymond, over to you.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: Thank you very much, by pull.  I would also like to commend the great presentations and the talk of the Panelists, joy and Jay.  Thank you very much.  You make my life easier United Nations in the organizations, I will be sharing four slides so you can understand better what my organization, a U.N. agency, focusing more on the SDG9, which is for innovation infrastructure and industrialization.  So you can better appreciate what we are doing as agency in terms of helping the countries to enter into the revolution, which is really characterized by data management, date acquisition, the use of data to make the difference to trade.  And we could go further because here we think the other Panelists, they mentioned idea of data for development.  But you can see the data regarding people moving the country, moving from the country to another place.
So I want to just mention those meeker trends which are the migrations, which are these new technologies and opportunities they offer, which are now the pandemic situation.  And we can mention without any doubt the tensions is not over.  We are still into trade tensions.  And all of that without the pandemic or organization, was to assist countries to swiftly move from the third Industrial Revolution to the force evolution to the digitalization of our economy.  I can share my screen, which would help me at least to put things together.  I'm getting a challenge to share my ‑‑ anyway, I would like first to mention aspects.  We are focusing and having challenge.  I don't know if somebody can see this otherwise.  Can you hear me?
>> We can hear you.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: The problem is sharing the screen.  Can you see my screen.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: We can.  Now it is better.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: Excellent.  If you can see my screen, I'm going now to ‑‑ first I mentioned the pandemic situation, migrations, new technologies, and the protection.  I want to start from here in the last seven months this is the case.  The case showed that there is an increase of digitalization and so it means without even knowing it, already accepted it, we are sharing data.  We are protected, not protected, but this is the situation.  So to discuss the concept and what we can do together with joy and Jay.
Here what I hope just to say is, obviously, the potential of data collected, we don't really know the data that is the big ‑‑ those are ‑‑ they have the domination of the digital development gathering.  The only thing is the concern growing now when we have the time to think about our data, what we are sharing.  People are sharing their behavior.  They are trying to be more cautious.  They are sometimes the issue of which kind of regulations and now the first world regulation.
I could not hear it before when Jay office ‑ I was expecting to see that and joy mentioned it.  We could maybe regulate ‑‑ and joy was inviting to regulate more, regulation using the length of development, the length of sharing of inclusiveness.  But not of really ‑‑ it used to be the same thing.
So that is why in my presentation, we are going to mention more status.  I think the standards and quality Jay mentioned those aspects of building the trust and I think when he was saying, we need obviously to build the trust and we need to be flexible in cross‑border data.  Not to boost the Research and Development and the internal development or Digital Economy development.  The next slides I would like to share with you are the slide Number 6 here, which is focusing more on the standards of what I was just saying.
In the white part of your screen, you can see some selected technologies that my agency is promoting in manufacturing because obviously tomorrow in many, many Developing Countries at least in transition country, it is essential to the event that manufacturing that you have block chain.
I think the other side is it interesting to see the new technologies of yesterday are recording for new standards because the essence of the existence of the new technologies of the new industrialization is data management.  The data governing we mentioned before.  Data will make the difference.  And from my organization, into the force in the evolution, it is trying to help the new business models.
We can talk about smart factoring, where you have many more technologies which are very gritty on data.  So, what it means, new technologies and new standards.  But also data to manage, to know how to handle it and to have the capacity to mine data, to manage them, to protect them, to share what we would like to share.
After these slides, I wanted to share this, another one with the way forward, which is going into what joy was just mentioning.  Inclusiveness, existence or the basis of our actions, multilateralism.  If you could like obviously cross‑border and corporation.
Those are our basics or the fundamentals of our expertise and actions.  Inclusiveness even the new slogan we use, it is inclusive and sustainable in this development.  No one should be left behind.  It was the motto.  It was our slogan.  Why we started the process before the force of the evolution has made some countries to enter into globalization and global play value chain exchange.  And nowadays, it is the same that we are using, so global should be left behind in terms of digital infrastructure.  Capacity and skills and the people in order for them to be able to engage and to include this.
Multilateralism.  I started it's a new challenge now.  We could not get out from this pandemic without the multilateralism where everybody is thinking about the solution could be national because we are all concerned about our nation, our problems nationally, but global solutions and let's say the solutions to the pandemic is coming from the multilateralism.  We shouldn't be kept out from that.  Corporation, I think the two worlds are really complimenting somehow they are the same in certain aspects.
You need activation.  Remote cooperation.  And when we recite policy, it is not only national policies.  We are talking about regional policies ‑‑
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: You have five minutes, please.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: Okay.  The rights are the regional economic information where we gather in a economic environment and regional policy and data management providing capacity that you see later on.  So capacity development of institutions not only SMEs on data management and standards, but we also strengthen the capacities of institution.  It's the capacity in terms of themselves managing data, creating new infrastructure or new institutions in charge of data, creating new projects and pilot centre like just joy mentioned before when you mentioned the first management centre in Uganda.
I'm not going to show what we are doing in other parts of Africa where we are helping the country with smart factories as demonstration but we have been had more digital observatories centered to manage data to protect data to enable the enterprise locally to take advantage of the data they can mine and they can manage.
I think I wanted to mention the policy and standards and the standards bodies, but we do more.  We are working at International level with the other quality development of quality infrastructure institutions.  ISO, International laboratory of centers are for all to accompany and solve this new trend of data management, new technologies in terms of standards.  We go beyond what our perspective is, and harmonization of standards, which will be less ‑‑ an example of regulation.
What I would like here, people take away is, we can find solution for the cross‑border data management and exchange without regulating like it used to be the first basic behavior and reaction of International level let's.
Regulate.  We can also set standards.  We can help to be much more flexible without development of new technologies which are in need of data.  I think this is what I wanted to share today with you.  And I thank very much for inviting us.  I think I stick to the time?
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Yes.  Absolutely.  Thank you Raymond.  So we are on time, which is good.  So there are a number of questions.  Let me start with the question, which is to Jay N there I will come to a question for Raymond and then follow‑up questions for joy.
Now, Jay, the question is, without localization are there ways to protect sensitive data and ensure that law enforcement can investigate crimes?  So we have about a good 30 minutes to go.  So I will be saying Jay if you could repeat your answer to 1 1/2 minutes to two minutes.
>> JAY GULLISH: Thank you.  The easy question in 1 1/2 minutes.  So the first thing I have to share is when you have mandated data localization, what happens is you have an architecture that may be globally intended to have five major points of entrance, hence risk.  Then you have to add in additional sites.  If you're talking about one or two sites, maybe that is more manageable but if every country on the planet has some sort of data localization, you're talking about many dozens if not 100 additional sites.
Most people think about cybersecurity from the zeros and ones but most people breaches, at least really the real critical ones and many of the dangerous ones, actually have to do with physical penetration or insiders.  So every time you add a physical centre, you actually create or increase risk.  One more physical site to protect and one more site where there may be ab error in configuration or mispatch.  So when you're talking about balancing cybersecurity and privacy, fewer physical sites of where that data is managed is often better than more sites.  Obviously managing redundancy and backup and so forth.  Now for law enforcement, this is one of the trickiest questions.  You need to balance access to data for legitimate law enforcement that does not have any of the bias or the political leanings or for those of us in democracy, maybe have to worry about this less than government itself.
So when people think about privacy, it's not only privacy from companies.  It's privacy from governments as well.  And so you just have to add that into the overall argument.
Now in terms of law enforcement access to data, you have to think about the real criminals and people that really trying to hide this information, they are going to do a lot of workarounds and you do things that actually make them safer than others.  So, in a lot of instance we are talking more about sort of incidental, accidental or unexpected sort of access to data as part of just sort of normal law enforcement or enforcing cultural norms such as cyberbullying.
Here there is a lot of work that could be done.  A lot of work that needs to be done.  There are some International, not the International accords, the Budapest Accord is one of them.  The United States is developing agreements on a bilateral basis.  There needs to be a lot more there so that law enforcement can be part of the solution to access this information.
A lot of the issues here has to do with different legal environments in each country.  So if one country wants to give data to another country, it has to meet certain criteria.  There is no perfect or comprehensive way for law enforcement to do this.  But also we need to make sure that we are balancing access that is even too easy or in cases can be abused by certain types of governments or in certain instances.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: thank you.
>> JAY GULLISH: Needs to be multilateral recall and multi‑stakeholder as well.  It needs to be a mechanism for consumers and individuals and organizations to be part of that conversation.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Absolutely.  Thank you.  I know we want to discuss this as well.  There is a question for Raymond.  How will climate change mitigation efforts such as leveraging artificial intelligence, which uses the data to boost secular models that are more sustainable industrialization and technological changes, including policies in Developing Countries?  Raymond?  In about two minutes your answer.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: Thank you very much.  I think it is critical.  If it is all what have we are doing.  You have a division dealing withs economies and division dealing with digital development and innovation and so we are working together so it means it's not alternative.  It's the use of data like you mentioned, and use various other new technologies which is what we are promoting.
Obviously what we would like to do is not to be fragmented in our interventions in countries but to have integration of all of those aspects which sometimes seems to be let's say stand alone like when we talk about secular, it's just a science of thing other aspects of where you need new techniques and innovation.
They record more innovation even if the people see it is for sustainability.  So, our policies are the policies we are promoting in Developing Countries, policies which look at sustainability, prosperity, and respect of the planet.  So integrated policies we are promoting.  And just to finish also, we need a hybrid solution that we are promote ‑‑ proposing to our member's face.
So I don't feel that we are thinking about two different things here.  In many Developing Countries you have lack of infrastructure and you have lack of skills and you have also non existence of policy which are now appropriate to help them to live from the new technologies.  The ease of solution is a new business model and really effective and sustainable.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you, Raymond.  I have a number of questions for joy.  There are three.  She has already answered them in the screen.  There is a common question which I will request joy to address.  This is from Alan and another from Michael Nelson that says, what would you say at the most widespread excessive restrictions to the cross‑border dataflows?  One of the examples with overly restrictive legal framework, and interested to hear your opinion on whether or not the date will be able to maintain to protect data if the restrictions are lifted.
A related point is, we tend to focus on Best Practices at the IGF, but often one can learn more from what practices when it comes to data localization and Data Sovereignty which countries are making the most mistakes, especially with regard to government's own data.  So since we have come to more or less an end to this session, there are 5 more minutes to go.  I will ask you to all touch upon these points as briefly as possible without overshooting the time.  I will start with joy.  Then I'll come to Raymond and finally to Jay.  So over to you, Joy.
>> JOY KATGEKWA: Thank you very much and thank you very much also for the questions.  I made an effort to answer them as they come in.  I think in my one minute, I'd really like to touch on a forward‑looking question, which is where is the solution when you try to anchor it in trade?  We have seen some perspectives and direction from New Zealand, Chile and Singapore, which created Digital Economy Partnership Agreements.
Is this the way forward for Developing Countries?  Is this the way forward for Africa?  I think we have to be careful to ensure that you bring countries onboard.  Everybody is trying to leverage the value of digitalization but I think the moment you trade, the moment you talk about banning customs duties and the moment you talk about dispute settlement, the moment you talk about nations, you're not really putting a trade negotiate's mind into the defense, how do I get flexibility out of this.  So you determine what will be a willingness to come to the table.  My plea in what is left of the 30 seconds is this question of, can we learn from the Trade Facilitation Agreement?  By front loading the question of dealing with the capacities to implement?  We know that infiltrate supporting digitalization is only 1.2%.  It was 3% in 2000, reduced to 1.2%.  We need to touch that capacity point because that is answering the development question.  Once you touch that capacity, you democratize the space and then it has direct relevance for schooling and health and for the exploitation of various services.  Thank you.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Absolutely.  Thank you.  I'm glad that you highlighted the transportation agreement in the context of technical aspects and capacity building.  This is exactly the point which you have in the paper done by my boss ‑‑ and the title is, what would happen to a world without the WTO?  And we are going to release it next week.  I hope you all will join us.
So Raymond n one minute what you say?
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: I would like obviously to reemphasize what I mentioned before.  We have another approach so that approach is to force the more quality and stand outs and so to regulate less because we think that with quality and stand outs, it is another way to facilitate or trade and to make technology, Private Sector, to help them to develop without ways and regulating and maybe creating barriers.  And I have another message I want to share with everybody.
The other message is maybe all this sharing of data without asking, or hindering dataflow and let's say exchange should happen in our own city.  What we are doing and we are working very, very strongly on that, is to try with this new Industrial Revolution to create smart cities.  Smart cities is a kind of own experience in your own city.  You see the interactions, the exchange of information and everybody would benefit on that exchange of data information to boost new technologies and relate new solutions for the development.  This is the message I want to pursue into this discussion today.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you, Raymond.  We have about a minute to go.  So Jay?
>> JAY GULLISH: Thank you.  So, I think the core question here is where do we want to go from here?  I think we all agree that the Digital Economy up until now has been incredibly beneficial to humanity at large, to countries to, individuals to, companies, and so as we move into this next iteration, we should look at rather than what Best Practices in the future, what is generally worked?  What has worked up until now is an incremental build.  There is open movement data.  There is transparency.  It's a multi‑stakeholder approach.  It's risk‑based.  I think going forward we should look at some of those sorts of tools and techniques and we don't want to go too far too fast.  We clearly need to, but it should be done in a measured way to thoughtful way, flexible way, building on existing privacy laws, existing laws of consumer protection, existing laws of competition.  And so when we are thinking about localization, what is the solution we are trying to solve here?
Is it really about data nationalism?  Is it about cybersecurity?  Is it about protecting privacy?  Because all three of those aren't solved by any one policy so we should just be very conscious about how we move forward from here so we can optimize the benefits.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you.
>> RAYMOND TAVARES: Want to thank you and I go.  If.  And really appreciate giving me the opportunity to talk to you all.
>> BIPUL CHATTERJEE: Thank you very much and everybody.  Let me conclude by saying that we are going to prepare a report of what we discussed today.  
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-ws217-the-role-of-digital-tech-in-environmental-sustainability^^

 
>> ROSS CREELMAN:  Hello, everybody, who has joined us today.  Good afternoon if you're in Western Europe, hello to you depending on the time of the day you're dialing in to this IGF workshop.  On The role of digital tech in environmental sustainability.  I'm with ETNA, I'm Ross Creelman, and we organized this session in close collaboration with others.  You won't hear much from me, I'll come back at the end to sum up and to present some of the findings.  I will now hand over to our moderator, Professor Beat Estermann from the Bern University of Applied Sciences.  Thank you. 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for this welcoming opening words, and I'm happy to welcome you all on this panel on The Role of Digital Tech in Environmental Sustainability.  This is a very important issue if we want to reconcile the digital transformation with the preservation of a healthy environment for future generations.  This view has been underlined by the participants by this year's youth Internet Governance Forum starting their list of recommendations with exactly this call, we should actively strive to mitigate environmental impact on the internet and ICTs.  Let's discuss today how to achieve this.
The session is structured as followed:  I will start with a few introductory remarks followed by a short poll giving us a first impression of what type of problems we are trying to solve.  After that, we'll have short inputs from each of the panelists before we enter the discussion phase where you will all be invited to join us.  We'll conclude the session with a final poll and the summary of the main takeaways with our Rapporteur.
To set the stage for the discussion, I would like to draw your attention to two points:  First, there are three different levels of impact digital technologies have on environmental sustainability.  The literature distinguishes between first order, second order and third order affects.  First order affects refer to the direct consequences of the use of new or different equipment.  Think of the production, the use, the disposal of this equipment.
Second order, it refers to better eco efficiency of goods and services, thanks to the use of Internet Protocol.  Third order affects, it refers to the feedback of first and second order affects with social behavior, for example, new activities facilitated by the use of Internet Protocol or higher demand due to price reductions resulting from efficiency gains, et cetera.  These are the so‑called rebound affects.  Research shows that rebound affects so far outweigh any eco efficiency gains that may have been achieved thanks to the use of Internet Protocol.  This is the first point that I would like you to keep in mind in view of the ensuing discussion.
The second one concerns the types of measures we may take to decrease the environmental footprint of our use of digital technology.  There are three of them.  We'll try to improve the efficiency of processes.  We can try to improve the circulatory of resources.  Think for example of recycle, slowing down of usage cycles or we can decrease channel consumption and production levels.  Measures of this effect is generally referred to as sufficiency measures.  Let's try to keep in mind all three of them during our discussion.
Before I give the floor to our panelists, we have come to our first poll.  We would like you to answer one question in order to find out what are the main issues that we need to reresolve as a global community.
Go to menti.com and then use the code that's shown here and answer the question that is shown on the screen from your point of view, from your point of view, what are the main reasons why important environmental issues remain unresolved to this day?
I hope we'll see your answers coming in.
You will see the answers coming in.
It is still moving.  I think we can slowly try to interpret the result.
What you see, on the left‑hand side, there is data, and then the two following items from the left are about understanding.  The fourth one, it is about awareness, and to the right, they're more about framework conditions and what we see now here in this group what, we think where we have the biggest lack, inefficient political impetus.
The following ones, laziness, inconvenience in everyday life, these are kind of a psychological factor as well as insufficient international cooperation.  I will leave it here.  I think it is quite typical for this group to focus on these and it doesn't surprise me to have that first.  What doesn't surprise me either is that we have the tendency that data is kind of there, understanding largely of natural phenomena, it is there.  Maybe hear what's interesting to see in a study we did in Switzerland, we didn't have inefficient understanding of the environmental technologies that also ranks high here.
We'll leave it to that.
We'll move through our panel discussion.  Let me introduce our first panelist.  First on the list, Andrea Halmos, working as a policy officer in the smart mobility and learning unit with the European Commission in Brussels and the current activities focus on helping cities and communities better harness data and artificial intelligence in order to meet environmental and climate objectives.
The floor is yours for 3 minutes input.
>> ANDREA HALMOS: Thank you very much for inviting me.
Indeed, I would like to just put the discussion into context, and perhaps address the comment that was made, that there is still a lack of political impetus, as you know, the European Commission’s strategic objectives related to both the digital transformation, so putting or creating, making Europe fit for the digital age as well as the European Green Deal seem to be transformational going ‑‑ as a twin digital, green transformation for Europe and this was also reconfirmed in the current overarching recovery plan for Europe.  The political impetus is there.
As you already said, there's a number of ways how to look at the link between digital and the environmental sustainability ambitions and in particular, you already mentioned that certainly we can look at digital as the environmental footprint of digital technologies as in terms of reducing the consumption of energy and in terms of the material use or waste but where cities in particular, smart cities come in the picture, it is more from the enabling role, as you said in the second, the third order effects.  Looking at how digital technologies can really help, for example, creating or dematerializing, decarbonizing certain technologies with their ‑‑ certain sectors with their enabling role, but also how they can, for example, change completely business models in certain sectors as well as how they said change behavior and the cities and the communities often have more ambitious objectives than national Member States in terms of the environmental impact.  What we also have seen is what really is needed, it is digital ecosystem, i.e., an infrastructure that would enable to better understand better monitor and to better address environmental and climate impacts.  What we have done, what we're doing from the European Commission's point of view, it is trying to create digital ecosystem for smart city, both from the connectivity as an enabler to actually have the connectivity for cities to manage this digital ecosystem but also from the point of view of having the necessary digital urban, digital platforms, having the right access to data and having the capabilities and applications and solutions to actually manage the data and turn it into more informed decisions, we know that cities at the moment, they use only about 12% of the data for decisions and we believe this can be hugely increased and working with cities, we try to help them develop their capabilities, for example through the use of urban digital trends.  We also believe that cities themselves, as public sector organizations have a particular role in making this happen and what we have done with cities themselves, it is to bring them together in a movement called living in E.U. movement, European movement that brings cities together to turn this Internet Protocol and the digital solutions into a specific purpose to link it to their environmental, climate objectives.  For that, we'll have some funding at the E.U. level and we're also working with cities to identify specific indicators on how to use the digital technologies for increasing the livability of cities and helping to increase the quality of life for citizens in cities.  I'll stop here.  We have, as I said, overview of objectives creating the digital infrastructure through platforms, data, and the applications, we worked with cities through political movements, declaration and movements and we have some funding available for them and I can elaborate on this later.
>> MODERATOR: Sounds great.  Thank you.  I'm sure we'll come back to you later on during the discussion.  Now I would like to introduce our second panelist, Sara Ghazanfari, who works with the European Telecommunication Operator Network Association in the areas of public policy and regulatory affairs and is based in Brussels and the areas of expertise are sustainability, competition policy and network infrastructure regulation.
>> SARA GHAZANFARI:  Thank you for the introduction.  Good afternoon to the panelists and also to our participants that have been joining us from Europe and beyond.
I represent the association of the largest telecommunication operators, just to give you the number, we count for 70.5% of the networking in Europe.  Let me just start by saying that we're strongly, vocally welcoming the ambition of the European Commission Strategy of the European Green Deal has put forward and our members have been put forward in the course of the past years different measures to cut carbon emissions and energy consumptions, just to give you data we have performed some collection within our members and it looks like data traffic increased between 2010 and 2018 by 1100% and carbon reduction reduced, and in practical terms, what our members have been doing so far, starting from the last year, end of last year, our members have been at almost 50% of energy consumption, using renewable resources and more policies have been implemented as we speak.  Many more members are committing to climate targets and thinking about tele company, the team and many more.  At the same time we're also deploying new and mobile networks, I'm thinking of 5G, it will also increase the energy efficiency.  At the same time, we're really deploying fiber networks all over Europe that as you know, it is expected to deliver increased energy and efficiency in terms of energy consumption.  At the same time, we're also working with regards to data centers, as you know, they're part of our network infrastructure and also of our Cloud services, so we saw yesterday the discussion from the European Commission, they have put forward, and I really look forward to collaborate with regards to the best policy measures in reducing an energy efficiency when it comes to data centers and Cloud services.  The other topic, we're working a lot when it comes to bringing financial aspects for example, Telefonica, they have put forward a unique option in Europe and we're doing very much on these topics and regarding actions.
At one point, it is really close to us, to our members, I would like you to look at us not like the other sectors but really like the enablers as mentioned by the European Green Deal.  The networks are at the core of the digital transformation and through digitalization and with our network, other sectors like manufacturing, healthcare, public administration, transportation can be more productive, more efficient, and then in turn greener.
I would like to close with a number that came up this number, in a very workshop that we had with members of European Parliament, the European Commission and our members and the tele company from our side managed to quantify the enabling factors and it turns that in 2018 the companies helped other sectors to reduce CO2 which is similar to taking 230,000 cars off the road every year.  We're talking about big numbers and I'm ready to take your questions after this intervention.
Thank you very much.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for this interesting input.  I'm looking forward to coming back to you with some questions.
Before that, I would like to welcome our third panelist, Andrea Halmos, a Belgrade based researcher at the DIPLO foe education where she conducts research on artificial intelligence, Sustainable Development and environment, Human Rights as well as other digital policy related topics.
The floor is yours. 
>> ANDREA HALMOS: It is a pleasure to be here today virtually with you.  I will dive right into how DIPLO tackles the interplay between digital technology and environment and we do so in two ways, the first is through our modus operandi and the other is through digital analysis of digital policy, issues and trends.  I will start first with our modus operandi.  A large number of our activities, by this, I mean our learning webinars and training, they actually take place online.
This is since we established 20 years ago, well before COVID‑19.  In this context, I would like to share a couple of numbers with you that will help put things in perspective with regard to the positive role that digital technology, namely the internet, can play for the environment.
In 2019, for instance, we had over 450 students who attended our online courses for more than 120 countries.  Instead of having them fly in from their respective hometowns for instance to Geneva, Malta, courses were delivered online.  On that way, we were able to save more than 814 tons of carbon dioxide.
Roughly speaking, it would take around 30,000 trees to process this amount of CO2 for year.
Since we have been doing this for years, it adds up to a large amount of CO2 production.  I would like to mention that the online learning, the eParticipation, it is not only done for CO2 reduction.  Something that the IGF has been advocating for a long time is the increase in inclusion and legitimacy of global digital policy.  Online participation, especially allows this by allowing ‑‑ providing a platform that marginalizes stakeholders and participants from small and Developing Countries.
Now I would like to tackle the second point that relates to actually the substance of our work and our activities evolve on two fronts, the first, it is through the digital watch observatory where we basically look at digital policy and digital issues and trends.
The second one, through our webinars and policy research.  That's through a slightly lesser extent.
Our digital watch observatory for instance, specifically addressing the issue of eWaste and this refers to discarded electronic equipment, including our computer, smartphones, TVs that in themselves constitutes a rather significant technological issue.
We have gathered data from the World Economic Forum, for instance, that shows over 50 million tons of eWaste are generated every year, however only 20% of this eWaste gets recycled.  Statistics for the future are even bleaker and suggests that by 2050 we'll be produce producing double the amount of eWaste we have produced nowadays.  On digital watch we monitor the trends in the field of digital and environment and water and technology and we conduct analysis on issues such as circular economy but we also look at the relationship that tech giants have with, for instance, with the oil and gas industry.
We provide regular updates on these developments.
When it comes to our policy research, I would like to refer to one particular study that's titled Science and Diplomacy conducted in partnership, it basically explored how countries interact with the Boston innovation ecosystem.  Among other things, we looked at the role in the context of the environment and we found that they have to address issues like renewable energy, marine debris, water source management, and also energy in general.  We also found that the role that Boston Universities, they play a major role for certain countries like Egypt, for instance, that helps them strengthen their capacity in strategic areas like water and renewable energy.  This is basically in short what DIPLO does on the interplay between dataization and the environment.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Thank you to all panelists for your introductory remarks.  
As we don't have a fourth panelist today unfortunately because Reyna Ubeda is not able to join us today.  We have some minutes for discussion, I'm quite glad we have this time to go deeply into all of the questions.
To our participants, you're all invited to participate in the discussion by asking questions to the panelists.  You can do so by raising your hand.  If there is too many of you trying to ask questions, you can also use the Q&A session and our online moderator will try to pick the most interesting ones.
I will maybe start with the first question, I would like to ask Sara maybe to respond to it first, maybe other panelists would like to respond.  We have heard about efforts that are currently being undertaken with regard to the improvement of energy efficiency, the circulatory of resources.  There is no doubt that these measures are very important.  They are certainly part of the solution to green the internet but the question is, will they be sufficient?  Let's face it, the big elephant in the room is the rebound effects or the gains in terms of eco efficiency of services that have been outweighed by the increases in the overall demand and hence consumption.  What's your take on that?  This is a question from one of the participants focused more concretely on Friends of the IGF infrastructure, yeah, we'll have some efficiency gains there, we'll reduce the circular consumption but at the same time we'll probably increase demand and overall consumption.
>> SARA GHAZANFARI:  Thank you for the interesting question and to the audience.
That's an idea we're also thinking about.  Generally, what I can say, based on data collection, we have performed with our response, the answer is yes, Friends of the IGF would bring ‑‑ it is less energy consumed, I think we have to realize in a broader sense and our members are not only focused on Friends of the IGF deployment but they're implementing further measures for example when it comes to making a Cloud system or the data centers, they're working on systems to use less energy.  It is really a shared neither all of our members within Europe and beyond have been following but not only recently, but it had already started some years ago.  I think we need to also pick these efforts to add on top of what we said before which is the enabling potential and what we would like to call as a digital enabled value chain.  With the 4G and Friends of the IGF and fiber, then you create IoT and then you have the communication services which are boost by AI and data, and in turn they create, of course, a green application that the entire industry can then use and then make linear.
I think there are some layers and some sets of actions that we're taking on and it is a joint effort, the private sector is being deploying in and we need also the help of the public sector as well.
>> MODERATOR: What would be your response to that?  Are you as optimistic about that if you look at the overall consumption levels and overall waste from the IT Sector when looking forward?
>> ANDREA HALMOS: Well, I would say the answer lies somewhere in between obviously when we look at the pollution generated by digital technologies, when we look at eWaste we have the negative part, the digital technology plays earlier on I touched upon the role that tech companies, for instance, have when it comes to the cooperation and partnerships with the oil and gas industry.  For instance, we're seeing for instance Amazon, a company that can be considered as an oil company give than it produces gas oil.  Then we have other companies that deliver services and products to companies that produce large amounts of data into companies that produce large amounts of data that in itself already pollutes a lot and consumes a lot of energy.  Consumption, I remember there was ‑‑ we looked at some studies that was conducted on the amount ‑‑ on the amount of electricity that for instance bitcoin mining issues, in certain cases, it amounted to more than the energy consumption of certain countries.
We also looked at in the amount of energy that data centers consume and that is expected to Ryan Clough to I think 8% of global electricity consumption by 2025 if I'm not mistaken.
Then there is the positive side.  For instance, we have explored, we have conducted mapping on our digital watch observatory of how digital technology can help advance certain SDGs that relate to the environment and I will just give two examples.  The first one pertains to SDG14 that refers to water and particularly target 1 is reducing marine pollution, we for instance identified an initiative called Eclipse Environmental that gathers data, using strong surveying, machine learning in order to map the distribution of material pollution in the oceans.  Then we also identified for SDG12 that refers to responsible consumption and production, target 5 that looks into waste generation where we pin down projects like recycle bank, I got garbage that is increasing citizen participation in waste management as well as public private partnerships in tackling the issues.
I think the answer is, we need to have taken into consideration both sides of digital technology and it is not all black and white, there is a lot of shades of gray in between.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
How about, Andrea, you want to respond or say something about your take on reducing the overall footprint?
>> ANDREA HALMOS: Absolutely.  I put it already in the answer.  So the commission is working on a number of fronts in reducing the carbon footprint of the ICT Sector itself.  So through initiatives related to greening, for example, the data center, the Cloud, network, Telecom, also in helping reduce consumption of material use for devices and, of course, reducing eWaste, what I put in the comment box, it is that's not ‑‑ let's not underestimate the potential of Internet Protocol as an enabler, especially for example in the area of smart cities where we see that digital is used for a purpose and this is also what we're trying to advocate, and indeed it is a lot more about addressing Specific Needs of cities and we're very much focusing on the use of digital technologies in cities for environmental aspects and addressing climate change, extreme weather events and better monitoring or modeling different urban decisions with relation to environmental sustainability.  We'll be helping cities implement urban platforms to monetary data to actually implement certain governance structures to share urban data and also to experiment with so‑called urban digital trends and there is a powerful means for cities to create scenarios and to model their decisions in particular bringing together different domains in a city to see what certain decision, how they would impact the environment on a micro level and we'll look at it at larger macro level, the commission is preparing a digital twin of the earth with a number of forthcoming pilot actions and the urban digital twins will at one point be somehow linked to the urban services, this destination earth, the virtual image of the earth.  We believe that this could be a powerful means for cities to actually innovate in and model their decisions.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
Now I would really like to turn to our audience.
Have you spotted any interesting questions?
>> In fact, yeah, there are interesting discussions going on in the chat and in the Q&A section.  Perhaps I can just read out what is being asked, we hear a lot now about eWaste, the problematic eWaste and he's asking who is actually responsible for tackling this issue, is it just the responsibility that lace with the companies, with governments, and what is the most effective measures to tackle eWaste?
We have another question by David, from the UN environmental program, and he's saying that there are currently defining their core priorities and he would love to know from the panelists what they feel is the most important role that the UN could play to help stakeholders to lock and harness digital technologies for driving environmental sustainability, that's these questions, they can be ‑‑ now with the panelists to be answered.
>> MODERATOR: Let's focus on the eWaste one and move to other core priorities.
Who wants to respond to the question regarding the severity of eWaste and who has to tackle that problem.
>> NATASA PERUCICA: It is a relevant question and it is a pity my colleague is not mere to specializes on eWaste.
Who is responsible for the management of eWaste, there is an international convention, the Basel Convention that regulates the shipping of hazardous materials, electronic materials pertaining to eWaste.  So far, only some 90 countries have actually ratified the convention, nevertheless, they do not adhere to it, they still violate what they signed up for.
A particular point I would like to raise, in addition to the regulation of eWaste, it is ‑‑ the legal dumping that most of the time takes place in developing ‑‑ in the developing world, that produces the least amount of eWaste, also it has other consequences and this pertains to the rare earth materials whose mining is extremely harmful.  This is a lot of hazardous chemicals that are released and most of the time, child labor is involved, and these are all issues that need to be regulated and states obviously bear the responsibility for this.  We have a case where developed countries are shipping their waste to developing countries but it is also the responsibility of companies producing these gadgets and we have seen the initiatives for example from companies where they actually ask their clients or customers to return back materials that they do not wish to use any more.  We have seen also initiatives to introduce for instance single chargers for certain devices to reduce the amount of eWaste being generated.
At present, it is being ‑‑ it is meant to be regulated by the Basel Convention and we're seeing initiatives also from private companies.
>> MODERATOR: Do you want to add to that.
Should we move to the next question.
Sara, you want to add anything to that?
>> Sara Ghazanfari:  Maybe I can put in a broader term with regards to what members are doing with regard to the circular economy, I think eWaste is well placed in these regards and we're taking measures also when it comes to our value chain for the past year so we're, of course, selecting suppliers and products in compliance with the environmental sustainability criteria and we're checking periodically the entire life cycle of our products so we're also recycling the devices in the most environmental friendly way and we're also, which is really important for us, we're putting forward some leveling measures to enable our customers to be most informed and also in the choice of products there buying from us.  It is all of a set of let's say voluntary measures and our members, they have been implementing it in the past years and we see that these voluntary measure, the information sharing of Best Practices, it is actually working.
I think before regulating eWaste, when it comes to circular economy, you need to also have a look at what's already working and what the industry has been putting forward in a voluntary way.
>> MODERATOR: Wouldn't it be useful to have some pushing from policymakers both in regard to companies at the international level like maybe that they have responsible actors in developed industrialized countries to actually take more care of what happens in developing countries?
>> ANDREA HALMOS: Just to add to what you were asking, indeed, in the commission, we have a number of initiatives to address eWaste.  Particularly through eco-design, but also modular repair and recycle and we're also ‑‑ and also to what extent we can keep the device alive so I think extending the life span of the device, its components, it would add to this or really contribute positively to these efforts.  What we have had in mind, based on the circular economy action plan, and the big initiative around creating all kinds of sectorial common European data spaces, you may have heard from the digital strategy that there would be so‑called a Green Deal data space and within that, we're hoping to have some initiatives that will bring together the relevant stakeholders to agree on how to best share the data, the data may be public, private, may be personal, but whatever data that makes sense to actually create this digital infrastructure for environments so this Green Deal data space.  In addition to some of the work that we'll be doing for the smart cities, there will be an initiative to create some kind of a product passport to better identify where the components come from and what their life span, usage has been and that will eventually lead to, for example, even a data space for circulatory which will be a very helpful contribution to deal with all kinds of waste, including eWaste.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
You want to add something to that?  Otherwise I would suggest we move to the next questions?
>> NATASA PERUCICA: I was following the chat and a point was made around the responsibility of customers and I think this is something that's very important, we should all be aware of having two phone, two laptop, that the amount of eWaste that it eventually results in, and I think that the awareness raising is something that's also crucial in addressing this issue.  It is not something that only ‑‑ that only private company, the ‑‑ the public institutions can hear, but also it is us as citizens should also be aware of.
>> MODERATOR: Let's move to the question on the core priorities.  I think it was asked in view of the UN environmental program, but I would extend the question to ask which areas could and should the Internet Governance Forum facilitate, where should we foe kits on to coordinate the collective action at the international level.
>> ANDREA HALMOS:  Maybe on this some questions I would like to hear all of you, maybe saying what actor the UN EP or the IGF or some other international actors should do to actually facilitate coordination.
You want to go first. inches what's impactful, the work we're doing on the digital image of the earth.  There will be a lot of international cooperation on this.  It will allow for monitoring, for example, in different areas of the earth like oceans, coastal areas, and so on.  In this one, there is certainly a need for cooperation, for example, on data sharing, different image, so on.  That's one element.  
I also wanted to quickly just respond to one of the questions that I was looking in the chat about indicators, maybe we'll come to that later, that the commission at the moment is pulling together different stakeholders to agree on a neutral indicator for Internet Protocol as an indicator so if some people are interested, maybe I can convey that interest to the colleagues that already worked on this.
>> MODERATOR: Sara, what are the core priorities snap.
>> SARA GHAZANFARI:  I think I can echo what was just said with indicator, it is an aspect from the very South of Europe, there is a discrepancy on a variety of indicators that makes our lives also when it comes to the background understanding of what's going on and also to take us to a baseline and then measure our accessibility and others.  I think that we have needed a better coordination when it comes to indicator and also when it comes to maybe giving the right feasibility to all of the projects that our Telecom operators have been doing throughout Europe and also to connect, also to look at communities because I knew that we're doing many projects, but sometimes citizens are not well aware of this so maybe if we give the right visibility thanks to IGF and other fora we can also leverage on them and also create a better momentum.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  You want to add to that?
>> NATASA PERUCICA: I will keep it really short.
I think that the priorities should be non‑traditional stakeholder, so involvement of actors who are not traditionally involved in discussions on technology and the environment.
An example would be the gaming industry.  This to an extent has already been addressed in a report that was written by UN environment gaming for the planet.
The gaming industry, it is extremely attractive because of the large site, it is customer, audience, the users that they have worldwide.
In my opinion, it would ‑‑ it is one of the priorities, it would be to expand the stakeholders involved who can contribute to raising awareness, who can reach out to different individuals so as facilitating when addressing issues on digital technology and the environment.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
Do we have any further questions? 
>> LIVIA WALPEN:  In fact, we have ‑‑ I mean, there are still one question on ‑‑ he asks if there is strong governmental intervention needed.  I think we have tackled this.  He can go further to the question by Herman, he says it goes in this direction, but perhaps I can still ‑‑ countries are struggling to implement regulatory frameworks and he's asking if there are ‑‑ if they're capable of developing an extensive, an adaptive framework to deal with technological innovation related to sustainable environment and as an example he says, he gives the preparation of renewable energy assets for new cybersecurity threats and other issues and that's something that's very concrete.
Perhaps just the second question, it is also in the Q&A, she I think is particularly interested in the topic of eWaste again, that we have already had, and he asks the panelists if you can elaborate on factors that have led to the success of such in learning from projects and policies aimed at the same thing in different contexts and she's giving the example in Switzerland and there is the company that refurbishes the tech and resales it and then they regularly report having trouble and motivating consumers to really bring in their old technical equipment.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.
We'll start with the question about regulatory frameworks.  Are they sufficient?  Are countries able to follow?  You mentioned before that we want to track where all the materials come from, et cetera, all of the countries, are they able to implement them or is it something that's just for industrialized countries and the others will just lag behind?  What's your take on that?
>> My focus on Smart Cities, what I can tell you there,.  In the local environment, you may have other things that you don't have at the national level.  You have the right focus and the right innovation ecosystem to practice good practices.  We have been working with regional, local structures in learning labs and also with digital innovation hubs that will help administrations experiment with digital technologies and in particular from the commission's point of view, we have been working a lot with administrations to try to have them experiment with artificial intelligence and at local level, for example, a smart waste management, using artificial intelligence, it is a very interesting approach and we see that many cities have been working with that and, therefore, we are also in the future funding period, we'll be helping cities implement AI enabled cross domain solutions that will use artificial intelligence.  There is a potential there for the local level to actually experiment with innovative technologies, for example, better waste management.
>> MODERATOR: Any other thoughts on that?  You want to add on that, are countries able to implement in a sufficient manner?
>> NATASA PERUCICA: Well, I would actually ‑‑ I will post a link in the chat.  As part of this, we have mapped out, we have looked at which countries have regulations in place so legislation on eWaste, which do not, and when we look at the map, we can see that the majority of European countries have legislations in place and there was a number of countries in Asia, including China, India and Brazil for instance has proposed the legislation on eWaste and then when you look at the majority of the African continent, you see that countries do not have legislation in place and this is where most of the eWaste is unfortunately dumped.  Some sort of ‑‑ this shows us that countries do have the potential and the knowhow to act at the national level, how much some sort of experience sharing could help in the process and also what I mentioned earlier on adhering to the Basel Convention that actually ‑‑ that actually regulates the dumping of eWaste, there are countries that are for instance that are good at extracting like Japan that are good at extracting rare earths from eWaste and making use of them again for other electronic devices and even I think they have made Olympic medals from recycled eWaste and there are countries that have the knowhow on how to recycle and make use of the gadgets for something else.  There is still ‑‑ it is an unbalanced relationship.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Before time runs out, I would like to come to the last question, kind of switch around maybe from regulatory to consumers.
The question was whether ‑‑ it is actually ‑‑ are there good example where is it works to actually influence consumers on eWaste, more or lessen an involuntary basis, we saw it at the beginning because of this psychological factor, it is playing an important role, our laziness, our commodity, everyday life, it may lead us to consume ‑‑ what is your take on that.  Are you seeing progress there, or is it ‑‑ Sara, maybe you want to start with that?  I think your organization has been trying to influence the sector in a way to actually reduce consumption levels.
>> Sara:  That's a very good point.    I think the link to our consumers and our customers, it is really ‑‑ it is really important.  All of our members actually have been implementing different measures to raise awareness and I think it was a point that was raised before but really to visualize let's say the consumption they're undertaking, I think it is the best way to make them aware and then change the habits.
We know it is difficult to change our personal habits, but when you figure out what you're doing in a practical way, I think it is easier to go into a more sustainable way of living.
As an association, we're try, of course, to leverage on these Best Practices to create more awareness and also to share those and raise to an upper level.  We're also trying to work with other stakeholders which I think it is also something that will amplify our baseline and also to enlarge our activities.  It is a process that started some years ago and the best is yet to come.  You're learning on a daily basis here.
>> MODERATOR: Are sufficiency measures part of the upcoming funding programs?
>> ANDREA HALMOS: What's difficult at the moment, it is really to have a clear indicator framework on the enabling factor of ICTs.  We'll be working on that as I put it into the chat.
We will be certainly calling for projects and really large‑scale deployment of digital solutions that will address issues related to sustainability, the environmental sustainability and the climate issues.  We really are putting in for at least the smart city context the Green Deal, the Green Deal objectives as the purpose for the digital transformation of ICTs.
On engagement of consumers, so on, there is quite a number of applications and solutions that will measure individual carbon footprint, whatever, depending on the behavior of citizens.  What's really been an issue for us, at the E.U. level, it is to see how we can scale up these solutions.  For this purpose, we have been promoting through the movement that I mentioned earlier, the implementation of the interoperable urban platforms because that allows for an easy take up of solutions between cities or even for companies to bring solutions from one city to another.  Also, we have been working and we'll continue to work with the community of citizen science, citizens can bring an interesting contribution to all of these discussions, for example, through their data collection activities and when we make those contributions, we acknowledge them and we put them into the right format so that they can be useful for the cities and I think that can be really powerful and we have citizens better create dashboards and creating their contribution to the environment and climate objectives.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Thank you, all, for this interesting discussion.  Unfortunately, our time is running out.
We would like you to answer one final question, I would like for you to show us the final poll again.
On the basis of what's been discussed, in which areas is international coordination most needed when it comes to greening the Internet Protocol?  Answers are coming in..
Promoting a circular economy, reducing consumption is third.
The consumption is going up.  It is like this Biden and Trump thing, it turns around in the middle.
We're settled, you can see the ‑‑ still people coming ‑‑ I guess you can see the main gist of your answers and I will now turn or   give the word to Ross, our Rapporteur, to give us a summary of the session outcomes. 
>> Rapporteur:  Many thanks and many thanks to all of our speakers.  I don't know how I can possibly summarize such a rich debate.
In such a short time.
Let me try.
I have got 4 main points from what we heard today.
Number one, the Internet Protocol sector is a key enabler.  That's the crucial word, it is an enabler, be that in terms of connectivity, use of renewables in the sector, green financing options, and the use of data.  There is great potential.  This is brought to fruition in smart cities and the Internet of Things, distance learning, some examples of that.  The second point, however, there are rebound effects, is the enabler enough? 
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-ws327-believe-it-or-not-the-internet-protocol-is-on-sale^^

 
>> EDUARDO BARASAL MORALES: Thank you.  I'm going to share my screen. 
Good morning, everyone.  Thank you, all, for coming to our workshop, Believe it or not, the Internet Protocol is on Sale.  We're very grateful to IGF for this opportunity to discuss the future of the internet.  I would like to thank the panelists for accepting our invitation and for supporting us in our research.  My name is Eduardo Barasal Morales and together with my colleagues, Tiago Jun Nakumura and Andrea Komo, we'll be the moderators for this workshop.
We are here to debate the impacts of the market for the internet.  Let me introduce our four panelists.  First we'll have two representatives from the technical community, then we'll have two private secretary viewers, Mr. Lee Howard from the United States and also India will be represented.
Let's start our introduction, remember, the basic, in order to access the internet, each equipment has to have an IP address.  Currently, we have two versions of IP, version 4, IPv4, exhaustion issues or IPv6, the newer version to develop to substitute the 4.  Although 6 has been around for more than 20 years, it is still variable according to measurements made by some internet companies, approximately 33% of the traffic is running over IPv6 because this is worse because IPv4 days are numbers.  There is a small number of numbers left in each region.  As you see, all of the regions, they're suffering from exhaustion.
In our region, our LACNIC region, this year, we ran out of the IPv4 addresses in August, this caused a huge increase in prices, last week, the LACNIC price on IPv4/23 was the same as IPv6/32, $600.  Now that LACNIC can no longer assign the address, the only way to get through those is through a broker that will charge you $12,000, an increase of almost 2,000%.  IPv6 has increased its price and it now costs over $2,000.
A high price, but still lower than IPv4.  However, the number of IPv4 transfers continues to increase and that's the reason why we want to discuss the IPv4 market we want to talk about the digital inclusion and the future of the internet.
Now let's start our questions and debate.  I'll kindly ask you all to type in your browser Slido and enter the code IP for sale all in upper case and we'll start our quiz. 
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Hello, everybody.  
We'll start with question number one, it proposes what is the correlation between IPv4 market and IPv6 adoption?  You have 2 minutes to answer this question, please. 
>> EDUARDO BARASAL MORALES: Type in your browser Slido and then enter the code, IP for sale. 
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Now let's discuss this question, first with Mr. Moreiras. 
>> MARCO HOGEWONING: Hello. 
Interesting results.  It seems that we have quite a bit of IPv6 fans here.  There is this ‑‑ there seems to be an overall sort of lean to this is a false impression that you do not need IPv6.  I'm not so sure in that sense, by the time you enter the markets, by the time you pay that amount of money for IPv4, I kind of assume I would assume that you would look at the alternatives that you have seen.  You would think that people would reconsider that if they see that price tag coming with IPv4, at the same time, yes, it is still needed until we all, the world has moved on to IPv6, we need some IPv4 and that means that some of us, especially newcomers, need to find a way to obtain this.
I'm a bit surprised there is sort of still like a quarter of you saying they're still not correlated.  I would love to come back to that if we have time to discuss and why you think there isn't a connection.  In my mind, there certainly is unless we all move to IPv6, yes, we have to do IPv4 as Eduardo Barasal Morales explained, and the same goes with the IPv6 service region, yeah, we basically have no more IPv4 to give out.  If you need more addresses, then the way forward, you find someone with a surplus and have an agreement to use those addresses.  It is interesting.
I'm not surprised by sort of the responses that I have seen in front of me.
I'm not sure that people just sort of look at the IPv4 market, yeah, there is this market, I don't need IPv6 and there may be a few there, but they're naive and I think if you see the price tag, you should be aware that there are alternatives and it puzzles me and it has been puzzling me for years why people are paying so much money to continue with a protocol that we know will never fit.  The internet is much bigger than the 4 billion addresses we have in IPv4.  Yeah.  We should move.
Now, I see a lot of familiar faces here in the chat.  I know many of them have already moved.  The big question on the table, I think also for IGF in general, it is what can we do to help and move the others.  Again, I'm happy to leave room for discussion and get feedback from the audience on what you think is sort of the key area and what we can do to unlock it apart from working until the ‑‑ it is ‑‑ I leave it here as an opening remark.  I leave time for some discussion with the participants.
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Thank you, Marco Hogewoning.
Next, please, Mr. Antonio Marcos Moreiras.
>> ANTONIO MARCOS MOREIRAS: Looking on one side, I see that the market, there's certain kinds of reasons to get the IPv4, they need to exist and to operate to date.
On the other side, we see IPv6 adoption, it is still very low.  For instance, in commerce, for instance in government and other kinds of reasons as well.  We see some kind of business such as ISPs that connect to the end users, transferring IPv4 and don't use, don't deploying IPv6, this is very worrying.  For instance, we have the data from LACNIC, we have had 25 transfers, and just 7 of the companies are deploying IPv6, just 7 of the 22 transfers, they have IPv6 together with it.  32%, I think it is very, very worrying.  It's not ‑‑ I can't not say it for certain, but since having an IP in the market, it is jeopardizing the IPv6, companies are not deploying IPv6 because they have the possibility of still getting IPv4 for price.  This is my view, that the market, it is not good for IPv6 adoption.
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Thank you.
Next, please, Mr. Howard. 
>> LEE HOWARD: Thank you.
I'm glad to be here.
So I did some preparation for this, I wanted to see what kind of correlation there is between the address market and rate of IPv6 adoption.  It is not an advertisement, I did a blog post, I have some charts that you can go see.  What I found, it was the rate of acquisitions by IPv4 addresses on the internet, it is linear, it is a straight line and the rate of IPv6 adoption at this point, it is very linear, a straight line and the two lines, they're almost perfectly parallel which says to me, there is none of the answers, it is not exactly correct, they are perfectly correlated, they are perfectly correlated at exactly ‑‑ this is my perspective, my opinion.  It is that they're perfectly correlated at exactly the rate of growth of the internet.
As organizations are bringing new users or devices online, they're having to adopt either IPv4 or IPv6 or both.  I have done multiple presentations over the years, including at Nanog and LACNIC talking about the price of IPv4 addresses and comparing that to the price of deploying network address translation and the cost of IPv6 and what I have found is that at a certain point it becomes ‑‑ it is cheap tore buy the IPv4 addresses than to deploy others.  In the market mostly, what we're see, it is that IPv6 is another way to reduce the cost of Nat and we have seen several companies using it that way, you need IPv4 addresses because the internet is not completely IPv6 yet but you want IPv6 so you have fewer IPv4 addresses for outside of your net.  That's what I'm seeing so far.  I'm sure we'll have a lot more to talk about.
Thank you.
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Next, we have Mr. Rajesh Chharia.
>> RAJESH CHHARIA: Thank you.
It is a very good question, a good answer.  What I find, helping the adoption of IPv6 and IPv4 market will jeopardize the market of IPv6, what other are the two parts of the coin.  In one way, no doubt IPv4 market will be helping the start‑up to start the network but at the same time, if the market is there, it will not encourage them to adopt IPv6 from the initial time.  What they find, the IPv4 deployment is very easy version easy to remember and IPv6 is very very tough to remember and you have to upgrade your hardware, equipment a lot.  That's the reason why this difference is here.
In India, what I'm finding, the IPv6 deployment, it is the highest in India if you compare with the world and the network operator, the large network operator, even the small network operator, they're ready to deploy the IPv6 and providing IPv6 to customers.  At the same time, we have to understand one thing, in point of India, in India, the lifetime of the equipment is very long.  We are using the equipment until the time that the equipment says sorry, throw me away, my retearing costs would be much more higher than the new equipment and then only are we changing the equipment and that's on the rural side.  India consists of around 65% of the world and the equipment that's getting obsoleted in the city, it is traveling back to the rural side, that's the reason why you find that the deployment of IPv6 in the rural area is small in comparison to the metro city.  IPv4 market is there, it helps us also to make the difficulty of deploying the IPv6 in a proper way.
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: We'll go to the next question.  Thank you.
What is the impact of IPv4's markets to the distribution of IPv4 addresses.
To discuss, please. 
>> MARCO HOGEWONING: Not a big surprise.  The audience speaks for itself.  I would sort of have a contrary view from a technical perspective, it is good to see that resources that basically lay there on the shelf eating dust get used.  There are still, as we discussed previously, there are still regions to do IPv4.  We don't have to.  As long as not everybody is on board with IPv6 it is good.  Yeah.  Obviously the price tag that you see, the prices that you are floating around for the resources, they are high and they're only getting higher and in that sense, yeah, it certainly is for the very few that can afford it.  In that sense again, you know, if we're all about sort of affordability for all of us, inclusivity, the sooner we go to IPv6 the better it is.  It is not free.  I mean, it is probably a lot more affordable than continuing this weird spiral upwards in market and certain brokers.  Forgive me for saying that.  Yeah.  If we all want the world to enjoy the internet then we should just move to IPv6.  That's the only way to make that happen.
ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Thank you.
Next, Mr. Antonio Marcos Moreiras.
>> ANTONIO MARCOS MOREIRAS: This is welcome, giving us flexibility to the current situation, together with the recovery process that are made ‑‑ that are made from EIRs.  The market depends on the economic power to buy the address, not just the need of the others.  Maybe things don't come together necessarily.  For instance, in the for organizations such as community networks, new community networks, maybe they could not come to exist, come to operate without new other, new IPv4 for others, it is not okay to have just a IPv6 only network, it is almost impossible.  They need IPv4 for others, they would be able to buy it in the market, I'm not sure, in a small way ‑‑ for example, in Brazil, we have 80,000 and 50,000 autonomies systems but we have 50,000 ISPs.  Only half of the ISPs are not autonomies systems.  There are ISPs operating in a small geographic region or in some cities, and they don't have IP and they don't know how to get them from NI Ryan Nugent‑Hopkins, from IRR, so they would be able to have that in the market, probably not because they are very small.  They don't have economic research to do it.
The transfers, they're a very good thing.  They have flexibility, but the market, I'm not sure it is the best way to solve the current situation and we should foster IPv6 adoption and make it faster better, but I'm not sure if the market will help with that, will help with the distribution of not using address and things like that. 
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Thank you.
Next, please. 
>> LEE HOWARD: It is a really interesting question.  I want to start by responding to a couple of things that Antonio just said.  You said IPv6 is not possible to run a network at ISP at IPv6 only, which is mostly true but for mobile companies, several mobile companies are IPv6 only inside of their networks, they only get those addresses and they do the nat64 or other technology on the edge when the users need to get to something with IPv4.  It is possible.  Is also Facebook, it is famously IPv6 only.  Everything in their network runs IPv6 only and only have IPv4 in translation on the edge.  It is possible for a data company A contact come to run IPv6 only.  That said, bough of those, all of the operators I know of running IPv6 only have also had to buy IPv4 addresses at some point so they still needed addresses to grow large enough to reduce the need there and that's dependent on the rest of the internet ecosystem, dependent on the content providers, the users they're trying to reach or in Facebook, the users trying to reach them for the IPv6 for the IPv6 investment to be worthwhile..
A bit of a joke, you said we should make IPv6 faster and it is faster, it is lower latency than IPv4, we see that on the internet, that's for another panel.
For this particular question, what strikes me, the place to look for information for how to really answer it, it is the policies, so transfers, for a long time, LACNIC was ‑‑ for a long time, it was not allowing transfers of IPv4 addresses outside of the region and that's partly related to other policies outside of the region and that changed a few months ago and we have begun to see addresses transferring in and out of the organization and we have seen an increase in the LACNIC region to buy addresses, it is more expensive than before.  That's a downside and we have seen prices increasing a lot over the course of this year.  So that's making it more and more difficult.  Economists would say, well, it is not, how deep someone's pockets are in terms of how they're able to pay for address, but it is even somebody with billions of dollars, they don't want to spend hundreds of dollars on something they don't need, but economists say those spending more for addresses will put them to a better, higher use, I don't entirely believe that.  They think there is a need for accredits while people deploy IPv6, it is still as an IPv6 advocate, it is still easy to say that the way to reduce the cost for IPv4 is to deploy more IPv6 and to tell friends and colleagues that they need to deploy IPv6.
That's enough for now.  More for the next question.
ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Next, Mr. Rajesh Chharia, please. 
>> RAJESH CHHARIA: The IPv4 market is making the situation, they have the financial muscle, it will enter into this market.  I feel that the start‑ups, the new intranet, they're finding it very difficult because if they start investing a lot of money into the purchasing of the IPv4, the IPv4 is necessary for the network, so the whole idea is going into that, so one thing, what I feel, it is very ‑‑ I'm not appreciating that, initially, the historical allotment of IPv4 addresses, they were allocated to some of the research companies, to some of the educational institutes, and to some of the organization NGOs and things, and at that time, because the IPv4 at that time had no value and the location, it was there, and they were taking the location data and now after this market, those NGOs, the educational institutes, they're the research organizations, they have taken this IPv4 address for the purpose of no start date, sending that into the market, into the market price and I'm not feeling good for this.  This is not at all what we thought when these were allocated to these researches or the educational institutes.  In my opinion, if we have any I have addresses for any of this, and if the research, if it is completed, then those IPs should come back to the IRR or come back so that the new intranet or the start‑up, they should be getting that IPv4 address for running their network properly..
14.6 million IPv4 addresses has come into the market through the tender process.  That's very long.  In the tender processes, those blocks are so big, someone will not be able to participate in that tender because that sender requires a huge muscle power to participate in that tender and that makes the initial investor in the network a problem for them to even pay for that only the big company, the big organizations, with plenty of dollars, they have the deep pockets, they have already cornered those IP and for the general user, for the general network operator, ESP, for the late intranet into the internet countries, the late entrants, they're finding it very difficult.  That's my thinking that the IPv4 market is only for the financial muscle power, nobody, general public, general network operator, they cannot use this IPv4.  Thank you. 
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Let's go to the next question..
What is the correlation between I have market and digital inclusion.  One minute for responding.  Let's discuss this. 
>> MARCO HOGEWONING: Yes.  It is ‑‑ the question, it is as we have seen before, it is interesting that there seems to be a bit of a race going on between different answers.  As we have heard from previous speakers and we see ourself, of course, yeah, building Ned work, it is expensive.  Building networks in this day and age that has to support IPv4, it will make it only more expensive.  As pointed out, we have seen networks that are only IPv6, a small little block at the edge to keep connected to the IPv4 role, it is enough and a great way forward.  Yes.  As long as people have the ability to sustain that only operation, they're not helping, they're not helping us so I think in that sense, yeah, it is probably ‑‑ I wouldn't say there isn't very strict, yeah, the I have market, it is breaking inclusion, it is helping and in that sense, back to my earlier comment, it is what it is, there are still a large chunk of the internet and you earlier on mentioned also governments, that do not do IPv6 so no matter how you put it, you have to find a way to connect to that old‑fashion world of IPv4 and that means that you have to somehow obtain ownership, whether it ‑‑ I greatly respect the comment, yeah, of course, we're more than happy to take addresses back and use our waiting list distribution center to distribute them in a fair manner by the policies determined by the multistakeholder process.  Yeah.  Market, it is a tough one to crack.  You know.  You can hand them back to me, you can hand them to somebody who is handing you a bag full of dollars.  The choice is probably for a lot of people fairly simple.
It is not great that IPv4 is still around.  Let me put it that way if you look for digital inclusion.  Again, if you're the one to move forward, and I saw an attendee pointing it out in chat, there is enough barriers and obstacles to get everybody on the internet already.  We don't need another one.  Let's move to IPv6.
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Thank you.  Next is Antonio Marcos Moreiras.
>> ANTONIO MARCOS MOREIRAS: Very well.
I think in the current situation, the market can be the only viable way to make new SPs or other internet‑related business, new community networks viable.
IPv4 is needed.
What Mr. Howard told about the networks being IPv6 only almost totally, just having some IPv4 on the edge, for the map, not for the 64, it is true.
There is still a need for this IPv4 for others to do that.  We have seen that most games don't do IPv6, most governments don't do IPv6, yet it is almost impossible to operate in a IPv6‑only environment, at least without some IPv4.  Yeah.  We see that ‑‑ we see that IPv4, the markets hate and the IPv6 hate and the internet growth, it is all the same, it is worrying.  The IPv6 growing hate should be bigger than the internet, it is the same, it seems that it is not improving, the percent of deploying.  Even if at some time should be IPv6 only and the way it is going, it will never be.
We see there's an important role in the digital inclusion in Brazil and the business, it is not viable any more, because of the block of IPv4.  Maybe the market will be better than before.  In my opinion, it was lost in the IPv6 adoption and it is a barrier for them.
It is also big for community networks.
I think the core relation is not strong, but there is a correlation, could be a correlation between the IPv6 format and digital inclusion and this format, maybe it can reduce the digital inclusion rate of growth.
Thank you.
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Next, please, Mr. Howard. 
>> LEE HOWARD: I agree with everything that Antonio just said.
The small ISP, community ISP, it is where I think much of the growth of the internet is coming from, where much of the additional inclusion of new users on the internet is coming from.  Being new, being in developing areas, they tend to be people and organizations with a smaller budget, just less money to spend on building the network and that's complicated.  I feel that the people that I have talked to, worked with that are working on these kinds of network, they're very smart people and they understand the trade‑off that they have to make and what decisions they can make.
I don't think that the problem is ‑‑ I think this is consistent with what Antonio just said, that the problem is not that the ISPs are unwilling to deploy IPv6 or unwilling to deploy both IPv4 and IPv6 and doing translation from private IPv4 to public IPv4 or from public or private IPv6.  The more of the problem is in the consumer electronic market that the wi‑fi router that may be someone's home, a wi‑fi access point in an area, it doesn't support IPv6 or a transition technology.  The consumer electronic, the smart TV, the refrigerator, the home security devices, most of those don't support IPv6 and until they do, the consumer can't live on IPv6 only.  We need a transition technology to get them there and so ‑‑ so the consumer market has not yet caught up to the ability to do IPv6 only and that's preventing a truly equal market for newcomers to the internet.
There is also ‑‑ even that, a better solution than it was a long time ago.  Translating from one protocol to another, or even from IPv4 public to private to IPv4 public, it is not a effecter experience.  It is a degraded internet experience.  Not everything works as well when you do that.  It works pretty well.  Basic web access generally works.
Things like gaming, certain kinds of innovation on the internet don't work as well and those are things where IPv6 can provide the possibility that sorry, I was looking at the comment on the panel, that his TV does support IPv6!  That's great!.
Innovation on the internet, if you don't have a true IP address from which you could do network innovation then you have a lesser experience than elsewhere and I think that's potentially a very bad thing for the internet as a whole and therefore for the global community.
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO:  Next, Rajesh Chharia, please. 
>> RAJESH CHHARIA: Thank you.
The question gives the answer.  This is the very good thing.  As I just go through a lot of international conferences, ICANN, APNIC, IGF, what I find, generally the discussion moves around the developed countries only.  Why discussing about any issue, and the discussion, the developed country, that's very predicting.  We also have to see the under developed country or the developing country also because the underdeveloped country, the developing country, it doesn't have the big pocket like the developing country.  They have only matured, they are in the way of getting maturer.  Here is the difference.
If I take the example of India, 65% population, they have a very big concern about the internet plan.  When the mobile has started in India, at that time, most of the calls to the website were by the missed call, the children of the rural people to the major city, the mother, the father, they give a miscall to the son and daughter and they ‑‑ they call, he now after almost the call is free but still this miscall process is going on.  The major concern is, the cost.
If IPv4 market, if any service provider, one more example, if the service provider, the big telcos are so serious on the penetration of the broadband in rural India, why still the rural India doesn't have more than 20% penetration and there is no business case to lay the networks over there and to give the services to the real people.
For the real people, the smaller ISP has to go over there and to give the services and the smaller ISP forgiving the services, they have to buy the IP report address from the local market and doesn't have the deep pocket and they will not be able to buy the IPv4 address.  What he will do, start doing, tell start doing the netting.  Now, the security doesn't allow that netting in I wanted I can't, for the security reason, because India, it is very badly hidden by the terrorism.  If I have to run the network, I have to buy the address.  That becomes a bigger thing rather than buying a router, rather than buying a server, rather than buying any other ‑‑ first the investor and the start‑up, they have to think that I have to buy IPv4 on the market because they will be getting only/24, or the 26 only, not more than that.
In/24 you cannot run a network.  That's the reason.  IPv4 market, it is just curtailing the digital inclusion because of the cost of the internet plan will be high, the cost of network will be high.
The cost will be high.  The user will not be very happy to take that as a ‑‑ you can say digital revolution in the country.
Thank you. 
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Thank you.  That's good.
Now let's go to the last question for a minute please.
The last question proposes how can internet governance be affected by the IPv4 market, taking into account the role of each stakeholder in the scenario..
Mr. Marco Hogewoning, please. 
>> MARCO HOGEWONING: I would turn it around.  Think about what we hear with each of the stakeholders in respective roles, what they can do to affect this market?  We spend a lot of time talking about inclusion and talking about essentially the short vision of IP before and the prices that are currently on the free market for additional IPv4 and the rest forms a barrier of entry to people, to companies, and I think it is in this sense being with the IGF, it is a great place to discuss what our collective responsibility is to stop that from happening.  The internet governance will be effected by the IPv6 market I don't think as much, the only real impact there, yes, in trying to progress inclusion, trying to get people collected and connected to the interrupt, this is turning into a bigger problem.  I think in that sense, you turn it around.  What can we, as internet governance community do to make sure that this stops and that this sort of becomes a more fair, more equal scenario and that's probably IPv6.
>> Andrea:  Thank you.  Next, please, Mr. Antonio Marcos Moreiras..
>> ANTONIO MARCOS MOREIRAS: If IPs are now so ‑‑ they are good instead of being a resource, a resource that has to be very well managed.  This is the situation, if IPs are now kind of good, what the ARAs, the NIRs, what they were doing, all these years, it was essentially wrong.  They should not keep doing that with IPv6, should IPv6 also be managed since the beginning, I'm not sure. 
I think that the market brings some questions about how we have managed IPs in the last year.  We should maybe talk about it.
I'm not sure that the market gets in the way of IPv6 but I'm also not sure if it is helping it, if it is helping the internet future and present.  I'm not sure.  I see there are very good points in the existence of the market.  It allows some business to exist and to operate today.  Maybe there is not good effect for the future of the internet.
I'm really not sure.
Maybe the question should be what should we do to help IPv6 adoption and helps the internet to go forward.
Thank you. 
>> ANDREA ERINA KOMO: Thank you.
Next, Mr. Howard.
>> LEE HOWARD: It is a very large question.  The internet governance as we discovered through years of IGF, it is ‑‑ it is a multistakeholder but essentially every stakeholder.  It is everybody that was on the internet, everybody who wants to be on the internet.  I think I want to give credit to ‑‑ there is a model at NIC.br, they set a model for deploying IPv6 in a country, we have heard from people there today, that yeah, we wish it was more.  The training and support provided by NIC.br is good and strong.  I look at countries where IPv6 deployment is high.  Belgium, a country with high IPv6 deployment.  That's because the government was ready to ban NAT, we need to be able to ‑‑ I think it was what was said, we need to identify a user in case of terrorism or something by their IP address and ISP said we can't bend that, we're ‑‑ we'll go out of business and citizens will pay significantly more for internet access.  They limited.  You can only have 10, 16 users per IP address, that made it, that gave all of the ISPs incentive to deploy that without telling them how to ‑‑ or to buy addresses.  They had their choices.  Most chose to deploy IPv6.
I wrote a plan for a developing island nation several years ago.  I noticed that the government in that nation was hosting most of the government webpages offshore, actually in the U.S. and so for citizens to access government services they had to reach a data center that was in Los Angeles instead of in the island.  I knew there were connectivity problems where the entrenched market, the networks didn't connect to each other and I proposed that by simply bringing the web hosting on to their nation, into their nation, on to their island, and requiring and providing preferential treatment for those who hosted IPv6 and providing preferential treatment for buying internet access services to the ISP would provide them IPv6, they may build a long way to deploying the IPv6 and more importantly, toward equalizing internet access in the country, so that citizens are able to access the government services so much faster because it is local and so much faster because they would be getting IPv6, they ‑‑ they ended up ‑‑ there was an administration change and the government ended up not doing anything.
There ‑‑ they're still reaching government services a long way away.
Part of it may be because of the cost of hosting locally, it may be just too high.
I don't think governments should enter the market themselves.  I don't think that governments in every country should just go buy a large block of addresses and allocate them locally.  That's another option that's sort of ‑‑ it is the expensive option but certainly distributes the costs of addresses among the entire nation, not just among the new entrants to the market, to the internet.  There's a lot more things that can be done.  I think that IPv6 is probably not the solution but based on the growth of both, we'll be watching and seeing both protocols running for a long time.  I think we can see that IPv6 is a more equal protocol, that it provides a true substitution in the nearer future.
>> Andrea:  Thank you.  Next. 
>> RAJESH CHHARIA: Internet governance, multistakeholder, words we discuss in the IGF, what I have observed, since the beginning I have attended all of the IGFs, these words are very common in this arena and at the moment we're going out of the IGF venue and we're in business and we have forfeited everything.  What's the main objective of the IGF, access.  How the access is possible if the IP addresses are not there and how the access will be possible.  Hence, IPv4 market, it is effecting IGF very strongly.  If we really want, IPv6 should be deployed and IPv6 should be successful then we have to take a call and the government has to take a call with all of the financial institutions including bank, airlines, government website, social networking site and all of this marketplaces should be shifted to the IPv6.  When these sites, when they're going to the IPv6 automatically user demand IPv6 from the network, then the network will also be deploying in a very serious way for the user, otherwise until the time the demand will not come from the user side you will not be able to deploy the IPv6 the way that we want.  Actually, when we're talking into the IGF, in the IGF, we should come out with a solution that all of these governments should be something mandated, otherwise they won't able to deploy out of the deep pocket organizations, and they'll still run into the IPv4 and that will make all of the smaller operators also to buy it from the market which is not good.  In my opinion, the IPv4 market, it is very much effecting the internet governance and they should think about that.
Thank you.
>> TIAGO JUN NAKAMURA:  I thank you for coming to this session. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-ws59-everything-you-wanted-to-ask-about-hate-speech-but-didnt^^

 
 
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Good morning or good afternoon, or good evening, everyone, depending on where you are in the world.  It's great to see such a big group already 48, and ‑‑ and counting, I see, joining this session of IGF 2020 online with the challenging title "Everything You Wanted to Ask About Hate Speech But Didn't."
This Session Is Trying to ‑‑ it's a one‑hour session where we are trying to address different aspects of comprehensive approach on combatting hate speech and gaining various experiences across primarily Europe.  As the speakers are from a European context.  IGF is a global forum and I hope we will bring in promising practices from other parts of the world and have an interesting exchange on challenges but also, I think very much opportunities to improve our approach to combatting hate speech within the framework and that's the setting for this discussion.
To recall, this discussion is livestreamed in plenary on the IGF YouTube channel and is recorded so that afterwards people can review the session.  It's a one‑our session.  We will have a short introduction in the minutes to frame the session debate.  And then we will move into breakout groups.
Participants are free to choose their breakout groups.  I will come back to that in a minute, how that works, and we will be discussing three main areas, the area of preventing hate speech and what can be done in that.  The area of self‑and co‑regulatory approaches around content regulation and the use of criminal administrative that covers hate speech and the challenges that might be to implement them in the online space.
I'm joined by an esteemed panel of speakers who will be speaking in their own breakout groups.  The breakout groups are not captioned, and they are not broadcast live, or recorded and I hope it's a safe space for everyone to actively engage in the discussion and I hope ‑‑ I count on our note takers to take notes and we have a very strong report afterwards.
With that, I want to, again, welcome the 57 participants that we have right now and I want to pass the floor to Bastiaan Winkel would is the vice chair of the committee of experts on combatting hate speech of the Council of Europe, and he's also working in the Netherlands as coordinating policy advisor on law enforcement and combatting crime within the Ministry of Justice and security Ministry of Justice.
Bastiaan, can you unmute yourself and give the frame of this session?
>> BASTIAAN WINKEL: Yes, Menno, my pleasure.  Thank you very much, Menno, for this introduction.  Thank you for organizing this session on this important issue, and for all participants a very warm welcome and I'm very glad that you find interest to follow this session and to participate in discussion on this matter.  A wide range of policy and practice initiatives have been launched in the past years at international and national levels to address the risks online hate speech poses to human rights in democratic societies.
And the term "hate speech" has been understood in different ways at the national and international level, and within different context.  With a bit of freedom of interpretation, we could roughly identify three ways the term is used.  First, hate speech that is illegal, in line with international standards.  Second, hate speech that is not illegal, but harmful to specific groups and individuals based on protected characteristics and third, hate speech that's not harmful to a specific group, but undesirable in a democratic society.
And it can be in a three‑layered approach as outlined in the UN plan of action.
Freedom of opinion and expression is a fundamental human right, essential to the functioning of democratic societies and the human rights system.  It is anchored in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and for the European on the human rights.  The European court on human rights has developed a rich case law of hate speech and incitement to violence.  In doing so, it doesn't have to balance competing considerations.
On the one hand, the need to preserve free speech, a cornerstone of democratic societies, and on the other hand, the need to protect individuals' personality rights, the prohibition of discrimination, mutual respect and understanding within society or public order.
In this respect, the court has noted that the failure to provide redress for insulting oppression ‑‑ expression could entail a violation of the positive obligation under Article 8 to secure effective respect to the rights to a private life.
Taking into consideration the human rights framework and the negative and positive obligation of the states, it becomes evident that different categories of hate speech required different, yet complimentary approaches to address hate speech and the impact on those targeted and wide other society.
The Council of Europe promotes a comprehensive approach to combatting hate speech.  In the session today, we cover three different types of approaches, where in the recent years, lots of experience has been gained with equality challenges and questions remain.
First, preventative measures, for example, through education, the use of counter speech to raise awareness to the risks posed to democracy and human rights.
Second, self and co‑regulatory approaches to content moderation and online governance.
And third, implementation of national criminal and administrative legislation covering hate speech in the online environment.
Now, the committee of ministers of the Council of Europe have tasked a committee of experts to draft a new recommendation on the comprehensive approach to combatting hate speech, including in the context of an online environment, where the human rights framework on European right of human rights and drawing upon the legacy of the No Hate Speech Movement youth campaign.
As well as possible practical tools to give guidance to Member States and other stakeholders in this area.
The work of this committee has just started and will continue throughout 2021 and will include a public consultation for the summer of 2021.  I believe this session is an opportunity to discuss between the many stakeholders present challenges, opportunities, and promising practices that can develop your and our approach to address hate speech and promote human rights online.
So far, my introduction, I give the floor back to Menno.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Thank you, Bastiaan, for giving the frame and introducing us to the Council of Europe's comprehensive approach and reminding us of the human rights framework.  I think it's worn.  As mentioned by Bastiaan, we want to zoom into this session in three areas, comprehensive approaches, of course, very wide and I would also like to recommend to look at some of the Council of Europe's documents in that and the committee's framework discussion ‑‑ sorry, the committee's background notes, and give a nice overview of the comprehensive approach and I will share the link in a minute.
But for this session, we wanted to look into three areas specifically developed lately in Europe, and I am ‑‑ and discuss them further in breakout groups where the various speakers will introduce a little bit more, what are the developments and the issues and the challenges in those areas, and open the floor for further discussion.
I am posting right now the various breakout groups.  To recall, the breakout records are not recorded or posted live and there will be feedback by the facilitator and the note takers.  I want to introduce the speakers and thank them for ‑‑ already now for all the work they have done in preparing this.
And this is also a good moment for everyone to follow and decide which group they want to go to.  The first breakout group is on prevention measures to address hate speech and it look into promising practices on using preventative tools such as awareness raising.  The speaker are Martin Mlynar youth member of the no hate speech and Albin Dearing who works at the EU Fundamental Rights Agency and he will be joined by Irina Drexler who works at the Council of Europe Unit on Cybercrime in Bucharest.  That's Working Group one.
And the second one will look into covers co‑regulatory approaches, and the speakers here Sejal Parmar, lecturer at school of law, University of Sheffield and Alexander Schaefer head of division for telecommunications and media law at Federal Ministry of Justice and consumer protection law in Germany.
The third Working Group is on prosecution and particularly using the national criminal and administrative legislation covering hate speech in the online and this will be joined Bastiaan Winkel, who is working as the coordinator policy advisor on law enforcement and combatting crime, justice and security and Alexandra Laffitte, vice chair of EuroISPA, and I will be note taking in that session and then in second session, will be Giulia who is the co‑Secretariat of the expert committee on combatting hate speech.
If I'm not mistaken, you can choose your own breakout session.  The IGF session hosts will open the breakout sessions in one minute.  You should be able to receive a button at the bottom of the Zoom when you can choose group ‑‑ Working Group one on prevention, Working Group two on self‑regulatory and co‑regulatory measures and group three, prosecution, which is on national law and how to implement them online.
The session will last half an hour and then we will come back for plenary feedback and further discussion in plenary.
I see that we should be searching for more buttons or breakout rooms button at the bottom.  And to be honest, I can't see it myself.
>> I don't have the button either.  I can't see it.
>> I'm sorry, Menno to jump in.  This is Luis.  At the bottom of your screen, you should see a button that says breakout rooms or sometimes there's no space and in that case it's like three dots and more and then there an option join breakout room.
>> I have none.  I don't have breakout sessions button.
>> Yeah, I'm seeing several people have already joined the breakout room.  So in organization, there's Alex, and Daphne Stevens.  Okay?
Yes, it says ‑‑
>> Just to confirm, if you are using your phone, yes, okay.  Continue, please.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Luis, could you please ‑‑
>> I was muted.  I'm sorry.  I'm saying for people that cannot find the button, you the host should be able to host people.  I mean, there are many people that have already joined the rooms.
Especially in protection.  In protection, we have and prosecution there's Alexander, Amal, and Daphne.  So for the rest of the people, you host, you can assign the people to the groups.  Maybe follow instructions by Menno, but you the cohost, if you click on ‑‑ so you Menno, you can see, if you click on join breakout rooms you can all the people that have joined.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: I can't see it I myself either.  Maybe we are suffering from the fact that I'm working on a Macintosh and or an Apple.
>> If you just touch on the screen.  Okay.  If you use the screen option, just put your cursor on the screen, you will be able to see.  I think on your top left, breakout rooms.  Breakout rooms.
Yes? 
>> Hi, sorry.  I think for many people, it says please wait to be assigned.
There are no options to actually select, and it could be actually as Menno said in relation to a Mac being used.  In that case, are we able to provide our preference in the group chat and be assigned?
>> Yes.
>> Yes.
>> Yes, please write in the chat and you will be assign the people that is not able to join.  I mean, many people have already joined several rooms.
>> It's probably the issue with Macs.  I have the same problem.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Okay.  So for everyone this is going to be a little bit chaotic.  If you could please send in the chat the preferred Working Group and then the host will have to ‑‑ the IGF host will have to assign us individually.  This will take a few minutes.
>> So can you see them, Menno, getting group three.
>> Okay.  Let me just do that.
Just a second.
Assign.
>> Okay.  I'm the host.  I will assign the people now.  Menno, for example, I'm going to transfer you now to room three, okay?
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Thank you.
>> Please keep comment on the chat section.  We have the three groups.  Groups one, two, and three.  Thanks.
>> So we are assigning at the moment.  You should be assigned shortly, okay?  Most of the people have been assigned already.
>> Yes, I will confirm even group two, there are around 20 people.
Okay.  We have group, one two, and three.  So group one is prevention, measures to address hate speech.  And group two is protection, self and co‑regulatory approaches, and three, we have the issue of national and criminal administrative legislation.  Please keep them coming.
Feel free to join any group.  Okay.  Thank you.  Thank you so much for your cooperation. 
(Breakout groups).
>> Thanks, Patrick.
>> Okay.  Is there anyone that needs to be joined to some group? 
I'm seeing Steven, Ivana are still unassigned.
Alexandra and Maritta, you write in the chat.  The rest of the people have been joined to groups.
So if no one says anything else, let's keep it like it is now.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Hello, everyone.  Yes, I see breakout group two is back.  Breakout group three is back.  Sorry for taking one extra minute.
>> It's well. 
>> I just want to close the groups is that okay?
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Yes, they are.
>> They should be joining shortly all of them.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Mm‑hmm. 
>> They need to be back.  In the next few seconds, they will be back.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Okay, everyone, welcome back to the plenary.  We are joined also by group one.  Welcome back.  I hope it was an enriching half an hour.  Just a little bit over a half hour.  I think our group three couldn't manage to wrap‑up.  So we were one minute late and I think group one had the same problem because you are two or three minutes late.  I complement everyone in participating the discussion.
We have ten minutes left.  And for purposes of recording, I think it's good to hear from the three different breakout groups and if we have a few more minutes we can discuss the overall discussion.  I encourage people to use the chat.  So if there are follow‑up questions or if you want to share data or links to report, please use the chat effectively.
Working on group one was on protection and I would like to grant the rapporteur for group one the floor, please.
>> MARTIN MLYNAR: Okay.  Thank you, Menno.  In group one, we had really fruitful discussions.  Firstly, I introduced my points of voice encouragement and education and the resilience which matters with regards to hate speech.
Then Albin introduced his point of Anti‑Semitism and the importance of media literacy and education, even in times of COVID‑19 crisis and its impact on societies.
Then we ‑‑ we got to a few ‑‑ a few summary points that Carine suggested that pointing to great examples is important in the peer network, where it's coming from and also not only ‑‑ not only promoting and showing great examples but also giving them voice by pointing to where it's best practices and awarding them.  They have ‑‑ in Germany, they have Smart Hero Award.  And great point about polarization was raised that nowadays everything is quite polarized, and the people are a bit too far and it results in further fragmentation into smaller groups and to marginal groups, and it's important that we try to build bridges between those groups instead of ‑‑ instead of losing them.
And it happens that we lose people from social media.  We lose them to smaller marginalized groups, and it's harder to combat those groups one we lose them.
And one great point was highlighted by Albin that we have to make people aware that what they do online matters and that they bear responsibility for that.
But that's a short summary.  So if I should say two or three points, education, building the bridges and promoting good examples are the most important ones.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Thank you very much, Martin.  It's clear rich debate and I think already someone commented that the Working Group was too short.  It only just started to heat up.
>> MARTIN MLYNAR: It was.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: So let's continue this in other settings.  The second Working Group, can I give the rapporteur the floor.  It was on self and co‑regulatory mechanisms. 
>> SEJAL PARMAR: Thank you very much.  There is an impulse to regulate in Europe, over the recent years in regards to various types of speech and noted that this impulse or the products of this impulse have been criticized because of the risks they posed to human rights and freedom of expression and at the outset, highlighted a couple of specific proposals that have emerged in policy discussions, namely the proposal of social media councils and a system of equals which could offer independent oversight of content moderation decisions.
Through the discussion, we looked at the German example and the implementation of the network enforcement act there.  And the improvements that have been made.  But also from the floor there were a number of concerns put forward about the general way in which regulation is impacting upon content.
So some of the problems that were identified include how states have been trying to find solutions on the basis of their terms of service, rather than their legislation and the example there that was given was a net DG.  And often there's a miss link with the rule of law and the rule of law institutions, particularly courts and others such as prosecutors, something that the recent and rather embryonic proposal of equals could potentially address.
There was also a great contribution from representative of Google, who reflected how Google has been taking responsibilities concerning human rights seriously and gave some really interesting information concerning takedowns by the company for ‑‑ for, for example, content that violates hate speech policies.
Apparently 151 million comments were taken down in one quarter of this year, and how for the private sector, at least for Google, it's a multi‑sector effort to address these issues.
Also, the reflections by the Google representative indicated how this focus on larger companies needs to be broadened out and think about other smaller platforms, but also raise the question which is how ‑‑ whether through automated systems it's possible to take down all the content that should be taken down, including the human rights perspective and how machines can do this in a way.
There was some skepticism raised about self‑regulation and also co‑regulation, because ‑‑ and the actors were talking about our businesses and they are always going to be self‑interested, and do the minimum possible no to meet ‑‑ meet the legal standards necessary.
And ultimately, that this is an issue of some kind of actual regulation, and proper accountability for these organizations under some kind of legal frameworks.
On the other hand, there was a sense of hope in relation to co‑regulation which was conveyed by another speaker who indicated or suggested that this co‑regulatory approach has to be industry‑wide and has to encompass different companies, large and small, and the key is to look at various business models which essentially monetize incitement and hate speech.
I think this was a mixture of skepticism and hope, about various regulatory approaches and there was an interest in new and emerging proposals for social media councils and ecourts and I think there's definitely a space to watch there and everyone in the discussion was interested in that.
And finally, these kind of, you know, long standing questions about the extent to which online platforms can practically address hate speech, given the sheer volume of it, and how context can be properly taken into account and their policies and also their practices in line with international human rights law.
Thanks very much.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Thank you, Sejal.  It's clear that group two had a quite condensed discussion with many different points raised.  Bastiaan, I understand you are reporting from Working Group three on prosecution, the role of national legislation and addressing online hate speech.  Can I give the floor to you?  Thank you.
>> BASTIAAN WINKEL: Yes, thank you very much, Menno.  On the point of law enforcement, when I ‑‑ when I hear the summaries from the other rapporteurs, it's always a pity to choose between one of the sessions and you cannot join all.  But I think at least that we ‑‑ that we should continue our discussion after this session as well.  For example, within the framework of crafting the recommendation for the Council of Europe.
So on the point of law enforcement, I think the discussion we had was quite interesting because we have ‑‑ we have approached the topic from different angles.
The angles from the ISPs, who are telling us it's clearly that things on Internet are happening, that needs some law enforcement.  So we cannot let it go.  Something has to happen.  But governments please be clear on what rules we should apply.  And that was a ‑‑ that was a very ‑‑ very strong message from the ‑‑ from Alexander, from the ISPs.  And so, of course, we want to cooperate with governments and law enforcement, but that's almost impossible if ‑‑ if all individual countries have their own regulations and have their own definitions.  We really should work towards more European or perhaps worldwide definitions to be clear for everyone what is allowed and what is not allowed on the Internet.
From the other ‑‑ the point of us brought in by some of the people that participated in the discussion, was the angle from the users.  We discussed the issue of should there be something of an obligation to make clear who you are talking with?  How to deal with being on the Internet anonymously?
Of course, it's the human rights, but on the other hand, it's for law enforcement, it's a very difficult issue and in some cases, you do not want people to be anonymous.
And the third perspective was the perspective from the state.  So where we first thought on the Internet it's something that the state should not intervene, we are now confronted with ‑‑ with illegal activities, with harmful activities and also with unwanted, undesirable activities on the Internet and we really have the discussion in all countries going on, like, where is the point where government should ‑‑ should intervene?
And on all of these different issues, we are phrasing ‑‑ we need to address them in a different way, with different measures.
And I think what was very positive from our discussion is that we all shared this idea of the questions that are on the table.  We did not have the time yet to answer them all, but I ‑‑ as I concluded in the session as well, I really think we are on the right track to address all of these issues and hopefully come up with a very good recommendation for the Council of Europe.
Perhaps Alexandra and Menno, you have something to add to this short summary, some points I forgot?
>> ALEXANDRA LAFFITTE: I think you summed it up perfectly.  We came in with questions.  We came up with more questions and I'm excited for the work that's ahead.  So thank you.
>> BASTIAAN WINKEL: Okay.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Thank you very much, Bastiaan and Alexandra, I second what you are saying.  We are one minute of time, but IGF gave us five minutes to wrap up which is very good.  I take that opportunity to inform everyone that notice has been taken in all the breakout groups and together with the three note takers, we will draft a report.  So the IGF asks us to draft a short report in 24 hours.  So we will do that.  But if you allow us and give us a week more, we will draft a bit more details report where various points were raised and we will share the chat so any links that were shared there can be reaccessed in the future.
I take also the opportunity to thank the IGF for hosting us and dealing with the technical challenges, specifically with the breakout groups and different ‑‑ using different platforms might have ‑‑ like Apple or Windows might have caused and captioning and the team that does the captioning of the session.
So the report will be online at this workshop session on the IGF platform.
And finally, I ask everyone to give IGF feedback.  So after this session, you will be guided to feedback form and if you are not automatically guided you can find a feedback form in your personal schedule and then also give feedback.
As Bastiaan and others were saying, there's a lot of discussion ongoing in many different areas and I think this is ‑‑ it shows the need for comprehensive approach.  Hate speech is a very complex ‑‑ complex situation.  We need to really ensure human rights standards and human rights framework is protected and therefore we need a fairly tailor made approach to everyone concerned, national context, local context, personal context and this needs a very differentiated approach.  This needs our thinking and I'm very happy that we had the time today to discuss this and share practices and I'm sure there are many forums where we can continue the discussion and move forward, including through the Council of Europe's expert committee and other forms.  So please join us.  I shared the links online.
Thank you, everyone.  Thank you, speakers and see you in the next forum.
>> Please fill out the feedback form.  Thank you so much and have a great morning and afternoon.  Thank you.
>> Thank you.
>> MENNO ETTEMA: Bye everyone.  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-ws75-ai-solution-and-governance-for-global-public-emergencies^^

>> CHUANG LIU: We're waiting for Daisy from South Africa.  Daisy is an active member in the Executive Committee Member and we have worked many, many years for Developing Countries.
This is a good time for us to meet together in this special time period.  Greetings to you and we'll have discussions on what's the situation, what's our common understanding and the methods and actions for us.
>> Hello.  This is your IGF host speaking again.  Please be informed this session is recorded and hosted under the IGF code of conduct and UN rules and regulations.  Please kindly respect that.  Be informed that the chat feature is for social chat only and only the Q&A feature is used to ask questions.  Have a very successful session.  Thank you.
>> CHUANG LIU: Thank you very much.
>> CHUANG LIU: Daisy, will you introduce yourself for us for one minute? 
>> DAISY SELEMATSELA: Okay.  Sorry for that.
Good morning.  Yes.  Good morning from South Africa.  This is Daisy Selematsela, I'm dying in from home because we're waiting from home from the University, I'm hoping the internet won't be a problem.  Thank you!  Looking forward to the discussions! 
>> CHUANG LIU: Daisy, she's a professor and President of WVO and a lawyer in Mexico, and you know Horst, and you know the Chair of coded groups, and then myself.
>> KE GONG: Hello, everyone.  Good day.
We'll start our panel discussion.  At first, I welcome all of you to make your time to Joan this very important discussion inning.  It is so important.  Especially important in the context of the COVID.  Today's panel is titled The role of digital tech in environmental sustainability.  We have the panelists have already introduced each to other and I think we just save the time to not have introduction again.  Please allow me to welcome you all on behalf of our team here in China and we're very happy to have these discussions and even though that's very short, just for one hour, I think we could continue this discussion in the future since we have already built a link between us.  WFU is an organization that consists of a hundred national members from different continents representing the engineering community.  We also are working with AI and we think AI is an important tool for to us implement SDGs and it is a powerful tool to combat the COVID matter, public crisis.  We're going to have six panelists to give 10‑minutes speech each and then have another 20 minutes for discussion.  Please allow me to give my presentation at first and I'll share my screen with you and ‑‑ could you see my screen?  Okay.
The title of my speech is AI, a powerful engineering tool for combating COVID.  Please allow me to use a few examples to show some WFU related works.
Here, on the first world engineering day approved by UNESCO was 4 March this year and unfortunately because of the COVID we couldn't meet together to make the plan with several regions of UNESCO.  On that very day, there was a statement made to call engineers worldwide, stepping up to the challenge of the COVID, at that time we called it coronavirus and other global threats.
Going back to AI, the first Ray alarm to this crisis is made by AI.  That was the 31st of December, last year, a company of Canada used an AI driven algorithm which looked at the foreign language news reports and other networks and officially proclaimed these crisis ‑‑ this crisis and gave alarm to the clients and also gave the alarm to the U.S. center disease control and also the Canadian ones.  Here you see AI plays an important role in areas like automatic body temperature modeling because the fast grasp of everyone, it allowed the very strict temperature monitoring rain the ‑‑ AI is used to support, to trace the affected people.  Very powerful usage of AI, it is to help doctors to identify a coronavirus city image that's widely used in many countries.  And MIT researchers found that people were asymptomatic and it may differ from healthy individuals in the way that they cough.  These differences are not decipherable to the human ear.  It turns out that they can pick up by artificial intelligence.  It is a very interesting finding.
One of the other challenges with COVID‑19, it is that it becomes apparent during the pandemic that patients can expect symptoms and then go downhill very quickly.  The system using AI will acquire, analyze, fuse relevant signals for realtime monitoring of the physical situations of the patient there in the hospital.  Here is another example offered by Google using the AI to accelerating drug development to treat COVID‑19, but so far we have not got a very decent track and it would help to find them, hopefully we can find them soon.
As pointed out by Secretary‑General of the United Nation, he said while this crisis is imperiling progress toward the Sustainable Development Goals, it also makes their achievements all the more urgent and necessary.  Moving forward, it is essential that recent gains are protected as much as possible and a truly transformative recovery from the COVID‑19 is pursued, one that reduces risk to future crisis and bring much closer the inclusive and Sustainable Development required to meet the goals of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
He stressed that we will ‑‑ it will require a surge in international cooperation and multilateralism.
It also requires a synergy of global partnership on AI for technical environment to make it more powerful and also for its governance.
In the practice of AI in combating COVID we do find some shortcuts of the current AI application.  For example, even though AI is widely used in combating COVID and its application has been accelerated in many fields, because of the new need coming up from the pandemic, shortcomings of AI applications have also been exposed such as the quality and accessibility of medical data for further process by AI.  That is an urgent need and it's a short come and the standards of data protection and sharing, the technology of test, the verification for AI application to ensure the standard is implied to protect privacy, so on, so forth.  The capability of the AI to find out an abnormal phenomena like human doctors, it is not exist so that AI could not very well to making early warning in the current situation.  Inclusiveness of AI applications for different groups of people, especially those elder people is another challenge for AI applications.  Going through these challenge, first let me introduce what's been done by WFU.
Our Committee for engineering ‑‑ for the engineering for innovative technologies has proposed 7 principles for responsible conduct of AI in engineering practice.  I list these 7 here from good for human and its environment, fairness, inclusiveness and public awareness, privacy and data integrity, transparency, accountability, peace, safety and security, collaboration.  I think collaboration, it is also very good proposed in these principles.  To carry out these principles, we need really to work hard.  We call on governments, foundations and corporations to conduct cross‑disciplinary, cross‑sector and multinational collaborations to establish consensus on AI ethical principles and we call on strengthening collaborative research and development of AI governance technology to keep pace with rapid AE progress.
Third, we call on open AI development apps platform with built‑in ethical development tools to support different AI system in evaluating its function and regulation compliance to define AI moral scenarios with significant social impact so that experts from different disciplines can work collaboratively on addressing AI ethical challenges.
Finally, to promote ethical education for every stakeholder in AI research, development, application, management.  All people should allocate it for a responsive conduct with AI.
Here I close my speech and move to the next speaker with Professor Horst Kremers from Germany. 
>> HORST KREMERS: Thank you very much for this very interesting first presentation.  Being an engineer myself and also working in information management in the applications.  I personally have worked with UNDRR, the program of the United Nations national European National global level.  My presentation, I would like to start.  I want to address a few selected principles that I would like to consider.  This is by far not complete, but it is some of the things that are not addressed at the moment in all the details and I would like to highlight a few of them.
I start talking about mentioning the data program and the challenges of information management at the international ‑‑ indicated on the international level and the background, it is a real big one, and it is also addressed by the Committee of data technology and my presentation, I want to highlight that I probably will only speak in aspects on the reduction and the specifications, the three accessible interoperable and reusable data principles.
On the historic background, it is not so far historic, but at least I go back to the year 2008 when I did my first international symposium on risk model application, that was also the time when the data, it started a Working Group and document archiving and those working in though this field, they know it is a real critical topic that's not done very well and open access to the disaster information, it is just to indicate that we're working on that since quite a long day.  The risk information management, the pillar, it may be more detailed across this prevention phases, preparatory and response faces and volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous environments and this is particularly the aspect of going there with global methods of representation or with artificial intelligence methods.  I will not compete with both, I think we need both.
In addition to comprehensive management, each of those pillars is subject to its separate information management elements, phases and processes.
What's the basic management principles, it is first of all, critical thinking, it is general management principles which in not all cases are really followed, sometimes people are more interested in doing certain methods, exploring certain aspects but management of those aspects are ‑‑ we have to talk about the analysis and we have already talked about decision action support and so on.  I don't want to go into details, all the presentations will be made available after the session.
Knowledge present takings, that's my main topic today with a few aspects, it is about setting up Ontologies, modeling of information representation, analyzing, the reasoning, deciding model, the acting and the goal‑reaching.  We made a formal representation of this.  This is not just doing it and saying that we have some data, we have some knowledge or some ‑‑ we'll just give it away and full stop.  All of that, I will certainly tell you all of that has to be done in an organized way.
The dependency is the other way around also, from deciding and acting, that is something that's actor, roles, facts oriented, we would have some rules and that also would reflect after model into the Ontologies, it is a permanent process, it is not something that we do one day and do for many years and then we see it is a precursor.  The goal reaching, it is something we have seen sometimes, to really reach the goal, it is the information and the knowledge that we have received, have we reached the goal as intended, it is not a typical management task, if not, we would have to go back to ontology modeling.
A thing I want to mention, it is really a bit problematic in the data spaces that are algebraic properties of information spaces, and it is information denseness, information homogeneousness, isotropy, it is working the same in all directions, is it continuous, is there no efforts in between or something or a prediction, a different liability, some steps or you have to model the steps, not just to street them at homogenous.
Knowledge generation, it is in the field of recognition of facts and that is in the formal reputation, you have the artificial intelligence measure, they're really positive in this field, the recognition of methods, the signal change detection, the coalitions and the dependencies between parameters and data spaces, sub data spaces and the verification of the hypothesis and the open area that we have to deal with in this session, it is also for knowledge representation, not just for a single dataset, you have the open data, then we would need the open software, we have to talk about and find out and describe the open analysis which is kind of available sources of how to do artificial intelligence, the models behind that, there is the intention also to make the artificial intelligence analysis so everyone can understand it and redo it.  The open context models, the scales that are applied.  The process models, that's those one where is all of the information flow comes together, some people, they call it also the quality measures of the quality processes to reach a certain result from complex input and analysis and then we need open quality measures that need to be transparent and what is not just precision but quality measures for instance like use oriented, it is the use of the data sufficiently and in the right way supported, not just the very best and precise data that we need to support the operational quality in all cases.  We need the open knowledge base and first of all, as an engineer, information people, they say including transparent, holistic documentation of this.
You know, I'm not talking about a single aspect, the whole thing become as bit complicated but don't fear engineers are dealing with that complexity to the user.
Operational decision support, that's the challenge.  We're working in risk domain and we're working in volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous environments and under certain boundary conditions and a few of them, they're much more, it is that we have to work our things about certain groups, data changes, analysis change, the situation changes in time, sometimes very rapidly and we have to do possibility in our analysis and decision making.  Don't forget we're not only mathematicians behind that, but there are managers of taskforces that would need the possibilities of the actions to be checked out.  Compliance checking, restriction, we come to the technical procedural, legal, financial, ethical problems that are also touched in the sessions, and I'm very happy to help.  And we have speakers today and talking about legal and ethical things, I always like to refer to the data protection guide in humanitarian action where a lot of these detailed aspects are treated.  Integration in open environment, there is some action field I recommend, the question of incompatibility, inconsistency of data and functions and results.  The similarity aspects, actions of normative meeting and processes government, there is a discussion on doing the same analysis, doing different analysis so we compare the analysis, so on.  Consistent multilevel generalization, that's a matter of we're doing support of knowledge for dinner levels of the decision makers so that has to be a little bit consistent with each other, otherwise all things get rough.
Preference and confidence measure, and what I always request, what I suggest, engineers do it, information people do it, set up test beds so that they have a situation A digital situation, they're a little bit complicated, people can test their AI methods, what we said, misrepresentations of results, dynamics of the situation, vulnerability, so on.
Main conclusions, knowledge representation for operational purposes is based on formal methods that are enriched by artificial intelligence methods.  Open access is a key scheme.
The UN instruments information in its complexities is in due need of a broader systematic integration, that's not addressed as I have seen too much in the really broad because of the complexity behind that and it is not always in this process.
There is a need for the public and private sector and Civil Society and academia and scientific and research institutions to work much more closely together.  I see a very slight joining, opening of the science actors to work together with practitioners and it is very hard work I know, it is not easy to get all of these people together but for the practice, for the humanitarian aspect of those who will rely on our support, it would be necessary for people to come to one place.  The application of informatics and state‑of‑the‑art that's available for innovative work and that's something that we have can adherence and require for this situation.
For this, I close my presentations, and I would be happy to stay in contact with any one of you in the panel and also the colleagues that are joining us in the presentation in the audience.
Thank you very much.
>> KE GONG: Thank you.  
Now may to invite professor Chuang Liu to give her presentation.
The floor is yours.
>> CHUANG LIU: Thank you.  Hello, everybody.
I have been working with the COVID and data hub.
Ever since COVID‑19 happened, there is a need for what kind of knowledge, data and what's out there in the world.  The China Association for science and technology supported our emergency project, COVID‑19 knowledge & data hub with a focus on the publications and the publicly available data so connected to each other, so up ‑‑ this is a system, this is the science.  There is 50 million cases as of yesterday in the whole world.
I notice from the chat, you can see in the different regions, and now we have ‑‑ hold on one ‑‑ we have 132,000 documentations and the data science in this system and this is a joint action, the COVID‑19, there are more than 50 experts from a dozen institutes joining this project, and this is launched in Jan and it is up to date.  We work together in the past and now we're working on this.
We have the documents and the datasets published in the world in each month, you see since January and in October end and until today, so we have this number, each month, it increased more and more and the different languages, the different reasons and the different publishers also and then most of them are the research publications and we have seen the situation reported, more than 800 research statistic databases.  In this case you can see almost every day, every workday, there are more than 600 documentation, publications and datasets.  You can see that this is very hard work.
How to deal with so big much resources?  We turned them into 16 groups and then terminology, daily briefings, press and remark, guidelines, review, epidemiology, virology, clinic aspect, Chinese medicine and pharmacy, public health, psychology, socioeconomic science, geographical environment, new tech applications, actions and platform, scientific popularization.
You can see all of this and the data side, it is the different formats.  There is so much information coming together, we need a new technology.  Under this one, we needed all of the information either timely to be findable, searchable, linking to one another and the classification statistics, all of this things, and the traditional methodology is not good enough for dealing with so many kinds.  We need a new technology to find the resources and we're quickly dealing with the data and also the quick classifications, the quick analysis for the summary and so this is an example for the guidelines.
For people, they don't need the information, the guide line information, it is different, so this is ‑‑ this is the challenges, the governance, we need to deal with the exact information very quickly in the system and we also are protecting this information.  This is all of the information we can.  There is the titles, the authors, the abstracts and the link to the original documentation.
Also there's a big sense that a different kinds of data, metadata, and then the metadata, it is ‑‑ you see this organized in a different way and it is very quick for classification.  This is the challenge to us, so this is a challenge for us to organize all of the information very orderly.  We need to be clear and deal with the data so that is why we need the new technology, it is the Internet Protocol technology including AI methods to dealing with these kinds of things.
Not only this, we also are publishing all of this kind of data and the information and people can easily access this.  We have a journal and we have the global changes on the data and the discovery, so that we can publish all of this related information and call people to work together.  Not only the research paper to summarize and also the analyses paper but also some are regional datasets.
This next slide, it shows you ‑‑ I need a bit of a wait, there's a delay.  Okay.  Here.
So there you have another journal, this is the digital journal of the global trend repository.  This is data published in this journal.  So we have two journals, one is publishing the paper and the other is the publishing of the data.
We publish a paper, and we call together, then it is easy to access them and then we have this video, so on the dataset, we developed this summary on the COVID video report and we have several video reports of this and it is in two languages.
We have artificial intelligence related to this COVID video.
This one, it is Chinese medicine.  This is a clinical one, it is the Chinese medicine.
This one video, it is artificial intelligence applications.  This one, it is granted by COVID for the United Nations, it is good information.  I think it is one of 200 cases in the world.
Thank you very much.  I'll show you a video report about AI. 
>> KE GONG: Thank you.  Thank you, Professor Liu.  Thank you for the hard work to make this COVID knowledge and data hub.  I think that's open access, open and accessible.
Next speaker, from South Africa, Dr. Daisy Selematsela.  She will address the issues of technical issue for research data management and the capacity building in developing countries.
Daisy, the floor is yours.
>> DAISY SELEMATSELA: Is the screen showing?  Okay.  It is coming.
Thank you, good afternoon from South Africa to all of the participants and the panelists.  I want to share the perspective from our side, especially from the developing nation on what we pick up and with regards to knowledge management, what we pick up with research with regard to the research data management and the capacity building when we look at the SDGs and now linking with the artificial intelligence.  The first aspect is how do we actually harness artificial intelligence in relation to SDGs?  Where there are complexities between the SDGs, capacity building and artificial intelligence and open data.  There are high expectations that are placed on artificial intelligence in developing solutions.  We have to look at different sectors that are effecting human wellness and human wellness as we know, it is part of the SDG3.  Wellness, it is interconnected when looking at artificial intelligence as developing solutions because when you look at human wellness, there is no simple model to analyze the effects and the implications when we look at, for example, human health, biology and the psychological aspects.
When we try and analyze and look at it from the knowledge side and look at artificial intelligence, we need to understand that this effects human wellness and this needs to be looked at holistically and you need to insure that you have solutions that require the understanding of social activities as part of understanding the treatments, a particular example is when we look at a pandemic, COVID‑19, you need to look at the social aspects, the psychological aspects and not just the biological aspects or the medical aspects related to COVID when you try and use artificial intelligence to analyze the situation.  In this regard, knowledge is key in addressing such complex issues when we have to deal with data issues and also artificial intelligence and like the three previous speakers alluded, issues around data management, the type of data and so forth.
African leaders have actually responded to the SDGs, Sustainable Development Goals agenda, by setting regional priorities within the common Africa position on the post‑2015 Development Agenda which is part of the African Union 2014 and later agenda 2063 and that's what South Africa is looking into, agenda 2063 on human health and how we address education and my focus will be on human health and education.
The African Union agenda 2063 places prominence on research and innovation for Sustainable Development.  An important development is the formulation of the ‑‑ in the formulation of the Sustainable Development Goals, it is the universal recognition of the importance of the quality of education which is Goal 4 and it is key for us in Africa.  The SDG target in Goal 4, that are of particular relevance to us that are working in the knowledge field, those of thaws are data stewards, and information specialists is with alignment to Goal 3 and Goal 3 look the ensuring healthy lives and promoting well‑being for all, at all ages in human life.
When we look at the knowledge management SDG challenges, Goal 4 on education poses the following challenges for us in the knowledge field, what are the issues and as part of the issues, who are the actual role players in assisting and addressing the knowledge generation and feeding and assisting also with issues around data management.  Who bears the responsibility on the complex and interrelated issues of accessibility and affordability of such knowledge resources.
Does this perception that knowledge specialists, that they have also to consider the appropriate application of the four interrelated and essential features to the right to education as depicted in the United Nations' Committee on Economic, social, cultural rights and these are the four elements that I'll share with you and you have heard some of the presenters alluding to some of these elements, the first one will be availability, accessibility will be the second one, third one, acceptability, and adaptability.  When you look at availability, you have a number of activities that are involved in the establishment of Committees of practice to share and facilitate knowledge sharing and learning and cooperating in pursuit of sustainable solutions in what we're going to achieve.  Accessibility will look at the roles in information literacy programs because when you look at what the pandemic is doing now, and all other climate change issues that we have to deal with, citizen science is quite important and all of these areas, these are key in assisting and educating and orienting the population at large.  
When you look at acceptability, it is not about making available open resources or sources to citizens, science and to the academia at large.  Adaptability will also look at training of researcher, policymaker, citizen sciences and public outreach support to ensure that everybody understands the application of knowledge in solving disaster, health problems or other disasters.
So knowledge management, when we see an information management have an impact together with citizen science in this research aspect.
University researchers are being encouraged to collaborate as part of their research in an aggressive way of funding for the research that addresses ‑‑  the respective countries and the Sustainable Development Goals, what this implies, it is that in Africa, most of our research from the University side is conducted with findings from the global side but the countries are actually pushing for academics to ensure that they collaborate and focus on the grant challenges, those issues that are impacting on the SDGs.
Another expectation, it is for the knowledge specialist, those that generate knowledge, those that are in the forefront to provide information and data to reinforce or facilitate innovations that can be after harnessed for improvement in health and we're talking about artificial intelligence in this regard and whether that data provided on innovation are conducive to bring policy change and these are the conditions for transformative innovations to succeed as part of public good.
I just want to share the knowledge society indicators in relation to SDGs.  For us, like I indicated, I'm focused mostly on Africa, a lot of amounts are spent on research and development as a presentation ‑‑ as a percentage with the Gross Domestic Product.  It depends on the country.  For example, 50% in South Africa offers unwell uninvestment in research and development, it is formed and comes from international partners.  This is from funding agencies.  Qualitative measurement of the use and access of ICTs leads to the indicator for us to be a knowledge society.  The technology also impacts on what we want to achieve and when you talk about artificial intelligence of now, the issue around higher education internationalization, it is quite key because this is where researchers are coming from to be able to be innovative.  When we're looking higher intelligence here, we're looking to integrate all of the dimensions of all aspects of higher education to enhance the quality of education and research for all students and staff to make a meaningful contribution to society.  That's what we're looking for when we look at internalization in higher education.
The other I wanted cater for a knowledge society, it is the number of scientists in the country and the number of patents filed and the number or impact of Articles published or in high impact journals.  You have seen with the professor what she indicated around all of the Articles that have been published for the past month because of the pandemic.
It would be fitting for us to also look at the emergence of a revised social contract between science, institutions, the state or government.  The expectations from government, it is the private and public funds, scientists and universities are expected to address the needs of users in the economy and society, furthermore, researchers are subject to much more explicit accountability on the money they receive for research.  This impacts also on policy decision making from the government side.  What it means, it is implicit, as implicit as it is, it is much more complex, the model is not saying that when you get funding, we expect you to account in this way, account in a way that we want to do research that benefits us.  You can't just do blue sky research when you're a researcher, you need to do that research that addresses the needs of society and you see that happening now with the pandemic.
This is making it harder to place politicians on the merit of public support and public funding for research.  When we started with this array a few years ago, it was in southern Africa, the state was also asking questions and especially saying how is this array going to add value and how will it put food on the table when people are suffering and people are hungry.  How do we deal with that when we're looking at rural areas where people are hungry, so forth, that's things when we do research, we look at artificial intelligence for now and we look at how Sustainable Developments are also impacted in what we want to do and generating knowledge and the management of that knowledge, what are the impediments in this regard.  That's what I'm sharing here.
On the revised social contract between the researcher, scientist, the Universities, the states, that there expectations of science, these are more direct and concrete.  The issues around the trust mechanisms of the scientific regulation and the linear model of innovation that have been replaced by the benchmarking practices, performance measurements and the indicators of quality because that's what you want when you put out the research funding, you want to see the feedback and indicators that would benchmark on quality indicators.
In closing, what does this tell us?  When you look at the SDGs we look at the data issues and in particular the open data, knowledge generation, the role players in the process, how do we actually organize ourselves as knowledge practitioners like Professor Horst Kremers indicated to better support the knowledge economy for Sustainable Development.  How do we actually demonstrate the data‑driven and the artificial intelligence driven and the knowledge management value through impact and usage measurements.  How do we have data driven and AI driven practices and how do we actually capture and communicate the value of AI, the value of data‑driven practices within the Sustainable Development Goals.
I will end my short presentation there.
Thank you, Chair.
>> KE GONG: Thank you very much, Daisy.
Let's move to the next speaker who is from the very early morning in Mexico to join us, Professor Ricardo Israel Robles Pelayo.
The floor is yours. 
>> RICARDO ISRAEL ROBLES PELAYO: Thank you very much.
I will present.
>> KE GONG: Please, go ahead.
>> ROBERT GUERRA: Good morning, everyone.  Thank you for the invitation to be part of this workshop, especially to share with you and the colleagues of this workshop.  I'll try to be brief and I'll talk about the importance of the use of artificial intelligence as an effective instrument to solve a public emergency such as COVID is specifically in the case of Mexico.
I want to explain as a lawyer, a law professor, this involvement is about finding a legal solution.  Fortunately, scientists know the technical path and I'm sure that they're already working on the proposal that I will explain in the end.  I have followed the previous workshops and observed enthusiasm in finding solutions to solve the global emergency and the importance of protecting the use of personal data held by public, private institutions.  However, I agree with many panelists in this IGF about the importance of using the data to seek favorable solutions against this pandemic with the responsible care of the data that we feel that artificial intelligence is a viable solution.
Therefore, I would like to talk first about the background, our current situation of the pandemic and COVID‑19 in Mexico.
The first reported case and impacted person of COVID‑19 in Mexico was on February 27.  The first patient of COVID‑19 was on March 18, death.  Since then, the number has not decreased and we're placing a plateau at the highest place of the curve.  As we can see on the map, on the other hand, the Mexican government monitors the number of cases of infections from COVID.  It is logical to think that most of the infection, it has occurred in the industrialized and more populated states of Mexico.
On the other hand, the Mexican government created the epidemic group to establish the mobility of people to activate economic activity and social convenience.
We have looked at the transmissions between people and the responsiveness and the consequences of the epidemic of health and life.  However, although they have had good efforts, it is not enough to at least contain COVID cases.  One case, it is the information that's coming from the data provided by people, unfortunately, their involuntary ignorance when they give the information to the health authority, it has been a factor that has to be brought by the right information and communication.  The issue of information transparency, it is also a concern of health authorities and the general population.  From a point of view, it is an issue that has been working on, however again, it is necessary to improve so that all of the data that's needed to feed artificial intelligence, it is real and efficient.  The technology, the use of the smartphone, through their different application cans contribute to face this and other public emergencies.
In Mexico, there are 80.6 million internet users and 86.5 billion smartphone users.  The reach of the internet has increased and will increase more in the coming years.  Besides 48 million users installed applications of the smartphones.  Most of the applications are for instant messaging and social media.  We have audio and video, games, mapping navigation, et cetera.  As we can see, the people with smart phones use application, however, 48 million is a considerable number.  As generated from this data infrastructures an economic point of view, the smartphones, it is easy to obtain, easy to move to different parts, artificial intelligence will use the data generated by smartphones to predict those people that are infected by COVID or has the probability of being infected.  The health authority has the information to act in advance and to take the necessary measures to help a large part of the population with optimal results.  In Mexico, the other countries of the world, some applications were developed or were improved to combat COVID‑19 through different methods they attempted to establish different strategies to perform promptly and efficiently against the pandemic.
Applications like close contact detection, WhatsApp, other apps from China, coronavirus from Peru trying together from Singapore to name a few, they're good examples.
The Mexican and federal local health authorities have created as well applications referring to COVID and they're mainly used to answer questions and to provide instances for people who believe that they're infected with COVID and locate cases in the territory.
In other countries, this kind of technology is used to place and take urgent measure, including to go and assist people personally.
The Mexican government knows the importance of using technologies as a tool to deal with public emergencies.  On June 23rd the government boards of the national council of science and technology published an agreement in the official gazette of the federation issuing the institutional program 2020‑2024 of the national council of science and technology.  It recognizes science as a Human Rights based on the provision of universal declaration of Human Rights and the international covenant on economic, social and cultural rights.  This official document recognized the importance of strategies for national priorities.  Using artificial intelligence to combat COVID can be achieved by replicating the Best Practices from other countries.
Mobile phone companies must send the data from their apps related to COVID‑19 combined with the health authorities and using artificial intelligence to predict the mobility of people and using economic and human resources efficiently, trying to obtain the national health priorities.  Implementing artificial intelligence at the local level and in collaboration agreement with the rest of the countries and the international level it would be one of the important solutions to act efficiently in the face of the pandemic.
It is important to remark that the international agreements must ensure the protection of identity of the users and only will obtain the information related only and exclusively to COVID.  This protects the Human Rights of the protection of personal data.
I'm sure that with the contribution of colleagues that participate in this workshop and the different participants in this IGF we will obtain important ideas that will help find a way out of this pandemic and the use of the internet for human resilience and solidarity.
Thank you very much.
>> KE GONG: Thank you very much.
Now we're going to the last speaker from China, Professor Zhou Xiang talking about Big Data and academic information services.  
The floor is yours. 
>> ZHOU XIANG:  Thank you, Chair.
I have to share my screen first.  Okay.  I'm from the Aerospace Information Research Institute and Science.  My colleague already has talked about a very important issue for AI for public emergency like supporting SDGs, even though some critical applications in different countries.
I would like to speak on Big Data for information services.  Please allow me to start with a brief background introduction of my topic.
As you know, information technology, influences our daily life, our social, economic development like Big Data, artificial intelligence, geospatial information so that technology, the science, it is predictable but also will reshape the political economic and military and social and cultural ideas, I think information has a lot of impact on our planet.  As we all know, the pandemic comes to our work, I think it is also working differently, maybe in the face of history, most of us have to stay at home by working on connecting with the support of information technology and we have tried to use different means to keep connection and transfer the information in the different communities and we have to give up shopping and being outside, dining, it is a great change for each of us.
I think the issue for Big Data, when we're talking about the pandemic, we need to have the utilization, that's how we use the data and analytics to fight against a pandemic.  That means that we have to propose the solution to improve not only technology but also the information.  I think we really need the information for our work and sharing worldwide, academic, that requires the information to be provided in an open, transparent, timely, accurate manner.
What can we do, I think there are two fundamental functions, voluntary and prevention, it may be ‑‑ here is a very brief comparing of the different information technology.  Actually when we are talking to the Big Data or AI, we're not deploying or utilizing only one of these, but I think we compare all different data resources and different techniques and means to produce accurate information.  That means that we have the integration of data and the integration of technology.
If you look at this time, there is a lot of methodology for the data analysis cluster.  Just like professor Ricardo Israel Robles Pelayo had shown, the very vivid picture to give you understanding of the coronavirus so I think it was a lot of information for you, not only for decision making of government, but also the public, so those technologies, they can be used to monitor the organization of the personal and also the resident block and also the title applied, AI technology, mainly titled the data analysis, the rapid temperature measurement, the different equipment like a sonometer or a video detector, a sensor, and also there is a lot of new imagers installed at different places so we need a new algorithm on the image interpretation and maybe recorders positioning and people's personal information at the same time.  These are important tools for us to fight the coronavirus.
For integration, I think all of the Big Data, this type of technology, it can be used to complete early warning for the pandemic and also rapid screening.  This is a table for this kind of technology, but who can use those technologies to fight against the pandemic?  I think this already giving us a very good example of the multistakeholder approach so we can confirm that there is a lot of information released from different sources, from different orbits like research community, government, commercial sector, public, Civil Society, the internet organization, of course.  So the stakeholders actively participating in this coronavirus, for example, the universities selects data from governments from different countries and the data from WHO and producing that map for the coronavirus monitoring.  There are public platforms to release this kind of information.  Also we can Google the virus, and as you know from the beginning of the pandemic, you already produced new apps which can automatically notify the people who not been exposed, so I think ‑‑ I think from the aspect of a multistakeholder, the Big Data, it shows how important it is, the importance of the multistakeholder approach and the solution.
If we talk a bit more about Big Data, we have finished a lot of work about information management, we can convey mobilization monitoring and the tracing and the source to people and to each resident block and also we can do the risk evaluation at least in part of the ‑‑ the information from the statistics and it is really important information to support the decision making on control and the provincial pandemic.
As you see from the right of my slide, the various apps on the house phone, the municipal government, I think it is a new kind of government service for public by using Big Data analysis and also we can use Big Data for virus research.  The Big Data can provide surveys and computing, but also it can introduce a lot of machine learning forecasting to promote the research on the coronavirus.  There's a new application.  Personally I'm from ‑‑ we are working on monitoring and assessing using satellite imaging.  If you look at the right side of my slide, you find from the beginning various situations, but from the end of February, the area became active again.  This can be very good information for the supply chain management and also guiding the work for the government and enterprise, also various potentials for data articulation and the technology creation, location‑based service, the generation communication. 
And we also have a lot of cameras and civilians, the equipment to help us to get the data and we have the new advancing director which we can see everywhere from this pandemic.  It is a service norm.  We have portal, we have the public from the messenger and also a lot of apps, even a lot of countries, Italy, United Kingdom, they're releasing these kind of tools for the mobile phone to send the notification message to the public about this pandemic situation.
Okay.  We still want to solve a lot of programs.  I think that there is a full prospect, the first is the technical ability, I think for a lot of the country, we don't have a very strong infrastructure or platform especially for detection between user and the public so for that country, they node to enhance the capacity on network and also on the software system and also the commuting and the storage facility as well.  The Cloud computing, this kind of situation, they are in the international community.  I also have the equity and the diversity.  We have to consider the people like children, elder, disabled, they are ‑‑ they have difficulty to access this kind of information.  We have to think about the model information about the pandemic, this second one, it is also responsibility and we all know there's a lot of fake news and rumors ‑‑ okay.
SAQ and other medicines for of the pandemic but I think we need more separation with the governments and we're ‑‑ allow know go ‑‑ the data security, we don't want to speak too much about that.  Everybody knows that privacy is very important for each of us during the pandemic.  I think it is a very big problem.  Everywhere we're collecting permanent information by video, by ‑‑ I mean, this kind of data.  Okay.
The following years, infrastructure as I mentioned, it is very important, different countries have different solutions, I think all of this innovation technology has to be compared and make most of use of it for the implementation of the accurate information delivery like Big Data, smart city, also I think there is one principle that has the utilization to save the resource and investment on that, and also vacation and service, we need to do a lot more work, especially the data openness, the integration analysis, the seamless connection to use control and treatments, it needs to be encouraging and also data security again, we need a unified classification and monitoring as well.
At last, very brief summary of the topic I mentioned, I think internet ensures that people are connected and have access to information.
We're committed to ensure that people get equal access to this and I think Big Data is a good solution.  Big Data, artificial intelligence, not only have intensive application in responding to public emergencies but also it can promote the intelligent processing and services, also the city operating efficiently and technology development.
The final word, Big Data governance, it will improve the ability of society to cope with various public safety and health challenges and also more important, the use of the development of the economic and social development all over the world.
That's it.  Thank you. 
>> KE GONG: Thank you.  Thank you.
During the presentations, we received three questions from the Q&A box.  Two have been answered by Horst I believe.  There is one still open.  Let me share my screen to show these questions.
I don't like to ‑‑ I would like to have some answers to this.
Can you see the question from my screen.
Everybody has to open this, it is an open question on ‑‑ let me read it.  To what extent will AI work in land   looked countries during the emergencies, not only COVID‑19, also flood, earthquake, agriculture, et cetera, such as in Afghanistan.
Who wants to answer this question? 
>> HORST KREMERS: I don't have the real answer for this situation.  The question is very essential.
I think we're in a stage at the moment, we're in a stage where we are doing experiments with artificial intelligence but the question is how to put that into operational practice.  This is not common practice, and that is why we're lacking this gap between research, individual results and the broad practice and the importance, as I said, also in the comments, on the chat, I think it is very important, good you're raising the question, because it is in the interest of all our citizens so we have to be much faster and we would have liked to have seen more research and development on national, international level.
Let's try to join forces, finding right sources of doing all of this detailed work which cannot be done by small projects and we have to have an initiative on this.
>> KE GONG: May I add some words to this question.
Actually AI, it is very strong internet, reliable technology.  In the emergencies, to keep the information internet to work at least extent, it is very important.  That is information network infrastructure for today's societal life.  AI is strongly depending on the interconnectivities of if we lose the interconnectivity, AI may have some offline application, but by large it is not useful.  That's my answer.
For the question, the answers, comments, any further.
Another two questions have been answered by Horst already.  The panelists, they could give further answers and comments to those questions.  We'll open the block of answered questions.
>> HORST KREMERS: A small remark?  I have to leave at time at 11:10.
I want to thank you for this very good presentation from the introduction to the end.  We see that Big Data has potential of doing all of this.  It came to my mind that for all these topics, we're missing the coop operational counterpart which is the complexity thing.  Data management plans, we're sometimes missing to control this when we talk about open data, how to make that operational at the time of service versus in the disaster and in the aftermath, transparent, it is a good attribute but how do you have to experience that in the operational level on all of thesis basis.  Timely data, it would need service level agreements or something like that or quality‑oriented service level agreement for doing what type of analysis, at what moment and what period of time every 10 seconds, every half hour or something like that.  So on.
We're missing all of these standards where our citizens would say, hey, probably you're working on this since a long time.  The role of digital tech in environmental sustainability. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-7-%E2%80%93-ws97-fact-checking-a-realm-for-multi-stakeholder-model^^

 
 
>> MAN HEI SIU: Okay.  So I guess we'll start now. 
Sorry.  Sorry, sorry.  There's a bit of technical problem.
Shadrach, can I ask, why am I hearing my voice twice?
>> You are hearing your voice?
>> MAN HEI SIU: Yes, aim hearing my voice repeat.
>> It might be that maybe ‑‑ do you have two devices connected? 
>> ALICE ECHTERMANN: It can be you don't have everybody muted.  Maybe somebody else has you on speaker.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Maybe.  Maybe.
Could we mute everyone then?  Shadrach, can you help?  Thank you.
Okay.  I'm still hearing my voice repeat.  I'm very sorry.
>> MARTHA MAI HATCH: We should explain to our panelists, so basically that we are just the organizer.  We are not host, so now it's the UN that they are the host.  So I feel like these are technicalities, like the UN should do something about it now.
>> Please, is anyone else hearing an echo besides Connie? 
Please, can someone try to speak so I can see if anyone else is having the same issue? 
>> ALICE ECHTERMANN: Yes, I can test.  I don't hear an echo.
>> JENS KAESSNER: Test.  I don't hear an echo either.
>> Thank you.  It might be from your end, Connie.
>> CHARLES MOK: I think I'm okay.
>> Okay.  So can you try again and see if ‑‑
>> MAN HEI SIU: For me, there's still an echo. 
>> CARINA BIRARDA: Yes, for me too. 
>> Okay.  So then we'll have to ‑‑ 
>> I you have an issue from your end.
>> MAN HEI SIU: I think Ms. Carina Birarda said she had an echo as well.  I guess I can try to endure an echo because I don't want to delay it too long because I'm hearing as well right now again.
>> CARINA BIRARDA: Now it's okay.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Okay.  Okay. 
Okay.  Very sorry for the delay.  Thank you, Leonie for sharing the PowerPoint.  Welcome everyone to workshop 97, fact checking a realm of multi‑stakeholder model.
It was in a way unexpected for the three of us with various backgrounds to come together and organize this workshop.  And it all started when we begun to see the rising amount of false information being spread online and it got even more severe when the pandemic began.  Creating an infodemic.  We wanted to explore the disinformation, and the misinformation with the amazing panelists we have today with us, and hopefully this will be a fruitful and sun session for everyone.
My name is Connie Siu, I'm a 19‑year‑old biomechanic engineering student from the Chinese University of Hong Kong.  And we have Martha Mai Hatch, with the City University of Hong Kong, and we have Leonie Kellerhof with the London School of Economics.  This is first time to organize a workshop here at the UN IGF.  I would like to give a huge thank you to the emails from three young people to participate in this workshop.
For some of you, it will be very, very early, especially Mr. Obed and Ms. Birarda.  I will introduce the panelists we have with us today.  I will not attempt to give us a detailed introduction to mention all of their details and achievements.  You get to hear more about them and their work throughout the session.
Leonie, could you move to the next slide, please.
Thank you.  From the government sector, we have Mr. Charles Mok from Hong Kong, which is a legislative council representing the information technology functional constituency and he's been serving the ICT industry for over 20 years, and is a founding chairman of the Internet Society Hong Kong.
We also have Mr. Jens Kaessner from Switzerland who has been working on the digital transformation of Switzerland for almost 20 years, including coauthoring laws and policies covering net neutrality, Internet security, Spam, data protection and much more.
And between 2011 and 2017, he has also coauthored two reports of the Swiss government on social media.
And from the civil society sector, we have Ms. Alice Etchermann from Germany, who is currently a 28‑year‑old journalist working for corrective fact check and investigates the spread of rumors and false information.  We also have Mr. Sindy Obed, and the president of Internet Society Haiti.
And last but definitely not least from the technical sector we have Ms. Carina Birarda has research and development communication technologies and also information security.
And a few words of housekeeping before we move on to the capacity sharing session, this workshop will last 90 minutes with around 40 minutes for the sharing session and around 30 minutes for the panel discussion.  There will be a Q&A section.  Please leave a question in the Q&A window instead of the chat box.  Please do indicate who the question is for or whether the question is for all the panelists in general.
There's realtime English captions available by clicking on to the closed captions button.
Martha will be helping me moderate and Leonie will be monitoring the chat, the Q&A box and live streams throughout the session.
And also for the panelists, I will most likely be addressing questions to a certain panelist or two panelists but feel free to jump in at any time you have anything to add on to, or if you have any further comments to the questions.
So without further ado, I will begin this workshop the capacity sharing session and we look forward to the questions that will be coming from the audience, from you all.
So each panelist will have around 5 to 10 minutes for sharing and I'm sure that Martha, Leonie, I myself and everyone else are looking forward to everything you will be sharing with us right now.
So let's start it off according to the order of the panelists here on this PowerPoint, with Mr. Charles Mok first.  So Mr. Charles Mok.
>> CHARLES MOK: Okay.  I unmuted myself.  Can you hear me? 
>> MAN HEI SIU: Yes, loud and clear.
>> CHARLES MOK: Okay.  All right.  So I will try to keep myself within the time limit.  First of all, I want to say that although I was introduced as, you know somebody from the government sector, really I don't work for the government.
I don't work in the government.  I am a legislator and I happen even to ‑‑ I even happen to be a legislator on the opposition.  So actually, I have no power.  I am not a part of the government, even though, you know, technically some might consider us that.
My background is mostly spending time in the industry.  I started international service provider longtime ago, probably 25 years ago in Hong Kong and since then also have been working with civil society, with, are you know, starting ISOC in Hong Kong and all of that.
Back to the topic about misinformation, and fact checking.  Well, you know, we have just had the great experience and lessons that we have seen in the last couple of weeks with the US elections and I think those misinformation being thrown around is probably still, you know, something that we can still witness within ‑‑ you know, with our eyes every day.  And it will probably carry on for another couple of months.
People have been saying a lot of disinformation, misinformation having a great impact and a negative impact on democracies, but on the other hand, you know, even ‑‑ we're not talking about the election.  Obviously, with COVID‑19 and so on, there's been a lot of disinformation being thrown around.  This is not just an issue with the western world.  Obviously, we each had our own problems.  In Asia being you can talk on and on about the problems we have in Hong Kong, but obviously internationally we also see problems in the Philippines and Myanmar and so on.  Lots of these issues with disinformation.
Now, I started thinking about this topic, you know, through thinking about what is ‑‑ are we talking about the how to ‑‑ how to help set up fact checkers and how do we establish the credibility of the fact checkers?  And then very soon, I find that the problem is not only with, you know, the resources and the problems and difficulties of setting up an objective fact checking operation, the problem is sometimes and a lot of times, especially when we are looking at what has been happening in the US recently, do people really want to see facts being checked?  Do they really want to know the objective fact?  Or are they just looking for alternative facts that they like to see?
So if that's true, then it doesn't really matter whether or not we have a great fact checking organization or not, because these days, you know, people look at the media, and they group them and say that this is red, this is blue, and this is whatever, you know on this side, on that side, right?  Maybe more than two sides, in some cases.
But increasingly, are people even looking at fact checkers and saying that, you know, they are not on my side.  They are ‑‑ so they are not objective.
Actually, people ‑‑ actually, people won't even use the word "objective" anymore, or I'm generalizing.  I'm not talking about all people.  But more and more people, I have seen ‑‑ I worry, it's beginning to not really have a desire to look for objective facts.  They only look for facts that support their own position.
I think that might be ultimately a very, very difficult situation for those would want to do well and do an objective and thorough job of fact checking.
Obviously, you know, in the last couple of years in Hong Kong or in Asia, that I have seen, there are increasingly many, many being fact checking operations that have been set up, and these organizations, of course, they sometimes are founded by activists, and sometimes they are founded by journalists or academics.  They each have their own probably short comments or advantages and so on.  But I think some of the challenges they share would be limited resources and the difficulty of setting up a ‑‑ an operation that would be able to take care of these requirements or needs or misinformation, that they have to take care of in a timely manner, because if you don't take care of it in a quick and timely manner, it's probably useless.
And in some cases, they also lack experience.  Also, cultural differences, language differences.  That's also huge ‑‑ a huge problem that sometimes these organizations face and increasing political pressure.
I think in some governments whether you are media or a fact checker, you are actually facing a lot of potential or even possible persecution from the government or other forces in many of these Asian countries and increasingly probably in Hong Kong as well.
But, of course, I think one scam.  That in Asia, I think we have seen a ‑‑ a sort of better example of doing fact checking, might be Taiwan, because over the last election in Taiwan, in the very early part of this year, in January, in fact the government was very proactive in terms of being open and providing rapid response to misinformation, different government agencies, departments.  This he have sort of a ruse that within ‑‑ I don't remember within two hours or five hours, they have to give a response if they see ‑‑ if they are flagged with misinformation that falls within their jurisdiction.  They work very closely with some of the large social media.
Like it or not, sometimes you have to work with them, because they are the purveyor of most of this disinformation, like Facebook and Twitter and so on.  Alongside with multiple community fact checking organizations.
So I don't have time to go more deep lye into that, but we also use chat bot online to receive reports and so on, some AI elements added into it.  So I think in some ways, they are a good example of what can be done for some governments, but unfortunately, what we see is that increasingly, there are other governments that are trying to use legislations to try to label something that they don't like as fake news.
Now this has nothing to do with fact checking.  And this is like government coming in and saying this is not ‑‑ this is not the news that I want to see, and they are fake news.  You know, like what Donald Trump is saying and that right now.  You know, CNN is fake news.  I'm not saying that they are or they are not, but for government to say that, without objective proof is a big problem.
And anyway, so governments in Asia, such as Singapore, they have passed laws to combat fake news and increasingly in Hong Kong, you know, our government and the pro government legislators keep saying there's too much fake news.  Anything that is against the government is fake news.
So this is the problem that we see also in many parts of Asia.  So I just want to close with some of these observations and I don't want to take up too much time because we have a lot of great speakers coming up.  So how do we play our part as somebody who is on the Internet as a user or different role that we are playing to ensure the trust and the transparency and the accountability?
You know, are we ourselves looking for objectivity?  I even have to ask myself, are we ourselves looking for real facts or are we just looking for things that we like to hear.  I think that's the biggest problem, question that we have to ask each and every Internet users.  Thank you.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you, Mr. Mok for your sharing.  I'm sure those are some of the great points that we will be discussing later in our roundtable discussion, which is in about 30 minutes or so.
And so the next speaker that we have today is Ms. Alice Echtermann the stage is yours.  You can share your screen.
>> ALICE ECHTERMANN: Thank you for organizing this session.  Yes, I will quickly share my screen.  Just a second.
Okay.  So can you see my screen? 
Okay.  Perfect.
So as already mentioned, I'm a journalist.  So today, I'm speaking from journalistic perspective, mainly, and a fact checker, of course, which is sometimes confused because you know, fact checking ask be different things, we define ourselves as fact checkers, that check things that others said.  Some journalistic functions have fact checks who check their own articles.  We do external fact checking, if you want to put it like that.
Our organization is called Correctiv and the subline in German here, "investigation for society."  And so Correctiv is a nonprofit.  And it's a unit inside this.
So we fight misinformation and disinformation online.  I will give you a brief overview, just about our work, our principles, yeah, how we do this.
So Correctiv as a whole has 40 persons roughly at two locations and just now speaking about the fact checking team, that's the whole organization.  As I said it's nonprofit investigative journalism.  We are funded by donors and have two locations in Berlin as the main editorial office and the headquarters is in Essen.  We also work with international journalists in Europe mainly and we have some colleagues in Spain and Italy and in France.
And Correctiv.Faktencheck, I'm currently one the team leads.  I joined Correctiv.Faktencheck last year in May, and before that, I had to ‑‑ like a classic journalistic career, working for a newspaper, as an online editor.
So what are we doing at Correctiv.Faktencheck?  We are working according to the code of principles of the international fact checking network, the IFCN, which is an institution of the Poynter Institute.  I will come back to that later, what that means, what this code of principles is.
We investigate viral rumors that spread online, mainly, of course, on social media, like Facebook or Twitter, but also WhatsApp is playing an increasing role, and Telegram.
We are focusing on viral rumors.  We think in we focus on a topic that is not very broadly shared on social networks, then we will even make it bigger when we address it.  So we just look at the big topics.  This can be photos, videos, news articles, quotes of politicians.  Basically, everything that contains the factual claim.  You can only fact collect factual claim.  You cannot fact check opinion.  You can also not fact check conspiracy theories, which means that yeah, if somebody says there are evil forces in the background trying to establish a new world order, you cannot fact check that.  That's not possible.
And also, we cannot fact check future forecasts, for example.  Objection, we don't have a glass ball to look into.  So we published our fact checking articles on our own website which is Correctiv.org.  We give inside our articles ratings from correct to bogus which means it's totally invented.  And this is like the rating we give to the original content.  We see, for example, a photo that was digitally edited by Photoshop, which is then, of course, totally false.  But sometimes also you have claims or news articles that are a mixture.  It's not always everything that everything is clear or correct and they mix actual facts with something that is not proven or some conclusions that you cannot draw from, for example, statistics.  Statistics which are real, but you cannot draw the conclusion that people do.  And then we try to give this very nuanced ratings to just be fair and open which is right and which is wrong.
So we also make transparent our ways of investigation and our sources.  This is very important for us, because we think if our leaders can see what we did and see which sources we used, only then they can trust us and then they trust our rating, if we say something is false.
The code of principles that I mentioned, it's basically ‑‑ yeah.  It's a bit hard to explain if you never heard about that before.  So we have the international fact checking network.  We have fact checking organizations.  Currently, there are 83 signatories, and the codes of principles means that there's some basic rules that all of these signatories commit to.  This is a commitment to nonpartisanship and fairness which means that you fact check all political sides.  You don't only focus on what you would call the right wing political side or the left wing, you just fact check everyone to the same rules.
You have standards and transparency of sources, that you say what you used.  Which sources you used.  Transparency of funding and organizations.  So on our website, you will find all the information, how Correctiv is funded with the donors, the main donors and the monthly and the quarterly reports.
We have standards and transparency of methodology, which is also how we investigate our, who we talk to and how we give our ratings and we explain how we come to conclusions.
And also open and honest policy of corrections.  So if we make mistakes ‑‑ of course everybody can make mistakes.  Journalists do that like all humans.  We have to correct ourselves and we have to make it open and transparent and say, okay, we made a mistake here.
The verification process of the IFCN is renewed every year.  And you have an examination of the fact checkers every year if you still comply with these rules and only then you get this, like, certificate.
This is important for us, just to say we have certain standards.  We did not invent these standards, but this is like globally all fact checkers in this organization apply to these rules.  You can compare.
Also, this is linked to something that we ‑‑ that is called the third‑party fact checking partner of Facebook.  So we are a partner of Facebook, since 2017.  So 2016 Facebook started with these kind of partnerships.  They partnered with independent fact checkers like us, worldwide, who are verified signatories of the IFCN code of principles.  These are, for example, AFP, Full Fact in the UK, Africa Check, Rappler in the Philippines.  There are so many.  And what we do is ‑‑ or what Facebook's program encompasses is we are tagging false information on Facebook and Instagram with warning signs.  So if we check a Facebook post that contains a factual claim and we say this claim is factually false, then we can put a warning sign.  People see then, okay, here this content is false or partly false.
Which also means Facebook is reducing the reach of this content.  It gives a link on our website and they can read what we investigated about this claim and they can read our sources and make up their mind.  If they still want to share the content after that, they can do that, but we are trying to give the context.  We give them education, so they cannot share something without knowing that they shared something false.
The false content will not be deleted, which is very important.  People often misunderstand that.  It's not deleted by us and not by Facebook because of the fact check.
Last thing I would like to point out, what we think is important to fight disinformation online.  So we are ‑‑ we are facing many, many challenges which is like was already mentioned, the capacities, we are only eight journalists and we are only covering Germany, but this is a huge amount of disinformation now in our country, and we have to be fast but still have to be correct which is very difficult.  We also face legal threats by people who don't like our fact checks which is not by the government in our case, but by the spreaders of disinformation, who are sometimes very big companies, actually, behind some media outlets.  They, of course, don't like what we do.
We think it's very important to have education of the dangers of disinformation for citizens, which is basically media literacy that, yeah, it is ‑‑ it is education schools, basically.
You also need knowledge about journalist and trust journalism which means journalists have to comply to standards.  They have to do their job correctly.  And we need more transparency by platforms, which means Facebook, Google, Twitter, TikTok, they need more insights, scientific research.  How things like photo bubbles and echo chambers and how the algorithms work.  Actually nobody knows how the algorithm of Facebook works, but we know that it favors disinformation.  Facebook is trying to do something about it, but still not saying how the algorithm works.  So we need transparency.
That was everything from me, for so short.  And really looking forward for the discussion and, yeah, giving back to you.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you, Ms. Echtermann.  It's nice to know how an independent fact checking network works and especially how your organization works during the fact checking process.  So I guess we'll discuss about it more during the discussion.
So moving on, we have Mr. Jens Kaessner.  So Mr. Jens Kaessner, it's now yours.
>> JENS KAESSNER: Thank you.  Now, before social media, we had the media that did the fact checking, but that's not the case anymore.  So today we have social media where anybody can reach millions of people and we now absolutely need fact checking, even if some people might not want this, societies need this.
But fact checking comes after the content was sent.  So if you like the fact checker is a bit like a goalkeeper in a soccer game.  He can't win the game alone.  He's the last man standing, and he needs 10 other players before him.  And I would like to quickly speak about these ten players.  The social media platforms maximize for engagement of the users and for time the users spend.  So they are designed to keep as many users online for as long as possible.
How do they do that?  With polarization, controversy, hate, partisanship, negativity, extraism, tribalism and, surprise, because facts that are not true are always a surprise.
So before the fact checking, we simply have too much content that evokes these feelings and that can destroy a country, a society.  The platforms need to change this so that boring but useful content gets enough exposure, as much as inflammatory content or in a word truth must spread as well as lies.
Now, the platforms know this, but they need a nudge to change.  Because the economic incentive keeps them from solving this problem themselves.  And in the end, they must amplify truth, as well as they do lies.  They must adapt their algorithms for that.  Because we have billions of messages every day, content created in the billions and only automated solutions can deal with billions of messages, and it's only when this has been done that the fact checker can do good work.  We need the ten field players on the soccer field so that the goalkeeper, the fact checker, can really protect the goal.
So with that frame given, yes, we absolutely do need fact checking.  It's ‑‑ it will have to be established worldwide in all countries.  It will have to be established on all platforms, video sharing platforms, messenger platforms, you name it.  What is happening at the moment is by far not enough.  And fact checking, in order to be successful needs financing, the fact checking ‑‑ the fact checkers need much more money than they currently get.
Now, things are starting to happen.  Networks of fact checkers are starting to form.  Ms. Echtermann mentioned the IFCN, and there's the European Digital Media Observatory, the EDMO that was established this June for Europe.  We need these networks and multi‑stakeholder models can work.  The multi‑stakeholder model is a good model for fact checking.
The only thing we need to be careful about is that as Mr. Mok already mentioned, some stakeholders actively support disinformation, and they want the lies to be successful.  So what is important there is that the principles of science and of journalism are at the basis of the fact checking process.  So you need to check what the sources say, go back to the source.  You need to check content with reality.
So if you like, you need to call that ‑‑ you need to do research, but mind you, that's not research in the perverted way of people going, ah, I researched on YouTube.  That's not what I'm talking about.  I'm talking about real scientific research.
And last of all, we need to protect the fact checkers.  They are doing an enormous service to society and they are under pressure and in danger and if we want our societies to succeed, we need the fact checkers to survive.  Thank you.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you Mr. Kaessner for your sharing.  I'm sure with your analogy of, like, soccer players, I'm sure many audience could have a better concept of how this fact checking is supposed to work.  Especially I know in the participants, there are a number of teenagers here with us today.  Thank you very much for your sharing and I guess we will move on to Ms. Carina Birarda.
>> CARINA BIRARDA: Yes, here.  I can show my screen?
>> MAN HEI SIU: Yes, you can.
>> CARINA BIRARDA: Yes, thank you.
Wait me, please.
Oops.
And okay.  I share my screen.
Here.
I have made a brief presentation with the concepts.  It's okay? 
You can see my screen? 
>> MAN HEI SIU: Yes, clearly.
>> CARINA BIRARDA: Perfect.
Okay.  Thank you very much to the organizers IGF and United Nations for this workshop.
Something about me, I'm Carina Birarda from Argentina.  My current shop is at cybersecurity.
To begin, I will be covering a few definitions of key concepts, fake news, misinformation, disinformation, and information disorder.
The term fake news is recent.  They have many uses of the term "fake news" even fake media, described reporting which the crowd does not agree.  They begin searching for the term extensively in the second half of 2016, but we will see the term is commonly wrong applied.
For example, another way for explaining the scale of information corruption.  And then the term fast becomes so programmatic, I think we had to start to avoid it in the wrong way.
So we talk about false information or false content?  Do you know the difference between misinformation and disinformation?  Misinformation is information that is false, and the person who is disseminating believes that it is true.
Disinformation is information that is false, again, and the people and the person who is disseminating it knows that it's false.  It is a deliberate and intentional lie.
Types of information disorders.  Much of the content of the fake news combined two notions, misinformation and disinformation.
False information.  Disinformation is being formed by disinformation.  They call it malinformation, information that is based on reality but is just to inflict on a country.  An example is a person's sexual orientation without authorization.  Such misinformation like true information, but violates a person's policy and goes against the standards and ethics.
Everybody knows false information existed since humans have told stories.
Fact checkers, traditional or analogic.  In the information process prior to the Internet, before publication of content, the information control process was carried out.
Since the arrival of the Internet, everyone can publish.  Everyone can amplify.  Anyone can edit.  Editors are gone and there's no trashcan.
Internet age, new process.  This information, misinformation today, what is different?  The false information is spread more quickly.  It's the speed of a click.  It's difficult to control the speed of the news spread, intentional fake information basic in opinion.  Intentional disinformation, lack of fact checkings.  AI‑generated news site ranking.
Okay.  What is true?  What is false?
There is an unintentionally misleading content spread with the affecting citizens really perception and affect it's their trust and their sense of environment, mutual consent and participation.
The legal context, the limitations are to be enforced by law.  The possible balance between the two is made ‑‑ is met by promoting responsibility and in combined information to end users, from providing and empowering users.
So empowering users, there's many items published on the Internet to empower users.  I would like to briefly comment one.
The message I wanted to share with you, is called AMOR.  In English, love.  This was created by friend and colleague from Argentina, Maximiliano Macedo.
A, is the author's name missing.  Is the author's name listed?
M, message.  Is the message, reference, and names, or objectives.  That ‑‑ are they only showing one side of the argument, or report/accountability?  Is it real?
It's not like an easy word to remember.  We need simple methodologies that can be related with casual words as love, amor, and validate the information around us.  Love is a way of approaching to a person from comfortable perspective.  And this is like there are some words and some concepts.
This is all my contact and thank you very much for your attention.  Please feel free to contact me if you need it.  On the last page, there are all information and services and useful sites from our point of view.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you so much, Ms. Birarda.  Thank you for giving a clear explanation is misinformation, and I'm sure everyone knows a new span word for love, amor.  It's a new method for them to remember fact checking.
>> CARINA BIRARDA: You're welcome.
>> MAN HEI SIU: And last but least we have Mr. Sindy Obed.  The stage is yours.
>> OBED SINDY: Thank you.  Thank you.  Can I share my presentation?
>> MAN HEI SIU: You can share your screen, yes.
>> OBED SINDY: Sorry, I will not the ‑‑ sorry, it's early now.
I will share my screen.
Okay.
It ‑‑ let me stop the ‑‑ start without my screen.  So I ‑‑ I try.  So I'm Obed Sindy, President of Internet Society Haiti Chapter.  I'm also a member of a ‑‑ a board member of LAC Law board member.  It's part of ICANN.  We ‑‑ we defend the end users and Internet end users, and I'm cofounder of a grassroots.  So we promote the engagement for young ‑‑ in Internet Governance space at GTEL, at the grassroots level.  So recently, I'm coordinator of Haiti IGF, since 2018, and in ‑‑ and in '18, IGF, in ‑‑ in 2019, we discuss on how to combat fake news in '18.  So we have awesome international panelists and national panelists, so we come with the conclusion that how journalists maintain ‑‑ defend in the information, and prevent the later consideration qualified to the positions of archives.  So we need ‑‑ the responsible media, the responsible media, and we work with the treatment of information.  So we also conclude that the ‑‑ any question to information of responsible behavior of the end users is the key.  So education in these ‑‑ in this phase is also the key to help combat the ‑‑ combat fake news.
So information ‑‑ information should be processed with more as if they are talking with a stranger, and it should be supported.
So in Haiti, we have two initiative related to fact checking bloggers network and we have a ‑‑ the Asian ‑‑ the T‑check AT and initiative of the Asian Association of Online Media.
So let me say something about the first project.  The first project is Toma.  Toma is a project is liberty of information published on the Asian webisphere.  They submit items for analysis.  After a few seconds, Toma suggests what questions to take from him, and whether they have the ability or more advanced results, about fake news or confirmed information.  The user can also share the results proposed by Toma via email to his friends or follow the information, one that it is confirmed.
They allowed it to learn quickly and improve automatically.  So it's a good project.  So the Asian ‑‑ the Asian blogger network needs more ‑‑ more people at this ‑‑ on this project to support it, to see how we can in the mid‑sequence perspective.  And so it will be very, very interesting.
And the other thing is T‑check.  This is to analyze the objectivity of the information circulated on the web and the traditional media in order to verify whether the facts are not exploited, presented in ‑‑ in order to serve partisan interests or to concern conflicts.  So this is the second project.  So these two projects to see how we can find fake news in AT, but what are ‑‑ I think that the ‑‑ like, as I said before, so education is the key.  So this is not too popular in AT, and this project is ‑‑ need more funding to continue these works in.  AT to fight fake news.
So we know that in AT, it was fair where we have traditional media.  We have new media, and sometimes partisan media, we have a politician, we have a ‑‑ someone in the ‑‑ there's someone in power.  So we need an independent ‑‑ we need the fact checking.  We need more fund to support the new journalism, the independent journalists to move forward in a good way, where we will have a new generation of users of ‑‑ of user for Internet in ‑‑ all who want to receive information, so that it's ‑‑ the ‑‑ the ‑‑ there's no need now.
So I cannot share my screen on my phone now, so it ‑‑ but I think we are ‑‑ we have question in the audience, we will ‑‑ we will ‑‑ I will participate in this interactive way.  Thank you.  Thank you so much.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you, Mr. Obed, and thank you so much for sharing your projects and if it's possible since you couldn't share your PowerPoint, you can send it to us and we can send it to the other panelists and the attendees here by pasting it in our proposed website.  I think that would not be a waste of effort.
So thank you for your informative changing on disinformation and misinformation and fact checking.  I will start off with Ms. Echtermann, and Mr. Obed, and you have talked about raising awareness with regard to misinformation, disinformation and fact checking.  So in your opinion which stakeholder should take up the most responsibility to achieving this?  And could you propose any method of framework to educate users?
>> ALICE ECHTERMANN: I can start.  This is a very difficult question, because I think there's not one person or organization who can actually do this task.  It's like the civil society in every country has to work together with this.  I can only talk about Germany.
In Germany, I think our teachers and schools and so basically, above this education politics have ‑‑ in the past one or two years, begun to understand how important it is to educate young people about false information on social media platforms.  So we receive more and more requests by schools, actually, who would like us to do workshops for their children.
The problem is that we as fact checkers, don't have the capacities to go to all schools in Germany.  And so we usually have to say no to these requests which is very sad.  In Germany, we are lacking experts about this topic.  So people turn to journalists which is the role of the state and the educational system.
In Germany, every child has to go to school.  You have certain policies.  All schools teach basically according to this same ‑‑ yeah, teaching rules ‑‑ I don't know how to explain it in English, actually, it's like educational plan for every, like, age.  And they just have to include media literacy into this educational plan.
And they have to have experts as teachers in schools like employ teachers and not external fact checkers, journalists come to school and give a workshop, maybe one workshop in one school in the whole Germany in one year.  This is not enough.
So we should teach teachers how to give the knowledge to their ‑‑ to their students about fighting disinformation.
Thank you, Ms. Echtermann, Ms. Birarda or Mr. Obed, do you have anything to add?
>> CARINA BIRARDA: From my point of view, I believe that it's necessary that society must be concerned in this systemic way, and in methodology and resources to be able to carry out its old personal and individual fact checker.
Without the sources, without the information of another fact checkers, maintaining a critical thinking, education and media for these efforts and user empowerment and multiple stakeholders, corporations, appear to be the best way to improve the quality of information that is spread online.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you.  And Mr. Obed, do you have anything to add on to that? 
>> OBED SINDY: So I think that all the stakeholders must be counted.  So I think the ‑‑ for me, the civil society have quick role to play in this.  So to put more fact checking because in the private sector, they have businesses.  So they have ‑‑ they have ‑‑ on their control, they have all the new media, or the traditional media.  So we have to ‑‑ we have to see how we can make up ‑‑ we can have all the stakeholders on site, how to have NGO so to ‑‑ to fund a fact checker, and how to have the technical community, the academic community.  And the most important for me is the users ‑‑ the user must be ‑‑ must be ‑‑ understand that we live in the new ‑‑ the new world transformed with all ‑‑ by digital.  So we have ‑‑ we believe in a digital society with information flow.  So the user must be trained.  So thank you.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you, Mr. Obed and to the other two panels for your answers.  So Ms. Etchermann has mentioned the lack of funding for the organizations and for Mr. Charles Mok and Mr. Jens Kaessner, can you propose any way in which governments can help in this situation?
>> CHARLES MOK: Well, it depends on which government.  I think if it's the Germany government, maybe they can give these fact checkers some resources and that would be a nice thing.  That would be last thing I want to see whether it's for Hong Kong or Chinese government.  They are part of the problem.  They are the kind of government that may actually end up, as I said legislating to label news that are criticizing the government as misinformation.
So I wouldn't necessarily look to the government for help there, unfortunately.  I would rather see hopefully efforts within the civil society to try to educate and to try to work with some of these commercial companies, even like Facebook and so on to try to rectify the problems, rather than relying on of the go.
I mean, I would be the last to trust of the governments, unless it's a totally really democratic government.
>> JENS KAESSNER: Thank you.  The social media companies have become some of the world's biggest companies in last years, very quickly so, and, in fact, practically without paying taxes.
So I guess from the billions of dollars that they make every year, they should put some of that into financing fact checkers, external, independent fact checkers.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Mok and Mr. Kaessner for your answers.  I think that's a quite feasible method.  Hopefully it could be implemented in the future.
And also to Mr. Kaessner, you mentioned that a global fact checking network is necessary in order to combat the global spread of misinformation and disinformation.  So in your opinion, how important is the international level for fact checking in comparison to the national level of fact checking?  And do you think that international cooperation and fact checking is achievable in, let's say ten years or 20 years?
>> JENS KAESSNER: It is achievable, absolutely.  And hopefully it will be there in ten years.  International cooperation is mostly about learning from each other.  But fact checking organizations need to be locally rooted.  It's only correct that can do fact checking in Germany.  It's not a French or a Korea fact checking company would have big trouble doing the fact checks in Germany.  So you need local fact checking but with international cooperation and I think that goal is attainable if the funding comes in.  And we have ‑‑ to add, we have been seeing in the last years, as I said, international cooperation, Ms. Echtermann mentioned the organization in the US and this is currently in the works.
Thank you. 
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you, Mr. Kaessner.  Does any other panelist have anything to add on to the question? 
If no, then I will move on.  Okay.
So for this question, I want to ask Ms. Birarda.  You mentioned that you are working in the cybersecurity sector, and so when people talk about mis or disinformation and fact checking, most people will connect them to mainstream media, but, in fact, this could actually affect many other industries, including the service security sector, as far as I know.  So with the relatively recent exponential increase of mis and disinformation online, how has it affected cybersecurity from a global perspective or your local perspective in Argentina, and is there anything that the cybersecurity community has been doing to combat this?
>> CARINA BIRARDA: Okay let me answer.  Give me five seconds.  Of the community of cybersecurity, we work together to be strongly firm.  I am ‑‑ I believe with Alice, they talk about we have to work together to ‑‑ for more quick fact checker activity.  And cybersecurity, we are ‑‑ we are connected in all time for difference method and different messages and different platforms.  And the information relative with vulnerability or something like that.  If one person detects in another part of the world, and in ‑‑ and we can know about that information, and this is the deal for us, I think.
Maybe in fact checker this is the ‑‑ a good practices could be used.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you, Ms. Birarda.
Now I want to direct the question to Mr. Mok.  You have mentioned that there are certain stakeholders within the ‑‑ the misinformation community that they would like to, you know, promote more misinformation and disinformation.  So in your opinion, how can stakeholders that support misinformation be included in this multi‑stakeholder fact checking process without ruining or affecting the integrity of this whole process? 
>> CHARLES MOK: Okay.  If I get your question right, let's say there are organizations that might be creating or purveying, trying to spread this misinformation and they might be doing it for different purposes.  It might be political.  It might be monetary.
It might be trying to cheat people money or whatever or ‑‑ and so on.  Or spread hatred.
How do you engage them into the conversation, is that your question, right?
>> MAN HEI SIU: Yes.  Yes.
>> CHARLES MOK: Is your question?  I don't know.  That would be difficult.  A lot of times these organizations or these people tend to be ‑‑ they want to hide their tracks.  And the problem ‑‑ I go back to the question of the purpose of spreading these misinformation.  They spread the misinformation because they want to try to achieve a purpose.  Now can we engage them and try to say, you know, don't do this and, you know, be a nice boy or whatever?
That might be difficult.  I haven't really thought of that ‑‑ that aspect of it.  I don't want to rule it out completely.  I mean, but it's like all of these problems we're facing right now in the world.  The world is, indeed being very ‑‑ is becoming very, very divisive.  Everything ‑‑ if there's an election, maybe half the world will end up with 50/50% election, like what we saw in the US.  And so it's difficult in that situation to tell people to sit down together and then compromise.
So I'm afraid that it's a very good question in, fact.  We need to think more about it.  At least try to ‑‑ as I said originally, try to instill or reinforce the importance of objectivity, so that people or users or even people who are trying to become their own KOLs, their own key opinion leaders are going to be able to at least respect objectivity, and ‑‑ and also for users to do the same.
I think that kind of education and value, reviewing of the value is important.  Now who can do it?  Can government do it?  Can educational institutions do it?  Can we reemphasize this importance?  Maybe but there are a lot of authoritarian regimes in the world that will go in the opposite direction and that's difficult for some of these countries.
So it might be different for different jurisdiction, but it's a very good question.  I need to think more about it.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you, Mr. Mok.  I'm wondering if Mr. Kaessner or Ms. Echtermann have anything to add, from the government perspective respectively. 
>> ALICE ECHTERMANN: Would you repeat the question?
>> MAN HEI SIU: So Mr. Mok has mentioned right now that there are currently stakeholders within the misinformation community that are trying to promote misinformation and disinformation.  So is it possible for us to include such stakeholders into this fact checking ecosystem, or model, such that ‑‑ but at the same time not affect the integrity of the entire process?
>> JENS KAESSNER: I can answer first maybe.  In the US, one institution that spreads disinformation has been accepted as a fact checker, and that has proven pretty difficult.  I think to speak generally, we need the principles of journalism and of science to be respected by all parties.  So if somebody does not go back to the sources of a message, and somebody does not compare a claim to reality, if somebody does not base their actions on science, then that is not acceptable.
We also need processes to be open enough so that others can control them.  But in general, there are very clever actors that profit from lying and from spreading hate and violence.  So it will be difficult to incorporate them.  I think the platforms should not accept any calls to violence at all, and that could help in trying to incorporate all entities into the process, but it will be difficult.  Thank you.
>> ALICE ECHTERMANN: Yeah, I also think that it's not about taking everyone into the fact checking process which is also ‑‑ when I would imagine a government actor doing a fact checking, this is just against everything that I believe in, even in Germany where we don't experience threats by government or ‑‑ yeah, threats to journalists, to not do their job properly or have the freedom of expression.  The problem if you have ‑‑ if you want to have trust and fact checking is that from our experience, many people who believe in false information and fall for disinformation, their problem is that they don't trust the state or anything that is attached to it.
And so in the end, it's ‑‑ it would be completely false to have fact checking by these actors.  Even we experience as completely independent fact checkers.  We experience people writing us very furious messages saying you are funded by the government which is not true.  They are thinking because we are not supporting their world view, we have to be part of the evil system.  In the end, everything you have to do to convince these people that you are a reputable source and that journalists are reliable sources when they work according to certain principles.
Many things that people consider fake news is actually just bad journalism and so in the end you have to educate people about what journalism and how they can recognize good journalism and see what is bad journalism, because actually in Germany, we many partisan media outlets that are spreading false information, but in a way that you cannot say, oh, this is just a very shady thing.  They have professional structures.  They have their own editorial staff.  They have professional websites.  They look like normal media outlets.  So you cannot say you can rise on the first site this is false information.  You have to educate people about journalism and you have to have journalists who really comply to journalistic ethics and it's a problem if journalists are speculating or jumping to conclusions too early.  Yeah, that's not part of the job.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you, Ms. Echtermann and Mr. Kaessners.  So I guess we actually have more questions for you all but due to time constraints we only have ten minutes left.
We have to move on to the Q&A session.  There are quite a lot of questions from the audience.  So I will start with a question addressing no Mr. Charles Mok first.
So this is a student from Hong Kong.  There may be warning songs that the post may contain authentic information due to barriers, we may tend to accept the information with stances similar to our presuppositions and the process of fact checking may be complicating those facts.  It makes people less favored to check the information and so what can we do to have people have the information checked.
>> CHARLES MOK: This happens to us every day.  We are Internet users.  And we use these social media platforms.  It's human nature, so unfortunately sometimes our fingers are faster than our brains.  So I guess there's nothing really more than just telling, reminding ourselves as an average any Internet user, that whatever we see, whatever we of course when we share something, very likely we spread something.  It's something that we like to share with others.  Something more likely than not something that we agree with, right?
So that's ‑‑ so I guess we just have to remind ourselves that hey, you no he if it's too good to be true, maybe it's not true.  So sometimes we just have to remind ourselves, you know, don't try to think like if I don't share it right away, I won't get as many likes as I may be able to get.  You know, try to make sure that we are responsible user.  I think from the user point of view, especially for young people like yourselves probably just reminding your several that importance.  And like I said again and again, the value, reminding ourselves that it's important to keep a value of objectivity.  And like Jens was saying respecting science and facts.  Keep reminding ourselves when we are tempted by all of these temptations around the social media.  That's the only thing I can think about.  There's ample information on the Internet, if you really look for it to really try to even do our own little fact checking before we share.  Obviously if the platforms are more helpful, that will be good.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you, Mr. Mok.  There's another question addressing to Mr. Sindy Obed.  You said to consume information on the Internet as if you were a stranger on the street.  Initiatives like fact checking robots can seem very foreign to people.  How can we make people trust journalists and initiatives that they don't as opposed to blindly trusting people online?  Mr. Obed.
>> OBED SINDY: Thank you.  Thank you.
So we have to educate users.  You have to educate users.  So the source in journalist, the initial sources is very, very important.  So we have many journalists in Haiti.  But we have to verify what we have to check before trusting in all the journalists on the Internet.  So we ‑‑ we saw that every ‑‑ every ‑‑ everyone is a content creator now because we have many influencers.  The response regularly is every day about ‑‑ about the ‑‑ we have to influence them.  We have to be careful about the information, and ‑‑ and we have ‑‑ social media is a public sphere, webisphere and so we have to trust before people.  We know before and verified authenticity, because we can ‑‑ we can have service problems, like we have recently hate crimes ‑‑ hate crimes in Haiti about someone who attack a girl and was ‑‑ and was ‑‑ and this girl was assassinate this day.  And after the investigation, they know that this girl was contacted open Facebook.  So we must trust people that we are sure that they ‑‑ they do not work for a job.  They do not work for a boss in the information, for example, for the government, for example, for the private sector, for someone in politics to win popularity to win elections.  So we have to be more and more careful on social media, because it's a public ‑‑ everyone is ‑‑ everyone is everyone has a chance to be popular like all the media, all the new media.  So we have to be careful.  Did ‑‑ we have to be careful to have the sources to have to know the journalists before trusting them.  This is my answer.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you Mr. Obed.  We can only ask one more question in the audience.  It's not specified to anyone, but then how do we define what students as violent material or wrong information?  It's always difficult to define such a gray line of freedom of expression versus stopping wrong and hateful information because of views changing as society changes.
Are there any panelists who would like to answer this ‑‑ who would like to answer this question?
>> ALICE ECHTERMANN: Just a very short answer.  We think there are certain things that can be answered by objective facts as we heard earlier so there are questions that ‑‑ about opinion.  There are questions that cannot be fact checked, but in the end, if somebody quotes a statistic or says something that is it actually quite ‑‑ scientifically quite good investigate.  So you can answer these questions.  And in the end, that's what I mentioned in my presentation.  You always have to make sure that, of course, there's not only two options, false and wrong.  There's also, for example, unproven.  You have to make transparent if something has no source.
>> JENS KAESSNER: Thank you.  I will agree with that, because some of the bad actors actually claim that there's no truth or that you have to question even more or that you have to do your own research.  And, in fact, that is very misleading.
What you need to do is also trust sources of truth that you have found.  That leads our whole society much farther than if you tried to research everything yourself.  I will person alley never find a corona vaccination.  I will have to trust the scientists that are specialists in this, and that's the way forward.  There is a truth.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Ms. Birarda, do you have anything to add?
>> CARINA BIRARDA: Yes, I will have to make simple compilations.  If one is on the street with a person, would you believe on that person that say?  I would doubt that.  I would doubt and verify the information it seems to me that the same can be transferred to the Internet.  Like being on street, from the strangers.
>> MAN HEI SIU: Thank you.  Our 90 minutes have come to an end.  Thank you so much for the panelists for joining us today, as well as the audience.  And in the chat you can see that previously there's a link being sent out which is a feedback form.  It would help us if you fill it out after attending this session.  Thank you very much for joining and hopefully we'll see you next year in Poland in 2021.
Thank you, guys.  Bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-dc-main-session-covid-19-pandemic-and-its-impact-on-work-of-dcs-%E2%80%93-raw^^

>> I'll kick the ball and give it to Hunan he'll be Hanane but over to Hanane.
>> Thank you very much.  Tatiana.  I'm just waiting for I'm waiting for the sign we're ready to go.  If we're ready to.
>> HUNANE:  Welcome to the main session on the IGF coalition.
My name is Hanane Boujemi and I'll be comoderating this with my colleague Tatiana Tropino.  The main session of dynamic cocollisions which is part of the intersessional work of the Internet Governance Forum in its first virtual edition will focus on a theme that is basically closed to all of us at the moment we're all battling a local pandemic and it becomes evidenceds that the Internet plays a key role in our lives in general.  So this session will focus on the socioeconomic recovery after COVID‑19 and more specifically the role of dynamic coalitions.
Without further ado I'm going to go through setting the scene for this session will include four phases each phase is focusing on a specific thing.  So we have digital divide.  Following education and empowerment and the last one would be the future of the IGF.  So this is pretty much a multi‑layered discussion because we were trying to identify the future of the Internet and its role post pandemic and the role of BCs facilitating the work needed to make sure you know that's all the issues at stake.  Abeing addressed and input of the dynamic coalitions with regards to the future of the Internet Governance Forum.  And the role it can play there as well.
We do have most of the dynamic coalitions substantive papers to contribute to the session represented in the panel.  Each speaker will have two minutes to ask specific policy questions.  We do have a timer.  Myself and my colleague Tatianna which will be displayed on our iPhone.  I hope you can see it.  It's literally two minutes.  The conference is structured in an organic way.  There's also the opportunity for the SM D attendees to ask questions after each phase.  In terms of the format, was highlighted earlier but by the secretariat that this session is broadcasted live on YouTube on Facebook Live as well and on the U.N. channel.
Sth this is a webinar format which means most of the participants are not able to see who is on the list of the participants in this session.
But I'm pleased to inform you that we have 87 participants.  Fifty‑two attendees and 35 technical staff, panelists and support team and translators and the interpreters, thank you very:  We do have the opportunity this session is actually interpreted into the main seven languages of the U.N. 
Right.  So without further ado, I think we would like to give the floor to our panelists and maybe I'll kick off by asking one of the key questions on this session is the need ‑‑ what do we need?  Obviously, COVID‑19 highlighted a significantly a number of beyond the usual digital divide that we were talking about.  So we realized that the Internet is crucial but it came with a huge disadvantage to a number of communities and luckily we do have many DCs representing these communities across the world.
So inclusion is crucial in this case.
And the barriers that we're encount ring beats at the heart of the work that is being done by the dynamic coalition on gender.  So I would like to start with Sumita because we tend to give priority to access equally to gender and maybe she can take us through what are the first priorities the governmented should focus on worldwide when can comes to sack tackling the issue of gender digital divide in the context of COVID‑19.  And I'll take the opportunity to remind you that all the sessions, the panelists are advised or you know ‑‑ it is good to voluntarily contribute with a policy recommendation towards the issue that you are speaking to.  So we can gather all this input and present it later on to the Secretariat.  So, if you can, consider that in your answer, that would be great.  So you can speak to now from your experience, what are the first priorities that the government should tackle when it comes to addressing the issue of gender digital divide in the context of COVID‑19?  Smita?
>> SMITA V.
>> .  Thank you, I hope I'm audible.  I'm having a power issue here.  Thank you for answering this question and it's a gh way to kick start this conversation because in all honesty, you can guarantee meaningful access to everyone how are we talking about Internet governance and information for that?
>> I think in the context of COVID‑19, what has happened is that a lot of lived realities, a lot of realities around access to digital spaces has just become amplified.  And saidly it's a spotlight on it.  It's not that these issues came up now.  It's just that you're noticing it now.  The governments are feeling the impact of lack of access for example.  It's not access.  Right?  For example, beyond that there's a gender digital divide.  But the thing is that one of the impact of this?  And also can you really tackle this only at the point of COVID at the point of a crisis.  One of the reasons behind the digital divide is not the lack of access, yes, I did participate in last year with the Internet.  More importantly we need to have issues which govern lack of access.  Right?  And important issues of patriarchy of misogyny, of you know language divides, language barriers, all of these are core issues and of course much accessibility.  Of accessibility for persons with disabilities.  Without addressing these issues there's no point on distributing orn laptops that's been done it didn't work for a reason.  Another thing is when we talk about the digital divide, we often start the conversation with a binary agenda.  Right?  Where we talk about men and women.
Gender is not just that.  There's more literature now and more conversation lived realities that say that gender is not just ‑‑ it's a whole universe.  So when you talk about gender divide can we stop is another question.  And what happened when we stop the binary.  One of the big issues happening and it wasn't acknowledged is that a lot of ‑‑ I know this for a fact in India ‑‑ suddenly lost access to very important medication that is positive people who lost access to medication and transfer who were transitioning and lost access to HIV medication but none of this would be spoken about publicly.
This is small organizations which were working to then bridge this divide.
And finally, in the situation that COVID where information is key, and a lot of the governments took the route of the Internet or apps, so‑called apps as a way to curtail COVID‑19.  But how will that work when so much of the country is unconnected and doesn't have meaningful access?  So many people in your country don't have ways to access mobile phones.  Small cities would rely on small mobile shops in a day there was a lockdown and they didn't have aaccess to charge their phone.
>> Thank you, these are very good points and I hope we'll have the opportunity to come back to you so you can elaborate further on the points you mentioned.  I just would like to remind the attendees, we have around 70 people now that we have the opportunity to ask questions and to the panelists.  But you can use I think the Q&A screen that you have on the ‑‑ on the Zoom window to ask your questions if you have any.  We will try to make this session as interactive as possible.
So without further delays, I'll just kindly like to ask the panelists to stick to the 2002 minutes I'm going to move immediately to Gerry who 12 working on DC and how the COVID‑19 crisis highlighted for the issue that speaks to this DC.  So what do you think the priorities of the governments should be in the light of the current crisis?
>> Thank you.  As I ‑‑ 20 or 30 second warning so I don't go over my time.  I'll break that question down into two things, one of course is discriminations that people with disabilities have built over the last while and then maybe advantages including people with disabilities.  And after that we'll come to policy questions.
So first let's say that there are 1.3 billion people with disabilities in the world.  That's about 1 in seven people or else the entire population of China, equivalent to the population China.  That's a huge amount of people.  As we know that access to digital services and products disproportionate advantage to those who are strong access but there are eye disproportionate barrier to those who don't.  This is true for everyone but particularly people with disabilities because we typically do not have access to alternatives.  COVID‑19‑related lockdown has moved the whole society more on to digital areas but we want to highlight areas where we as people with disabilities really don't have access.
So there's inaccessibility of key Web sites, of key services over the Internet the likes of online shopping sites and we don't have access to the alternative.  Public information including COVID‑19 related information is often created very quickly so normal accessibility scrutiny doesn't take place and we don't often have access to that.  Terms of support education and employment, very, very key because if you can't work or you can't get your education during COVID as other people do, then you lose out and that can be a lifelong disadvantage.
People with disabilities are often poor and have less access to the likes of broadband and the latest and greatest tools.  Particularly in rural cells geographically.
>> Thank you, Gerry that was two minutes on the dot if you'd like to stop there.  But you raise important points about the importance of having accessible Web sites.  I think that is a very good point and I hope that you know the different providers take the lead to adjust their platforms so people with disabilities can access them.  Thank you very much for your contribution.  And I'm going to speak to another maybe related topic which can loop us a little bit in terms of the educational aspects that the libraries provide especially in an era of a pandemic.  Valencia is representing the D.C. on public access in libraries and maybe she'd like to elaborate further on the efforts deployed during this time.
>> VanENSIYA.
>> .  Thank you, looking at the difference ways that libraries and public access facilities have adapted to continue to support digital inclusion even when they're doors were closed has pointed to possible considerations and for us actually we could see these as falling alongside three key elements that empower people to make full and effective use of the Internet.  That's connectivity, that's skills and that is content.  So in terms of connectivity, one possible consideration is the continued demand for and use of public access facilities across various countries, different measures from lap toch and mobile hotspot loans to reopening public spayings was public Wi‑Fi when possible or free computer use for essential purposes during lock dunes with an employment.  These are measures that have been taken to support and speak to the demand and help meet users' needs and these can be important for groups who are more vulnerable.  They're often used for job seeking for benefits and other essential tasks and priority that we'd like to draw attention to of course is supporting users who may not always have decent quality connection or devices to carry out essential tasks at home.  Second r second consideration as you have pointed out digital skills of course.  We have seen promising examples of how traditional skills programming in libraries can be delivered remotely from Trinidad and to be ago 0 weekly library ‑‑ virtual 2020 in London able to offer many, many others.  With digital skills clearly essential, focus and a question and a priority for us is having and supporting entry points, additional skills skills, learning alongside formal structures, this can help reach a lot of people especially adults who may not have access to such learning opportunities elsewhere and finally the third element is digital content.
In so many countries where connectivity per misted libraries saw a steep growth in demand for digital content and they significantly broadened their opportunities for demand.  It has been a key resource for study, research, work, you will skilling, and simply well‑being during the pandemic.
 >> MODERATOR: Excellent.  Thank you.  Very good points.  Very concise and I will invite the tendies to use the Q&A window please to ask your questions.  Take this opportunity to have an interaction with the speakers, I know we have other DCs represented and I think they can speak to the possible recommendations to governments and what should change actually in the context of COVID‑19 when it comes to the specific work they're doing.
And we do have June Parrish with us from IRPC coalition and I wonder if you have any input with this regard.  June, you have two minutes.  Thank you.
June Parris:  Can you repeat what the input is.
>> It's about what do you think based on the work you're doing at IRPC the government should prioritize to guarantee digital inclusion.
>> June Parris.  The IRPC is based on human rights and we focus mainly on ‑‑ in our charter and this is human rights and governments are corrected ‑‑ connected in a very strong way.  I mean as we're going into lockdown and online environment took life, the fundamental rights and freedoms in a virtual space is paramount.  Tackth the digital divide is no urgent need on access and it becomes crucial being able to work, study and social engagements so it's vital to ensure that government responses to the crisis go hand in hand with international human rights and norms so as to fulfill the obligations to promote and up hold fundamental rights and freedoms both online and offline.
Unfortunately, many governments have seen the outbreak as an opportunity to implement more repressive measures from using artificial intelligence, increased surveillance and data collection to restrictions on freedom of expression and information and discrimination online.
We in the IRPC are looking at all this and covering what is going on with COVID and hopefully we can make some sort of change in regards to this.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Excellent, well thank you very much, June, for this contribution and that was two minutes, bang on.  We will wrap up the first phase on digital divide and just to sum up quickly the contributions we had so far from Smita which highlighted the societyal influences when it comes to addressing issues such as gender, digital divide.  We did have also hear how important it is for Web sites to guarantee accessibility to people who are ‑‑ who have limited accessibility issues.  Also the importance of public spaces and libraries generating energy and raising awareness about specific issues and finally the human rights based approach and importance of digital rights in a crisis and the phases like COVID‑19.  So I invite these panelists, our esteemed panelists to write their recommendations so we can pass them on as an outcome of this session later on to the secretariat and that brings us to 25 minutes that we dedicated to the first phase of this session on digital technologies and I'm going to give the floor to my colleague Tatianna to take the lead on phase 2 which will speak to the fundamental rights and freedoms in the phase of COVID‑19.  Tatianna, the floor is yours.
>> Thank you very much Hanane.  I'd like to provide a wrap upup to phase one.  There is a question on the Q&A.  I think this is from Vanncyia what has been the extent of libraries and community centers during COVID.  If you have the ability to type up the answer, please do.  If not, we can come back to this question later because we do have another aspect where coalition of public ‑‑ on access to public layers is going to be included.  The second phase we have is actually focused on human rights.  Fundamental freedoms and protection of fundamental rights.  And we wanted to ask the coalitions working in this area.  I know almost any work of anyone would relate to rights and freedoms to some extent.  But some of them are dealing with these issues directly like for example, you heard from June intervention.
How governments and private industry are dealing with handling and promoting human rights during the COVID pandemic and they're not always doing well.  So based on the contribution provided by June, I would like to move here to sustainability.  Your paper focuses a lot on the post COVID recovery.
And on journalists and what you call info demics.  I wanted to ask you from your perspective, what are the main issues during the pandemic and hopefully on the road to recovery.  I believe that we have Michael who is going to speak from this coalition.  Michael, you have two minutes.
>> Michael:  Thank you for having us.  Essentially there are a few things to stress in this particular time.  Oghia.  And that is that indeed, journalism at the moment and news media in the world are facing really an extinction level event where, according to one survey for instance that was just very recently released, essentially even though readership audience reach has been up over the past ever since the beginning started, almost 80% of small and independent journalism outlets around the world are reporting a significant drop in revenue.  Why is this important and why is it relatedded to Internet governance?  It has to do with the, one, so much of what is happening online is as it relates to journalism and news media, it means ‑‑ includes the fact that funding is under threat because of changing advertising revenues and market Dynamics that impact the journalism sector.  But also there's a critical ‑‑ rather ‑‑ there's a critical lack of good.
>> We lost Michael.
>> Michael OGHIA:  One thing we say ‑‑ can you hear me?
 >> TATIANA TROPINO: Now, yes.
>> .
>> One thing we like to say a lot, an axiom we like to a is that you cannot have press freedom without the press.  So one of the things we're dealing with at the moment is the fact that ‑‑ but in order to actually enable press freedom, we need to have sustainable journalism and that is exactly what I'm trying to ‑‑ is our point that it is under threat in part and we need support from governments, technology organizations, technology companies, advertising firms in order to shore up the sector as a whole.
Hanane:  I can't see how much time I have left.
>> Zero.
>> That's a start for now.  Happy to take more. 
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you.  I'm sure you can see if there are questions, I hope there are questions for discussion.  Olivier you will have the floor and you're going to speak about digital di viet and connected to fundamental rights so you have the flow of the session here.  Before we go to Olive yay, I would like to give the floor to child online protection because we're talking about human rights and fundamental freedoms but there's a big debate going on about how pandemics actually affected children.  So how do we protect them online.  What is being done by your coalition and in general.
John Carr, the floor is yours.
>> John CARR:  Thank you very much.  I hope we get a chance to come in and strongly support the things Michael was saying in the previous session because that absolutely raises questions about clirn and young people's rights..  Just briefly I say you sometimes hear it said that professional journalism is not dead.  You just have to pay for it now.
Well, you know what?  I have a number of subscriptions to the economist, new scientists.  They cost a lot of money.  Children don't and can't pay to hear the truth.  Would they rely on professional journalism, governed by the ethics of journalism and governed by the laws of liable and slander that have always governed NORCal newspaper outputs ‑‑ libel.  These laws simply do not apply to online platforms which is where children and young people are increasingly getting their news from?  So this whole question of journalism is a human rights question.  And it is a human rights question which is particular in children.  I just want to briefly say I very much agree with what Smiti was saying at the beginning.  What the COVID crisis has revealed is nothing new.  It's just put it all on steroids.
The number of children calling help lines during the lockdown has gone up by 50%, 60%.  The number of children who haven't been able to connect to school remotely in England was 1.34 million.  They didn't have adequate Internet connectivity or device at loam that would allow them to do their homework.  By the way equivalent figure in the United States is 9 million.  If that's the position if two of the richest countries in the world you have to wonder what's been happening to children elsewhere in the world in less affluent countries, having a mobile phone is no good if you're trying to do your chemistry homework.  Having a mobile phone is no good if you're trying to write an essay about war and peace.
So COVID is revealed stuff that we already knew but it was magnified and amplified it if I can borrow the phrase that Smiti used in her opening remarks.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you, John.  Time.  Thank you.  We'll get back to you, thanks.  We're just saving time for discussion.
Now I would like to Olivier Crepin‑Leblond.  This is the core anything on the Internet.  We know there are different from principles.  We hold these interventions about human rights, fundamental rights, rights of children, journalism, media and support.  So how can the work‑related to core Internet values support all these and maybe bring these issues together?  Is there any chance?  Olivier, the floor is yours.
>> Olivier Crepin‑Leblond:  Thank you very much.  I've heard a lot of sensible points being made here.  The dynamic coalition on core Internet values focused on technical issues with regards to the Internet and core values, technical values in which the Internet was built on, TCP/IP, all these technical things with end‑to‑end principle and Internet being open, being non‑discriminatory, et cetera.  Unfortunately what we're seerg here at present that governments are doing is exactly somehow the opposite of what they should be doing.  We've heard from so many DCs here that the primary problem is going to be access and access for those children and grownups that do not have access to the Internet at the moment because the COVID‑19 has just brought so much business online and if you're not online, you can't have it.  And instead of doing that, governments have been focusing on exactly the opposite.
To the extent that the dynamic coalition of core Internet values and other dynamic coalitions have released a statement on Internet on excessive Internet control which touches on suppression of political dissent because technologically this is something that's being done and can be done especially with artificial intelligence, national firewalls which are now being rolled out for some reason.  National shutdowns, fragmentation.  Internet and data prioritization and shaping.  And we understand there needs to be traffic shaping for maybe new services that come out.  When it's being used politically, in order to provide this sort of edge, this competitive edge to the biggest companies out there, the expense of the smaller voices out there that we really have a problem and that completely breaks core Internet values.  So that's where we stand at the moment and several DCs have assigned this dynamic coalition that went on to Internet of things, Internet principles coalition and youth coalition on Internet governance, thank you.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you for being short and on the spot.  And this gives us some means for discussion and for maybe some of the panelists answering to the interventions of each other.  But before we go there, I think that many of the fundamental rights and freedoms problems, I see on the chat as well, we're talking about gender, we're talking about boys and girls.  We're talking about how gender is affected and I see that the chat is actually bringing some of the issues and I wanted to ask Smita, listening to the first three panelists talking about fundamental rights, protection, core Internet values, do you have anything to add here?  .
>> Hi, yes, thank you.  I think one of the things which we talked about is what I put in the chat is one thing that you talk about access to education and information who is prioritized to whom is another question.  What happens once you enter the digital space and start losing technical is another question.  Right?  One of the things that's happened during scween there is a sudden dramatic increase in online silence and this ‑‑ and this is you know you can actually trace it lock downs happening in different countries.  And what this means is that once again this infringes on fundamental rights against discrimination.  Education because it is the access to technology and monitored council and whether they are the ones subjected, the fact is that Kay, this is happening to you so stop using your mobile phone.  Right?  And these are ‑‑ you know, the nuances of individual needs to be spoken about.  And finally, when we talk about access and you know the right to access, what also happens to spaces like IGF why we need to have these conversations, is it easy access?  Is it welcome to persons or people who do not speak English or the U.N. languages because more people speak in spaces ‑‑ there are a whole bunch of languages which are not in the U.N. list of languages as well. 
Also when you come here how easy is it for me to join a panel?  Am I clicking in five different spaces and then coming here?  What does this mean to people who want to talk this and have a lot to add, for example school teachers, college professors and journalists in small cities who don't report in English have a lot to say here.  But, if I have to click in five different places just to find a log in link then happens?  Are we making access easier.
As a queer person I didn't like the registration form which when I had to register for IGF because after man, woman, there was other.  Am I so fluid that it's all or another?  So I think when we talk about core values, these are things which we need to reflect on by ourselves and see how we can do better by communities who want to bring their own questions and are we doing the actions required for the same?  I'll stop here for now.  Thank you.  Tlt Tatiana Tropino thank you, Smita.  I know you see John's excellent intervention on the chat.  Do you want to add anything else because I see that the issue about access fundamental rights, children's rights.  Gender issues are coming together in this panel.  So John, over to you.
>> Not much to add to what I said in the chat.  John CARR:  I was very impressed by Michael's presentation.  It's a shame we don't have longer to talk about it.  Set up systems where apparently we're now expected to pay for the truth.  Children can't pay for the truth.  So when they go to Web sites that say the Holocaust never happened, or when they go to Web sites that tell us that won the Second World War and the Soviet Union had nothing to do with it that's a human rights question, a child rights protection question and if the Internet governance member nims questions can't address it, we're wasting our time.
>> Thank you, John.  Actually, we do have time to talk about this because I was cutting off brutally.  So Michael, now over to you.  Do you think Internet governance can address these issues?  .
>> Michael OGHIA:  Yes, when it comes to journal system sustainability there are crosscutting issues not just one specific group of actors that need to be included in the conversation in order to drive change.  What we really need is concerted multistakeholder effort.  If anything, that's one of the exact reasons why we need to be here at the IGF, why the IGF can facilitate those kinds of connections and cross pollinated ‑‑ that kind of cross pollination.  I talk about that with environmental sustainability.  It's just as much of an issue within journalism sustainability.  And one thing that we've done for instance earlier this year is we actually released and emergency joint appeal that was signed by now over 180 different organizations calling on recommendations for across ‑‑ for stakeholders from across the sectors.  Talk talking about what they can do.  For instance advertisers and technology organizations need to stop black listing certain kind of advertising from journalism article or journalistic articles that for instance talk about COVID‑19.  Earlier in the year a lot of advertisers were ‑‑ stopped allowing for COVID‑19 related posts to include their branding and their adverts.  That obviously hurt journalism organizations even though those ‑‑ you know that was something that was meant to be ‑‑ that was something that could help support that.
So that's a one instance.  But of course there are so many others to highlight including the need to continue expanding access.  That is something that is absolutely critical for the up take of journalism in new media especially in global south and hard to access areas.  There is a need to discuss how ‑‑ what for instance governments, technology companies can do to help facilitate the kinds of support that is needed.  I mean especially financial support and things like that.
So there's quite a lot that we can do here and that's exactly why the DC sustainability thinks that it's so important for journalists and news media akters to be involved in the digital policy discussion else specially that historically we've been we've been relatively excluded not necessarily on purpose but we're makeing that concerted effort to make our community heard.
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: We still have a few minutes left in this session.  I wanted to ask, John, did you want to say something.
>> on CARR:  Michael, where is the vast majority of money that used to pay the advertising that kept journalism going?  Where is all that money going?  It's not going to anybody who 12 in this session or anybody listening to the IGF?  If a government were to legislate to tell Google and Facebook to give money to support professional journalism, what would you say?  That the government has nothing to do with governance?
>> Michael ooh GHIA:  I would say we do need significant market‑based mechanisms for how to address this.  Because you know there's a clear imbalance between what publishers and what not ‑‑ what publishers, journalism organizations, what they're dealing with at the moment and then what especially large technology companies without naming any names per se are now reaping the benefits of that.  I mean there's a lot of interesting regulation and a lot of interesting developments happening in Australia now within the EU and also within the U.  Is.  I don't mean to just highlight northern examples but those specific examples are where there's a lot of ‑‑ where a lot of this conversation is being driven.  And I would say that I mean it's ‑‑ I really don't see ‑‑ of course, I welcome dialogue but I don't really see any significant changes happening without more ‑‑
>> John CARR:  Michael you did see that Facebook threatened to draw all its services from Australia if they promised to go ahead with those laws.  You know we need to be realistic about this.  Two or three small companies are doing all the damage and they are not involved in this discussion.
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Hello, dear panelists.  I'm going to wrap up the discussion right now and Mariana you got it right in the chat.  I was going to give the floor we still have a couple minutes left to DC on human rights and principles and I was going to call either Marianna or somebody please, the floor is yours for the next two minutes.
>> Marianne Franklin.  Is that okay?  We haven't cued ourselves off this line.  Thank you very much.  This issue around right of access to the Internet as Michael quite rightly sh sorry, had I, as Michael quite rightly says these are cost cutting issues and why this DC main session is so important and underscores how important the issues are.  Access is more than pushing a butted unor entering details.  It begins once you enter your detail.  The other A word is availability.  And Michael ising the fact that we have less and less availability and rich diverse forms of Dev Anand Teelucksingh 10 years old underscores this within its article six freedom of expression by including the right to information.  A 5‑year‑old has a right to information.  As that is made up by you in ‑‑ so this is what the problem is and we know that governments are reneging on their actual human rights obligations by allowing private sector actors to provide emergency provisions and using pandemic as a cloak and this must stop and we must be firmer and clearer for governments to comply with their own human rights standards and intervene in ways only they can by avoiding private sector domination of all forms of information.  And finally, that with information comes dismissed skewed information with all this availability becomes difference, diversity, contradictions.  It's not about all saying the same thing at the same time.  It's about being able to discern the difference between rubbish, bitter rushish, worse rubbish, truth, fact, fiction and all the rest.  That's the concern.  I don't want us to get locked into an either/or situation, we have to allow diverse information and let people who want to spread lies spread the lies but come back with truths, our own truths, substantiated truths and Internet can provide this but governments have to step up to the mark.  I'm getting increasingly impatient.  Thank you very much.
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you, and with this this is basically a perfect wrapup for this session on fundamental rights and freedoms because you made a point which leads us to the phase 3 about awareness, about education and empowerment.
And I will give the floor back to Hanane who will moderate the next phase.
>> Thank you very much very shall Tatianna and all the speakers about the passionate plea.  We do have various contributions which touch closely on the key issues that we're facing as humans and Internet users so the role of the media is very important and that takes me to flip the coin and take us to another important segment of the society.  And that speaks to you know the next phase of this session and specifically the role of youth when it comes to how they have been you know tackling the area of digital inclusion and I'm happy to invite the conversation what is the other side of the coin, you know, of you know this pandemic from the perspective of the youth.  So Gustav is representing the coalition of youth in the IGF, not sure if you can hear me.
>> Gustavo Paiva:  I already have my time here, first of all, I have to agree with the points represented before.  If anything I would really highlight that maybe a way to sum rye what was discussed so far is the COVID pandemic potential liced three existing inequalities across tle board.  All of them.  Economic inequalities.  Age and even in access.  Mainly in access.
And not only that, when it comes to the youth in education in particular, political issues, national political issues, election issues.  Took precedence over the essential things that are important for youth to our education.
Basically, the youth became absolutely secondary.  The whole next‑generation became completely secondary to all these political issues going on around the world.  Mainly and we can see this in elections even today.
Not only that, one of the things we identified in a workshop in Brazilian IGF is that going forward, Internet governance as in the holistic understanding of what the Internet is and the role it has in society and professional world is no longer something which people cannot know.  It is becoming increasingly pressing that educating people about what the Internet is, how it works and even platforms and all these issues we're facing with disinformation, this is necessary.  This is necessary in universities in basic education.  This is no longer something which we can keep in a specific (audio cutting out) all across the globe and in families.  This is going forward and essential life skill.  Thank you. 
>> H anane:  Thank you Gustavo.  Good points.  I'd like to ask Christopher Yu connecting the connects and unconnected.  I think through your paper that I read you play the key role during the pandemic addressing the key issues that have arisen due to COVID‑19 especially in the health sector so you might want to share with us you know what role did you play in terms of raising awareness.  Educating the authorities about the needs of citizens.
 
>> She ‑‑ he has to be here in a minute.  Chris, I hope you can unmute yourself now.
 
>> Christopher, I'm not sure if you were able to hear  
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: Me.
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
>> Hi, you're muted so I don't think we can hear you.  .  We'll sort out your technical issue and come back to you.  with regards to raising awareness on these issues.  I have to go back now to Gerry.  Gerry, so I now that you're doing a lot of work on the ground.  Meanwhile, Christopher is back.  Gerry if you would like to take us through your efforts to raise awareness and play your educational card when it comes to addressing inclusion issues?
>> Gerry Ellis:  Thank youin.  One of the things that we want to raise awareness is that we're not the only people who are saying that inclusion of people with disabilities are good for society.
All of society is saying that.  I'll give examples of that.  U.N. general secretary Antonio Gutierrez launched the disability inclusion strategy in 2019 and stated from a remote in 2 or or tackles for people with disabilities the whole world benefits.  Accenture launched a report in 2018 called ‑‑ let me just check the name.  Getting to call.  What that showed is the economic benefits of organizations of including people with disabilities as employees and making their products accessible to society in general.
There's an economic benefit to those organizations.
Of course, U.N. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.  Of course, people with disabilities are mentioned 7 times in the sustainable development goals.
The roadmap to equality and sustainability includes the 1.3 billion people with disabilities.  It is a benefit to all of society.  And that's one of the main things that we're raising.
Let me Geoff you a small example just before we go.  This IGF that we're attending, there are hundreds of sessions.  And if that was ‑‑ if you were trying to watch all those on video to get an idea of what's going on, it would take you three years, two years, who knows.  But because there is captioning there which was originally done for people who are deaf, you can now search through those.  You can do deaf mated searches, you can search for common themes through different things.  Much more easily.  That benefits everyone.  Not just people with disabilities.  I'll leave it with that for now.
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: I'm going to go back to Christopher we'd like to hear from you in the role you're playing in terms of raising awareness with the communities you're working with.  Hi Christopher, it's good to see you.
So the floor is yours.
>> Christopher Yoo:  Can you hear me now?
>> Loud and clear.
>> Thank you very much we're delighted to be here representing the dynamic coalition on innovative approaches to connecting the unconnected.
We continue our work trying to gather to try to avoid reinventing the wheel, to learn from the wonderful work that people all over the world but are convinces that unfortunately, very little information or data is collected on a success of failures which means that everyone is pretty much starting from scratch and unfortunately, also what little data is being collected does not allow for cross project comparisons.  The heart of the work is a database with a mass of over 1100 innovative ways to connect people to the Internet both on increase of connectivity but also of overcoming demand side obstacles such as digital literacy and the like.
And gender disability access as Gerry mentioned, senior access, any one of a number of dimensions.  We then reaped out to all 1100 of the initiatives that were identified and have now conducted case study interviews with everyone who convented they're in 125.  All of these are available on one world connected.org.  And we're trying to create an information base that will help to give insights to people all over the world, give a new ideas about ways to try but also information on what's working and what's not working.  Because many people are too busy, people are doing this in the field don't have time to document what they're doing.  And what is documented often is perceived success stories without much often attention to failure stories and this is important for learning project to project.
Based on my understanding of this meeting ‑‑ and I apologize if I got the time wrong ‑‑ because I thought I was joining just before it began.
I was asked to address in particular issues surrounding education.
Which has been one of the focuses of the dynamic coalition's work.  In fact, what we participated in two major efforts one is initiative to connects everything in school by UNICEF for the ITU and the educating project led by Tim Unwin a professor in the U.K. called education for post in the nallized in post COVID‑19.  What we learned is a case study of importance in the work that the IGF is doing is that the Internet connectivity is critical.  If that's ‑‑ anyone who has school‑aged children involved in education have become aware that the pandemic nearly through a huge spotlight on the necessity of Internet connectivity.  And that's a really wonderful chance to understand its importance and what we learned among other things is that the pandemic is actually exacerbated learning.  In July Kenya admitted that they had lost the ‑‑ and conceded that they will reopen in 2021 but have no real way in effectively conduct education for its students for most of that year.
So there are alarming problems but at the same time we've seen the number of very innovative responses and solutions which have been tremendous ‑‑ it's a wonderful chance to learn, wonderful chance to try new things and mother of necessity ‑‑ necessity being the mother of invention what you see is an outpouring of fascinating efforts to expand into connectivity with urgency of need to educate people.  Many joint efforts with private sector with edge tiffs being launched all over the world but for example in South Africa alone, they ‑‑ additional spectrum to wireless broadband.  Spec data, provided laptops, tablets to make this possible.  And a very common phenomenon all over the world South Africa zero rated content to make it easier to access.  These are all very interesting, innovative responses which we thought was incredibly beneficial.  Interestingly also we learned there are a number of prerequisites for delivering educational.  There's a bunch prereq easiest one for all of us to understand is the necessity of Internet connectivity for students.  And so first it has to exist and it also has to be affordable.  But we also learned that quality matters a great deal.  We see in the middle of pandemic because of the multiple use there was a spike in usage and that would cause slow downs in a number of countries. 
And in fact we saw even countries with connectivity ‑‑ the story is Italy.  They have a good base level connectivity but not enough to support the video learning, submission of assignments and all that that brought things down.
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: Thank you, Chris fer.  I don't mean cut you, you're doing great work and I invite everybody to read your paper on the IGF Web site but I have to cut you because there is another aspect that I really want to touch upon before we broke up this phase and see a few questions and I invite people to keep an eye on the chat window because there's a very interesting discussion and input consistently and constantly added by the panelists and different participants we have.  We also have three questions and I hope we answered a few of them through the different interventions that we have.  But the last item on the agenda speaks to the role of empowerment which we know empowering people to join the conversation on Internet governance integrated into national policy processes is not easy.  So we thought that having our work done online will help include more people in important key policy processes.  But I think one panelist I'll have to turn to Stuarh to speak and Gustavo if he has anything to add to how do we empower least represented communities in processes such as Internet governance so we can have actually a dlary view of what's at stake exactly?  So Stewart?  Maybe.
>> Stewart Hamilton:  I have to confess I was coming with research and learning but I mean, I think libraries replay a good role through the connectivity that we offer to allow people to take part in Internet governance, but you know there are things that you know people need if they're going to be able to participate accurately in this and that of course is the sort of skills that come with a good education and that's where we've been trying to do our best during the pandemic to make use of library facilities and extend online education whilst the doors and places like libraries are closed.  So I wanted to point out a couple things which I think are important for the over all debate which do cover that context of engagement.
We've seen a tremendous amount of use of digital library resources by all user groups which I think bodes well for engagement.  There mightbe an idea it's only younger people but we've seen it across the board and lenciya.  We've seen this big shift to online education and research and learning which Christopher was alluding to as well.  It's there I want to point out things we need too keep a close eye on as we go forward.  There are problems.
And some of these problems are around the licensing environments for the sorts of information that libraries make available.
Limits on number of simultaneous users that people can connect textbooks, ebooks, restrictions on lending.  Information op libraries across countries and restrictions on test and data mining which is extremely important because access to knowledge is very much in a pandemic a public health issue.  There are major issues around the costs of things like electronic textbooks.  I'll play us a link in the chat in a moment which will let you see the mattive differences between the cost of a print book and electronic book and huge issues around copyright.  If you think about a situation where lecturers are telling people it would be better to get a Netflix subscription because we don't have media studies courses take place.  This is something we need to be careful of.  In terms of what we want in policy recommendations we need clarity on the exceptions and limitations that be can use for online education and things libraries can provide.  We need an investigation into ebook pricing which is scandalous and we need more options to purchase them.  And something we haven't touched upon which is di Seth Reiss we talked about connectivity.  We need to talk about deadvice poverty in the future.  Hb hb thank you very much, Stewart.  Knowledge is power and educational aspect is also equally important in the issue of empowerment.  And I do have two hands, I think.  Two panelists that can speak to probably the issue of panel grating minorities and disilings making processes and I'll give the floor to ‑‑ Smita to reflect on this point.
If you can hear me, so the question speaks to the role of empowerments.  Of minorities or communities that are not represented properly.
>> Muhammad:  Yes, thank you very much.  Ladies and gentlemen, my apologies for you not being able to see me because I have a one key Internet connection so I would really apologize for that so you have to rely on my voice.
I would like to see two or three points here with regards to inclusion and awareness and particularly about the empowerment.  We have to have if we want to make people we we need to bring communities as we ‑‑ people with disabilities like to say.  Nothing about us without us..
If you want to have a discussion about persons with disabilities, you need to bring people with disabilities on to that level for having these kind of discussions about their issues.
With regard to their dynamic coalition on accessibility and disability this year, since were hearing that this IGF is going to go online, we thanks to a guard from Google and Vint Cerf, we supported people with disabilities all with regards to Internet connectivity.  We provided fellowships to enable people with disabilities with regards to accessing the Internet and availing the opportunity to attend IGF.  We also organized a hub in Italy to persons with disabilities but also supported by the grant provided by Google and Vint Cerf.  So thanks hats off to that.  We quo also provide some next year IGF goes back to in hitch person participation, there would be funds as well.  Two minutes is up.  You made cool suggestions on how to include basically guarantee more contributions in general so second recommendation in writing so we can put it forward and I'll give the floor to Smita because I know she has something to say about empowerment of minority in general.
 
>> Thank you very much.  I think one of the things that we really need in terms of bringing more people to this conversation, one in which ‑‑ I have two points to make, I think one of the reasons people live here in different conversations around IGF and less policy spaces is because they cannot connect to their own realities.  If you cannot connect with people on what is actually happening to them and convey why these policies matter to them in real life, why will they care about it?  Until you get people who care, policies and guidelines are just words in the cloud.  And second thing is that in a lot of conversations what happens, especially with regards to communities and women and other gender and sexual minority is the possibility speak establish all of this is that we constantly remain in disguys as intervention mode and we talk about problems.  Gender came into IGF spaces because online grew to the point that we couldn't ignore it and there were people smarter and wiser than me who spoke about it and said we can bring to Internet governance spaces.  Question not stop.  You need pleasure and access to spaces and technology for fun.  You need access to do what you want.  Policies need to support this.  I don't want a policy only to protect me.
I want a policy this will will allow me to have fun.  It's like demanding equality and this equality to loiter on online spaces equality to participate in policy and bring up topics that are relevant to you.  Access tomorrow.  But I think that is the way we can actually bring in more people.
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: Very concrete suggestions and inputs as usual.  Thank you very much.  And I think with that, I am going to wrap up the section on empowerment and education and we will have to spend the last 20 minutes of this session talking about the future of the IGF and contribution of ‑‑ to Tatiana will be moderating that specific space.  The last note it is very important at this point that the IGF works on cross fertilization of ideas between different segments that are not represented and I received information yesterday that the high level roundtable which included Parliamentarians would like to collaborate with the DCs and I think this is good news because then you can actually work with various entities on specific issues to advocate on whatever is at stake on the ground, on the floor to make sure your voice is heard.  An with that I will pass the floor to Tatianna.  AT&T AT&T thank you, Hanane:  As you said we want to ensure that all voices are heard and allow Gustavo to make the last word about the last phase.  I'll give you two minutes.  We will make it.
>> I'll be very brief.  On the topic of empowerment I think there are many ways to approach this especially when they talk about the youth.  Many of the young people who come to government spaces coming from other industries.  They come from economic activities which already are closely tied to Internet policy making so for them, it's only about matter of quickly learning about topic and then just jumping in.  For other youth who want these people, these young people they often do not have continued engagement if we want to create continued engagement, especially from youth or people, people in general, not only youth but underrepresented people such as LGBT people, we need to address a fact that for many pro fetionals, continuing engagement in Internet governance is not feasible.  There are very few incentives in terms of how it applies to their inactivity and we in the Internet governance community we benefit immensely from extremely hard working volunteers, it is uphill battle.  And this continued engagement especially for young people and people fl from the global ‑‑ it is when you have so many professional obligations when making enough to live by is so difficult.  It is very difficult.
To justify the kind ‑‑ this kind of engagement with global ‑‑ thank you.
Hb hb thank you, Gustavo and thank you for building another bring from our previous discussion to the wrapping up phase of this session.  We are going to talk Tatiana you're of IGF.  What can the IGF community do to make these ‑‑ the IGF catalyst, a cause for these Qian tomorrow changes during pandemic and post pandemic?  And is IGF doing enough we have two speakers in my mind for this phase of the session.  I would like to actually ‑‑ we wrapped up the previous one with youth and I would like to give the floor to another speaker from youth to Ellen.  What is your take on this and future of IGF in this regard?
>> Eileen CEJAS:  I'll be as short as possible.  From youth coalition we've been seeing that the current situation is that the disease had an a key player in the get governance and on youth coalition where we brought the topic of the table of which is the role that we have as youth how we want to play it and facility and empowering the next‑generation of leaders, we in the IGF/IG environment.  A good example is how we've been working closely with Internet Society to build mentorship training for interns who say youth and others of this years because we believe that we need more voices that can ‑‑ to be able to have voices who can give proper treatment of the topics that matter to us in IGF.  This has been part of our efforts targeting youth and participating at the youth and strategy.  So future within dynamic coalition we shall address the importance of eye lighting intersectional work as this has been happening with the BPMs, they may not get enough recognition to most of the discussion is concentrated at the developments in the IGF space.  But I would like to bring to this excellent panel the future application of IGF plus model.  It has been highly recommendation to the U.N. high level panel on digital korntion and especial other stakeholders and global citizens they organize this year.  Dynamic coalitions and other parts of the IGF intersectional work should be the basis to strengthen Internet in the terms of digital corporation as a introductory remark we have participated in IGF often behalf of the YC.  In addition we promote dynamic coalitions.  This year we have collaborated with statement on assistive Internet controls that my colleague 0 whrif live yay colleague Olivier mentioned before.  We have participated at a section organized by rights and principles coalition, these examples show us the work of dynamic coalition that should become more relevant than ever.  We are part of of a larger community.  We need to contribute the improvements of the IGF towards the future.
Finally I would like to remark that it is essential to have representation of youth including youth Parliamentarians at IGF intersection activities.  We shall decide in out future and encourage stakeholders to avoid tokenism of youth.  We are here to address the matters we care about.  Our voice should be heard and taken into consideration to shape the future of the IGF in the intreft governance space.  Internet governance.
>> Thank you very much eye even.  It's very nice to see youth being so active in all these processes.  I would like to give the floor to Olivier Crepin‑Leblond because I believe in a way the dynamic cocollision of core Internet values can tell us how core Internet values contribute to all these Qian tum changes.  Olivier you have 20 seconds to add something.  To add something to youth.
>> Olivier Crepin‑Leblond:  Oh, dear you're so tough.  Twenty minutes would have been just barely enough.  No, I'm not going to purport to say it's only dine applicant coalitions on values that has all the issues.  What this session is showing is that every coalition has got a different angle covered and covered extremely well.  And as Eileen just mentioned I'm not going to have to repeat what Eileen said but I can say that the future of IGF has got the core Internet ‑‑ sorry, dynamic coalitions and its real core.  It's vitally important that this intersectional work continues ‑‑ intersessional work continues.  That's only possible with the people of you, the people watching this, the audience here because the vibrancy of dynamic coalitions is only there because of the people that make it.  That's all I wanted to say.
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you very much Olivier.  And I would like to remind us all because I can see how many people are attending right now.  I have 103 people in this room.  And I hope that you're all enjoying this session.
We still have a couple minutes to wrap up this phase which was pretty short for this very big issue on the future of IGF.  If any dynamic coalitions weren't to say so this, yes, Gerry, go ahead. 
>> Gerry Ellis:  People with disabilities want to be involved and be included and to a large extent include.  DCED made standards on making meetings accessible so we say please lock it.  Make improving the Web site, I know it's going to be rebuilt.  These include our needs in those.  But as we get away from COVID‑19 and we move back toward physical access and then hopefully Poland next year, there is a recognition or there needs to be a recognition that it costs usually a lot more for people with disabilities to attend because of inaccessible transport and to able hotels and physical buildings where meetings are held.  I know IGF doesn't have funds but hopefully you'll work with us to find funders to help support people coming from particularly poorer areas of the world to have their themselves heard.  Keep in mind, please.  The basic saying of people with disabilities, nothing about us without us.  Consult us.  Talk with us.
we'll help you, you can help us.
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you very much.  Gerry, with them I'm going do Close the.  Peter you first and then Marianne.  Please be brief.  Uti, the floor is yours.
>> Jutta Croll:  I'm not speaking on behalf of dynamic co list I might belong to but as cofacilitator for all the dynamic cocollisions and I'm grateful for the richness of this depate.  I've seen a lot of points that will bring us forward into the future not only post pandemic but also considering how intersessional work will be done by dynamic coalitions in the IGF plus model suggested by the HLPDC.  If I can report back also from the roundtable of Parliament airians it's not only the roundtable itself but all the Parliamentarians that took part in that session yesterday.  Really had a great interest in working with this dynamic coalitions intersessional between Internet governance forum.  So we have achieved to arouse interest in that during the IGF last year.  And I would really suggest to pick up on that dynamic coalitions to have a look out for Parliamentarians who can work with them and also bring the work forward because that is the major step moving forward for all of us, thank you so much for this.  Thank you for all the work you do to facilitate this work Tatiana Tropino tts this work of dynamic coalition and everything you did for the preparation of this session.  Marianne we want to wrap this up with your contribution so please go ahead.
>> Thank you very briefly.  I want to the comment that shu just made to the charter of human rights and principles.  Starts with quality of service.  The quality of service to which people are entitled acts shall involve in line with advancing technological possibility.  I do not believe the quality of service is evolving in line with advancing technological facilities.  So I think we had a serious task ahead of us and this is why the IGF has proven its worth and Olivier, finally, a huge call out, thank you to everyone here who puts all their additional time their weekends, their leaping time to get up at 3 and 4 in the morning to be part of this.  I just want to say all this is voluntary, unpaid and underpaid and underrecognized laip and we need to start noticing it because our time is also money and we're descroating 0 you are time and money to this process.  So I want to thank everyone for all their time and all the extra hours.  And organizing committee for this DC9 session and professional paid support teams as well.  Let's give the IGF more money, more resources and more grunt because we make it so show us put your money where your mouth is, governments, private sector, technical communities and anyone with any member and give it to us without strings money taxed or you're noft not worth your salt.
>> Thank you very much.  I
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: I want to tell the number of funds ‑‑ there are 107 who heard your intervention and with this I'm going to give it back to Haane for the wrapup.  It's yours now.
>> Thank you very much.  Thank you, Tatianna, thank you to all the panelists and vibrant attendees of the session who made the discussion really interesting.  It's ‑‑ we're lucky that we have a transcript and I think we can always go back to look at all the contributions across the board, you know, through the whole of the phases you know that we had during this session.  So we can actually have a concise ‑‑ you know summary of all the recommendations and also I would like to thank the ‑‑ what do you call that the godfather and godmother of the intersessional work, specific to the DC work and that is Markus Kummer and Jutta for their encouragements and all the work that is being done by the DCs themselves.  I know what it takes because I cochaired one of them and I understand inside out how they can influence policy making processes in various contexts.  So I would encourage people to chose the topic that is close to their heart and join the DC work because it speaks to the heart, to the core of the issues tackle in the IG and there is a little bit of everything for everyone.  So ‑‑ and you know, for the people who are asking how to join, the DCs I invite you to check the Internet governance Web site, Secretariat.  There is a mailing list for each DC and you can actually choose which one that speaks to you most.  So you can join the work.  It's unpaid work.  It's voluntary.
It feeds usually to the full‑time job of all of us somehow.  Just to that none of us are paid.  We're doing it because we love what we're doing and we'd like to contribute to enrich enthe agenda of the IGF and make it more substantive and meaningful.
And I guess the sum up of this session speaks to us all.  We know that youth has a role to play.  We need to be more inclusive when it comes to representing making sure that every segment of the society is actually represented.  That pandemic made us all realize that the Internet is so crucial.  Now everybody who is not compelled or convinced that the Internet can may play actually a key role sites and economies, now is the time they understand that.  Having said that we also realize how the pandemic actually widened the gap whether it's gender gap, be disabilities gaps.  So we need to be wary.  We need to address these issues to make sure that nobody's left behind, that that we are actually practicing what we're preaching and that is very important.  And I hope this platform has been you know important you know to call out all the decision‑makers and policy makers to take into account and be accountable also to the feedback we're receiving from communities all around the world.
I have to say this is one of the most active sessions I've ever moderated or contributed to and that's thanks to the rich discussion that we had so far.
I invite the S and Ds to also read the substantive papers that were submitted by the DCs because they actually Zoom in to these issues that we're trying to speak to at a high level.  And that's what we do usually in these kinds of panels.  So maybe we don't have a silver bullet that kind of ‑‑ let's say creates solutions to solve things but this is a process.  I think a lot of people on this call understand what does it mean to be involved in the IGF.  For so many years at least two decades now we're doing this and we're doing it for a reason.  We can see the impact.  We can see how we manage finally to include actually more segments from you know Parliamentarians to youth into the discussion and I heap you enjoyed the session as much as I did.  Thank you very much, everyone.  Thank you to the interpreters, thank you Tatiannathank you Markus, Jutta and work of DCs and thank you to all the panelists and I think that's all from me today.  Thank you very much.  And good‑bye.
 
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you, good‑bye.  All.
>> Thanks to you both.  Wonderful moderation.  Thank you so much.
>> Bye, everybody and to the sign language interpreters and captioners vmentd yes, captioners and sign language interpreters.
>> wonderful session, thanks, everybody. 
>> Excellent, bye.
>> Thank you, everyone.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-high-level-leaders-track-health-implications-%E2%80%93-raw^^

>> The captioning is AI technology, right?  Because this is the future for the platform, right?  We already ‑‑ we have experience at AI. 
>> ANJA GENGO:  That is true yes, although we're still Hume.  We have humans there also correcting.
>> Yes, yes.
>> all right.
>> In all languages?
>> Just in English.  So the captioning is only in English.
>> I thought you were doing it.
>> PATRICK LEUSCH: That looks great
>> PATRICK LEUSCH: That looks great.
 
>> Patrick, it's 9 cloak here in Geneva, that's our schedule time I'll leave it up to you to decide when to start.
>> PATRICK LEUSCH: Thank you very much.  If you're all ready we can start, I guess.  Okay
So ladies and gentlemen, very warm welcome to this higher level leaders track in the framework of the IGF.  On health implications of the role of Internet governance in the age of uncertainty.  This is the title of this session.  The session aims at discussing roles that digital public policy can have in preserving and improving the global public health particularly in emergency situations.  My name is Patrick Leusch.  I'm the head of European affairs at director general's Office of Germany's international broadcast based in Germany..  The COVID‑19 pandemic has shown that it makes our societies maybe more resilient to global health threats.  We have been fast learners in the past months I think.  The whole health community but also citizens have adopted to very new situations.  And we have seen grown a lot of digital tools also that could have people and health system to manage this crisis.
However, if technologies are complained as ineffective digital policies, these can can have detrimental effect on society.  So I think we are all in r on the way to something.  And no state on earth, no health system, no operator was really up to see what the digital potential is to manage that pandemic.
My guests will exchange roles on Internet and drij tal technologies and role to improve people's health on one hand.  Challenges and future of is an interesting point that goes far beyond this specific pandemic, and local and global stakeholder responses to global and digital policy for public health.
These are some of the topics that we'll be discussing in the next 90 minutes.
Here is the leading question for the session:  Could digital be the key to achieving Sustainable Development Goal number 3 of the SDGs to ensure healthy life and promote well‑being for all stages and all this under the impression of the COVID‑19 pandemic.  So here are our guests.  First of all, let me welcome Mrs. Anuradha Gupta thank you for being with us.  And Kira Radinsky, chairwoman and CTO of diagnostics robotics in Jerusalem which she cofounded in 2017.
She's an inventor and entrepreneur specializing in predictive data mining.  Kira caned recognition after software predicted the first in 30 years outbreak in Cuba.
We have among us Mrs. Precious Matsoso director of the health rectory science platform at the university in South Africa and also in the World Health Organization director responsible for the development and implementation of the global strategy and plan of public health.  We have with us Mr. Bernardo Mariano, director digital health and innovation and chief information officer at WHO in this role he's responsible for coordinating WHO's digital health vision and strategy for everyone.  Welcome, looking forward to your contribution.  And last, but not least wee have connected to Dr. Anurg Agrawal, director of the institute of economics and interpretive biology in New Delhi India and also am eastbound of the WHO digital health Advisory Group.  This is a great panel wand we're looking forward to your insights..  While we speak I'm asking you to mute your microphones and to keep your cameras on to guarantee smooth running of the digital session but I sca scwa assume you have all become experts in this new normal.  Thank you for taking part in this panel.  Let's start.  In recent times I think we agree that nothing has challenged the health systems as COVID‑19 pandemic and many countries were more overwhelmed with a rapidly growing number of infectious cases with high death rates and we have witnesses eye heroic work of medical workers around the world but also their ‑‑ it's not surprising that many health systems turned to digital very soon to cover these challenges.  Databases created or improved.  Health information systems improved and there has been a range of measures that have been taken more or less assuming more or less power and more or lessees testimony attic approach.  We have seen how digital technologies have been deployed to help fight the pandemic as awe whole.  What is your experience in this regard?  How have digital technologies helped so far the health systems in times of the pandemic.  Give us an assessment how big is the links and how big is the contribution of digital systems to manage this pandemic and I'm turning this question to Bernardo Mariano, director of digital health and innovation and chief information officer of the WHO organization first.
Bernardo, please come in, turn your microphone on and come in.
>> BERNARDO MARIANO: Thank you, Patrick, good morning, good afternoon, good evening to everyone depending where you are and happy to be here.  Let me start by saying that we at WHO promote the use of digital health technologies.  And appropriate use I have to say.  Appropriate use means it should be people‑centered, trust‑based, privacy and ethical based, evidence‑based, effective, sustainable, inclusive and equitable well as contextualized to where we are using that technology.
At WHO, I wanted to also say that since the pandemic we have missed a great collaboration across sectors.  We had a good support from our traditional partners on the agencies such as ITU, but also most important from the private sector we had good good support from private sector.  But it doesn't need to take a pandemic for us to work in a collaborative way.  We should actually have done that earlier.  Preparedness is key.  If we'd done earlier we would do much, much better in this pandemic.  Now, how do we ‑‑ how did we ‑‑ what was the experience and how it helped health systems.
Let me take you three areas.  One which is the people‑centric and the other one which is existing health system but also how to build a stronger health workforce.  So in these three areas, I just want to say that currently we are working with a number of countries us as well as G20 countries to look at how we can leverage on telemedicine to support health systems at national, subnational level.  The technology is mature enough but we need to adjust policies of regulations to really leverage them so we're working with a number of countries on that.  But early in the year we had a lot of calls from contact tracing asking us to test, track and tracing was happening and digital technology helped.  So WHO with published a guideline on consideration of use of proximities tracking technologies for COVID tracking.  This was a topic that our member states and lots of countries were grappling with.  How can we make sure that those technology have support the current pandemic.  Of course, contact tracing has to be an integral part of public health response.  Because if it is not, then it doesn't add the value, it doesn't ‑‑ we don't leverage the potential that it has.  But as part of that we also started working wees tone yeah to develop a vaccination as we start thinking on vaccination which currently is the vaccine card for some people especially living in developing countries or the yellow vaccination card is required as others perhaps may not know but this is only with adults into vaccination card that keeps coming across borders so we want digitally enhanced vaccination card.  We want a digital clearinghouse to help countries navigate the myriad of solutions that are appropriate to them on innovation and other areas to try to support and help countries to navigate and manage this pandemic well.
The last part which is strong health workforce.  We fast tracked the WHO academy, the launch of the WHO academy which is a strong digital component but also we added a number of trainings on our open WHO academy.  So it's open WHO.org which is a learning platform that provides training and 17 different ‑‑ sore 0, 41 different languages with 17 different topics oncyo individual and has carried 4.5 million users benefiting from that.  So all to say that we've ‑‑ we accelerate these digital technologies in the pandemic but we could do better and we can do much better to prepare for the next one.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for the first insights Bernardo, you mentioned a couple points particularly the people mif centered trust base inclusive.  This is very demanding when you have to cover the world.  So what is the main aspect that you as a WHO organization are seen in this deliverable to people.  Is it more to have same standards from technology bases or is it more to improve the political systems in governing this kind of technologies?  You have said the performance of the technology is there.  The lack is elsewhere.
>> 
>> BERNARDO MARIANO: Let's recognize that the digital maturity of countries is very important as we look at how do we support countries moving through ‑‑ maturing through the process?  Also we are witnessing a living and digital transmission of healthcare sector.  Within that each of us has a role to play.  And we have an added value to protect and bring to the table.  At WHO we look at how for instance how to address the interoperability challenges.  That every country has.  Health is silo'd by tradition.  So digital technologies to leverage them and really use them to accelerate SDGs related to health we need that interoperability to work.  So we have the mandate.  Yesterday they approved the goal of strategy on digital health.  So within that we want to make sure that the investments of digital health and maturity of digital health allow countries to move from the current maturity level to the next one.  So countries at different stage but then we issued as well in digital health investment guide, investment implementation investment guide which allow us to say if your maturity is at this level, the investment should ‑‑ the path we want to see the added value a year from now where that maturity is increased from where it was to where it should be.  And if not, we may take action:  So yes we understand that country in different phage and we need to work together to ensure that we bring them to a different level that we're all on.
 
>> MODERATOR: Yes, thank you very much.  I let me pick one aspect that you mentioned also and jump over to Kira as you mentioned that an interesting point here is the collaboration with the private sector that has been obviously boosted by the pandemic from the public health perspective to increase relations with the private sector.  Kira, as a chairwoman of a startup ‑‑ I don't know if startup is correct ‑‑ but private company, that has been involved very raryly in the management of the COVID crisis, is there any detection that you have on particularly that link from public healths to the private sector where things have moved forward to become a little bit more speedy or a little bit more ‑‑ better the link between the industries?
>> Kira:  First of all, we have been building triage systems for the last two years, the way the system worked there were training based on historical 76 million historical medical visits obtained from the healthcare system both in Israel and United States.  The system would ask triage questions and predict the urgency of the patient and where in the medical setting the patient needs to be navigated.  The consequence was to reduce the work doctors were doing for years if not centuries.  And what we've seen especially during this pandemic is that this accountability of physicians came to the maximum.  We understand we cannot continue as we started before.  With shortage of 100,000 primary care physicians in the United States alone we cannot just continue training more doctors and assuming they're going to be enough for the growing population.  Until 2030 we're going to have 3.8 billion people without access to primary care.  It means 3.6 hours that people are waiting right now in the emergency dents in the western world is going to be quickly more than 8 hours and it's not a prediction, it's just a fact because in different locations in the world, this is how long patients are waiting.  And during COVID it became more severe.  You have an entire population in crisis that needs to be triaged almost immediately.  They need to know where to go to the department, stay home, lockdown, what should they do?  There's just not enough call serchters to answer everybody.  This is where the contact applications come into place is this okay to actually monitor people?  Do we actually want 0 monitor all of this clinically?  So what we started doing is extending our triage service, started automating all these processes.  Every time a person needed any interaction with the healthcare system our system would ask the triage questions.  If the system said patients ‑‑ stay at home but most importantly predict for the government which cities are in the very bad.  In other words, differentiations between lock dunes it was at the beginning of the pandemic when we deployed this system.  It was knowing where to send COVID tests because we just didn't have enough.  During the second it was around differential lockdowns so we can make the economy work faster.  I think this collaboration between government and a private sector, the private sector is provide vooing tools for decision making.  It has been accelerated tigly during COVID.
‑‑ significantly.
>> 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  The question was ‑‑ I understand clearly that the effect of your work.  If you had the impression that despite the fact that you have not started working in this sector just with the pandemic but is there from your perspective, is there any learning or improvement in the relations between private sector and public sector in that regard?  .
>> Kira:  This is a lot we still need to improve.  Right?  The only thing that a private sector like us can do is provide recommendations.  It doesn't mean that the decision Maker is going to follow this.  They have a lot of political aspects that they need to cover that became significant during COVID times that it outgrew some of the recommendations either the private sector or academic center or even healthcare center.  So we need to think at what time do we need scientific knowledge to overcome political aspirations.  This is the main aspiration we saw specifically in Israel that companies predicted that we're debt racing and still not actions taken.  Consideration theories about the fact that there is no COVID, lockdown has not helped.  We even have proves from data from interventions of lockdown significantly caused lower impact of COVID at certain locations.  We saz a scientific community need to also think how we clearly communicate with the governmental agencies to give them this information so they can take action.  In other words, for example it wasn't clear if going back to school is actually causing our non‑deterioration COVID.
Very lately it will show that children under the age of 10 they get COVID two times less than adults.  But still no study shows how infectious they are.  So I still think we need to supply more information, more with speed because it will create less trust between the decision making and private and research community.
 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Kira.  I think that is a very interesting point the relation between politic, science, digital and relating to trust.  Because as Ben ard 0 also mentioned a couple of questions regarding the use of digital technologies and for health is really the trust, the trust measure.  Both on politicians but also from citizens to my perspective.  Precious, in South Africa, from your perspective, coming back to the question what is your experience, how digital technology ‑‑ sorry, digital technologies have been deployed to help fight pandemic, so what is your experience in that regard looking over the last six to 8 months?
>> Precious Matsoso:  Thank you very much.  Good morning, good afternoon.  The experiences that we started firstly, by having a digital health strategy.  And that was important because we we worked hard to make investments.  Investments in making sure that the digital platforms were in place.  There were a number of challenges and I'd like to start with those.  In that firstly, we're invested a number of years we registered over 43 million patients on our health patient registration system.  Took us quite a while to deploy the systems across the whole country on all clinics.  In fact you could only deploy this in clinics, not even in hospitals because of the complexities of the hospital systems.  So this is the first step that we took over a number of years.
But as we're ‑‑ you know, doing this, when COVID hit, we had to look at various digital tools that didn't exist.  Like for instance we had what you call connect based on our in‑health strategy which was useful in care.  We used this was a platform that was used for information dissemination in that we sort of developed a number of apps.  One was intended for contract tracing.  And I always say that contract tracing must not be techno surveillance which is likely to happen.
Secondly, we also had the tool set that could be used for self‑screening and COVID related symptoms.  At a population level we've had the district health information system.  I think it's a system that is used for routine data collection.  And it's used ‑‑ the risk that you've always had over time is that because of lack of interoperability we had multiple systems that developed to each other.  And I think Bernardo referred to this somehow.
But I'm happy to say that all these platforms that were developed over the years have actually come in handy in that we're able to connect all of these.  But it is not just tools that I use for the health systems, it's also tools that I use for patients themselves.
For citizens themselves to monitor.  To monitor whether they have COVID or not so that they do not, you know, come to our facilities when it's a risk to do so.
But what is happening is that we've also had other tools like ATM pharmacy that have been rolled across the whole country.  And the nice thing about some of these tools that we've developed is that they've actually avoided having people come to the facilities when they don't need to.  For instance, for collection of medicines, they don't have to come to facilities.  The area that we could have done better and you know, we could have invested over a number of years is on telemedicine.  We have, but it's only in selected areas and areas where I would describe as centers of excellence, they're not widely implemented and I think it's a lost opportunity.  For those facilities that have systems in place, it has been very useful to collect data because we're able to see and track patients and to know how well we're doing oncyo individual, for instance the number of hospitalizations, the number of patients that are you know,
positive and number of patients that have recovered.  These systems were built over time and we learned from HIV and AIDS, as you know South Africa has been ‑‑ these have been very, very helpful for us and we've used some of the platforms you know for COVID and took advantage of that.  I want to raise a few points that we need to know.  One, there are too many applications and the risk is that you then get information overload.  Not only information overload but a risk of misinformation.  This sometimes undermines our efforts to contain and mitigate COVID.  So we need some governance frameworks so that we can see what kind of are out there and regulate them and whilst promoting innovation, we want innovation but ensure that it can be trusted and it can be used appropriately and it can benefit society.
So one governance structures are important but we still have infrastructure problems as you know.  Cost of connectivity is a barrier and also interprobable digital health systems and solutions.  Not all of them are interoperable.  And so it's one hurdle we have to address which will have some legal framework and have been implemented and these are intented to do data protection concerns to use privacy and security.  And one thing is to invest in digital skills so that the managements of big data and the capacity to do so exists.  I think.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, precious.  That was very interesting insight.  What I take is what you said at the end, you need a digital strategy.  You need a legal framework and digital skills and I think we will come back also to the point you're saying that how can we avoid information overload and the fact that there is too many applications which we deal and particularly citizens also.
I'm taking the opportunity to call on participants in the quick session, inspiring session to put questions or comments in the chat or Q&A section that you see on the bottom row below your screen.  They'll forward it to me.  Anuradha Gupta, let's look further going a little beyond pandemic.  How can digital innovation help to protect health for people in more effective efficient and accountable manner?  We've seen so far we have looked more in the aspects how to manage the pandemic when it's there, when you have to avoid overload or the health system that is all related to tracking for instance orientating people to the right service, the triage questions we had.  But in the more forward‑looking and more forward‑looking terms, how could digital innovation protect from people from now?
>> Anuradha Gupta:  Thank you for that question.  Actually, I'm not sure whether everybody is aware that Govi has a massive scale of operations.  We support more than 70 countries in expanding live‑saving vaccination to about 18 million children every year.  So in the countries that with support, there are 80 million children born every year who need to be vaccinated and we're looking at about half a billion vaccine shots that are provided to these children because they have to be protected against a range of diseases.  So clearly, you know, these are big investments and big operations.  And some of the speakers actually touched on this whole dimension of private sector and private public sector partnership.  And Govi involves a setup and return of millennium in 2000 as a public/private partnership and the whole idea was to set up a unique alliance that can leverage the comparative advantage of both public sector and private sector and therefore, we have been able to leverage a lot of innovations in taking immunization to those countries and to those households if it have reached without he's efforts and we have indeed, exploited digital technology a lot as we are tried to do this.  Typically, I like to see that vaccination happens when three Vs come together and these three Vs are the vaccine, vaccinate tore and vaccinee.  You need these at the same time.  If you don't have vaccine, you can't vaccination card intate children.  If you don't have it they won't happen.  And the child who has to be brought by the caregiver so the three Vs have to come together.  And on each 3Vs we have exploited a lot of variety of technologies including digital technologies ‑‑ on how these vaccines are traveling.  And how stocks are being managed and really the level of consumption of these vaccines.  There are some very interesting innovations that we have done.  For example, remote temperature monitoring.   You know, this is ‑‑ so we have data loggers and we have temperature monitors that are put in the chain which actually start to send digital messages to managers when there are temperature excursions because what vaccines have to be kept at a certain temperature.  So, if there are temperature excursions, then the potencies of vaccines is lost.  So we didn't have digital things we could actually be vaccinating children but not immunizing them or protecting them because the vaccine could have lost its potency sows these are helping efficiency and effectiveness.  Other on vaccinee for example, one of the biggest tools is by way of electronic immunization registries because a lot of these countries we work in have very weak health systems but not civil registration of births and deaths.  So clearly the denominator is very unclear.  What is the target population?  The children do not have identities.  So therefore, what we are trying to do is to set up electronic registries on immunization is health workers absolutely understand who are the children who have to be systematically reached with different doses of vaccines?  In terms of vaccinators, we have invested a lot in scaling up digital technologies for the skills enhancement.
You know, skills are important.  And if vaccinateor do not not have those skills Dakar particularly as we deploy new vaccines because there are new precautions and regimens that the vaccinators have to be aware of.  So we founds this extremely convenient to do capacity building aat scale in a much more efficient and effective manner.  Last thing is vaccinee.  How do we work with caregivers to spur demand.  So one we have lack of demand in some sectors.
We have S MS and things to make sure caregivers are made aware of the benefits of immunization but there's also a lot of misinformation as you know.  We think that good information is the best antidote to bad information and just making sure that we make use of technology to counter false propaganda
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  From your perspective, what is the point that have deciders all over the world when you look at the global scale, learned first when it comes to the link of digital innovation and digital systems and managing such kind of crisis?  What was the first thing really that triggered people?
>> Anuradha Gupta:  I really think it is lack of a sort of opportunity to have a physical contact.
You know because in a pandemic situation we're increasingly talking about lock dunes and social distancing.  People ‑‑ lock dunes.  One.  Things we realized is there was widescale disruption of health services in countries we support.  and actually among health services that were disrupted immunization was the worst hit and that was because of two reasons primarily.  Because there were fears among the caregivers.  Mothers did not want to bring their children to facilities any longer for immunization but also the health workers were fearful of catching infection.  They were also redeployed in many cases.  So therefore, the whole ecosystem got completely topsyturvy.  And that is what put pressure on the system to start to think innovatively and we saw that a lot of digital tools that we have been deploying but which hadn't been really scaled up, you know, in many cases actually were really sort of adopted at a pace and at a scale that was unprecedented.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.
Dr. Last, but not least same question to you after the intervention of your colleagues and from your perspective, what is the main point where digital innovation will help in the future to make people more resilient to make health more efficient, to citizens, to people?  What is from your pectdive the main point here?
>> ANURAG AGRAWAL:  Thank you, Patrick, I take the point on how digital is making something physical.  When you vaccinate something there's a human and you're giving a vaccine and a physical thing.
There's three more levels that you can see in digital medicine.  The most obvious level is the people are still there there's still a doctor.  There's still a patient but the medium of communication is entirely digital in digital medicine.  If you take another level from that there's a patient.  He's digitally connected but the person on the other end is not a human being.  It can be a check part.  It could be giving answers.  And the last level which I think we will see very soon is digital the person does not really exist for the healthcare.  It's a ‑‑
lots of vices creating additional image of a person that is continuously being analyzed.  Only when they do find something that is both communicated to the physical world does information come to the physical world.  Each of these is possible.
And in the field that I come from, genomics for example, digital is not option.  It is essential.  There is no possible way.
In which a human being can look at anything and figure out anything.  So the way I see digital transforming health is number one for example in countries like India, India does not have Tosh the number of doctors per thousand people is less than 1.  WHO recommends one.  If we take all doctors India barely hits one, otherwise it's less.  Europe for example is typically 4.
And in most countries similar to India, doctors are more well distributed.  So you need digital to create the connections.  And if you can use your skill and upgrade their skills, you don't even need ‑‑ simple intelligence of augmentation pertaining basic guidelines into practice that can be done.
You need smart infrastructure.  That's going to change everything.
An example where human comprehension and ability becomes limited and continuation of medicine the ability at least of assistance, and perhaps at some point there is from this stable additional.  At some point we can't exactly comprehend this.  But we run rigorous tests to make sure the system works faster than digital.  There's nothing more scalable.  The most important part is does it work?  And that's something that we're spending a lot of time on in the time to come to make sure we don't get blinded only by the speed and scale.  We also continue to imagine is it really helping people?  And that's only time there.  I'll stop you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That's really a far beyond outlook that you present here.  "understand from your inspective digital Kuo‑Wei Wu could be a solution that the classical health services we know in some countries apply to everyone on earth.  I think that is the background from which you come.
How do you see the trust item that we had several times in the discussion here when you deploy this?
>> That is a phenomenal follow‑up question.  Trust is central.  When the time comes telling doctors what when to do ‑‑ it will come soon ‑‑ and doctors not necessarily being known for mathematical skills are unable to fully comprehend the reason but they can only see the data showing outcomes.  Trust is going to be central.
Patients phenomenally trust doctors.  Doctors trust hard quality clinical outcomes, control trials that is data related and governance needs to be lean and balanced.  Sometimes you think these words are impossible.  But it has to be.
You have to figure out a way in which data can grow rapidly, trust is high within the system for everyone.  And the only way it comes is transparency.
In my opinion, when everything is transparent, when doctors know the data from the trials, outcomes and they're sure, every step whether by block chains or any method, non‑tempered, original, visible to everybody.  Then that transparency and trust will bring the progress in the field.  So transparency in the end.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Obviously you are really convinced about the vision that you're presenting.  I'm looking at the chat here and the Q&As that are coming in that are more and more.  And they are pointing to two points.  One, obviously, is how to ensure the right to privacy is respected regarding digitalization of health data.  I think that is really a big challenge and that is a discussion on the whole world.  Here in Germany we've had intensive discussion about a simple tracing app which is completely decentralized.  It's not interoperational with other ones and even here it was difficult to bring it to the people.
And second one is about the link between the public and private ecosystem.  Because the aspect of commercialization was raised.  And I understand when I look at questions that there is a massive ‑‑ I wouldn't say fear but that there is ‑‑ who is driving it.  That is the question.  Is the commercial side driving it or government?  What about civil society?  Who is setting the standards to go forward with digital technology in the howj system.  Maybe let's pick one by one.  I'm turning to Bernardo again because I think you mentioned at the very beginning the privacy issue regarding digitalization of health data where is the challenge here Bernardo?
>> BERNARDO MARIANO: Thank you.  I think for the first challenge really is the fact that digital and health are two different ‑‑ they have two different cultures.  So you have the culture of monetization of data and digital tech.  And you have the culture of donation. 
We donate blood, we donate organs.  And I think it was mentioning that how we conciliate the two extremes in such a way that we add and we bring ‑‑ extract the value that both in this campaign and bring Ben gets that we all want to see.
So the privacy and data sharing, those are the two extremes where we can ensure that we extract benefit of health data to ‑‑ for health outcomes and also we do not harm people because of health life science.  Do not harm very enshrined in the culture of medicine medical health specialists.
So from our perspective, what we did and we're doing, we proposed in our global strategy in digital health a framework to regulate for international regulation of health data.  It's a framework that we need to put in place that addresses both the privacy but also allow the digital technologies to leverage on that data to bring those health benefits we are all looking for without infringing on privacy or without infringing on ethical ‑‑ now, our strategies say people at the center.  And to build a trust ecosystem we need not just private public partnership.  We need to bring academia, civil society.  I think there's a question there as well.  There are other stakeholders that need to be in the discussion.  WHO will be creating what we call a network of networks.  Because today ‑‑ and we have as a culture and we have to ‑‑ I mean I want to dwell on this culture because we are creatures of habit.  Many institutions were created after Second World War and the framework we work was to address the challenges we had at that time.  We have new challenges, we have digital age.
This is the first pandemic in the digital age.  So we need new rules, new engagement, new normal.
And I think to make sure that there's a trusted ecosystem we need to bring all the stakeholders together.  So the power of WHO is to bring, create convening element, to bring these different entities in the ecosystem and create what we can all trust.  The framework of regulating health, international health data, a framework to create an interprobability or others.
But we have systems and players that we need to bring together to work in the new normal.  And bring the players that we norm ly don't interact with even at WHO, our tradition is not interact with private sector.  So we have to step up and start that engagement.  But the understanding that we have two extremes that we need to negotiate and bring those benefits to the public.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Bernardo, that was very clear.  Precious to hear your experience the most important thing is that you have a digital health strategy, if I understood correctly, and you base a lot of things that were set up now for pandemic on the fact that you already have a kind of digital health strategy which gives you a framework to work and new applications for instance to widen the scope.
So from your perspective, who are the important stakeholders to design that trust in this applications particularly from data protection point of view?
>> Precious Matsoso:  Well firstly, I think we need to have the most confidence to increase.  Firstly, we must have digital health governance.  That recognizes that digital health is not just for the health sector.  It must envelope a different ministries ministries of communication, (audio cutting out) and engaged different ‑‑ a sector like we said public, private civil society organization and academia.  But it is not just enough to engage them.  It is also trying to send for instance in South Africa what we did when we started our work on development of the digital health strategy, we started with ehealth strategy and mhealth strategy.  And whilst we did that, we looked at all the digital tools that were in both the public and private sector.  We came up with a normative framework to assess all the tools both in the public and private.  It was the very useful exercise in that we could see the weaknesses and the strength from both sectors.
Those systems worked, those that didn't and those that you could build on.  So it was a voa useful experience.  But it's not enough to build systems around patients when you don't involve them.  And I agree with the Bernardo that whatever systems we develop, they be in the public or private sector must put the patient at the center.  In fact, I don't see patient because sometimes you're not necessarily sick to use the systems.  It is about well‑being so there must be people centered, people‑centered because when you have patients who are already sick.
So for those who are not sick but need to use digital tools for their own well‑being, they still need to access those digital tools.  So we must make them People‑Centric.
And I think this is an approach that we've been developing.  And the digital tools cannot just be for those who work in the health system.  We need also digital literacy.  Digital literacy so that with this people centered aapproach, those who need to use these tools must also have skills to do so.
Thank you.
 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Precious for that.
Is there something that you want to contribute to ‑‑ it's an open question to the panel.  Any contribution to this that have been here.
Kira I'm looking a little bitd to you because particularly the ‑‑ I'm not sure if I'm correct by interpreting the term.  As you mentioned at triage, this is something that from an ethical point of view, can be seen very difficult.  And we're talking here about our digital systems can take decisions by artificial intelligence that has been mentioned in the couple of times.
So that seems for many, many people very, very unusual potentially dangerous also so who is taking the decisions to do that?  How is the system designed as a former journalist I come to the point?
>> Kira:  Very quickly the concept of clinical triage has been deployed for hundreds of years.  Patients should be treated by urgency.  The blesm today is how it's being done.  It's being done by protocol manually.  This is part of the problem in getting healthcare to be streamlined.  Knowing which patients needs to go where is a extremely important for running healthcare system.  Give you an example.  If everybody goes to the emergency department like they do today, we're not going to have enough time for may patients that are acute.  Only in the U.S. there's $200 billion spent on avoidable emergency department visits that could have been handled somewhere else.
However, I do agree about you that when developing artificial intelligence systems and in general any type of protocol especially in healthcare you need to think about fairness.  There was a very nice paper published approximately a year and a half ago about the fact that algorithms predicting which patients areon fair to the African‑American community in the United States.  The reason they were ranked lower is they were receiving less attention for medical setting in general and preef yufs 10 years and algorithm identified that patients that are costly at a higher probability of doing preventable in‑patient visit in the future.  It created a full bias in the way the algorithm did those recommendations.
So it iOS a bleeding edge research topic on how to make the algorithms more fair and it's our responsibility as the scientists here to provide systems that are explainable, in other words, that decisions that are not making the decision and to be as transparent as possible and there's several mathematical algorithms to actually ensure the fairness across several subgroups while not hurting performance.  I definitely agree that in clinical aspects you have to understand how to do it correctly.  It doesn't mean that we should not do it because the problem is currently we're losing the fight in a scale.
As was mentioned it's not far off that we're going to have a system running on thousands of billions of data points and thinking a human can actually do it.  We need to change the way we think and move to a more digital world.  We've already done in finance for example so why not even in healthcare?  It doesn't mean we're not going to have the human touch.  It means we're going to have more human touch because doctors can actually do more face‑to‑face meetings instead of doing administrative work.
A few hundred years ago this he were having 200, 400 patients for primary care physician.  Today it's 2,000, maybe 5,000 in some countries, it doesn't scale.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Dr. Agrawal, I'm sure you also have thoughts about this aspect.
>> Dr. AGRAWAL:  Yeah, I do, my first thought is a very, very local context.  If you look at the GDPR in Europe versus laws elsewhere, it all depends on how you perceive health data and its use or misuse.
The reason for privacy is primarily not one of simple choice.  It's one of preventing misuse.
And how you go about handling health data to make healthcare systems better but preventing misuse is a very dynamic level.  To illustrate the point, if somebody was able to download your data and misuse that's clearly ‑‑ however, if your data was to be secure, better able to utilize it.  Procurement results develop better parameters and nobody has lost anything.
I think we are at the beginning of an age of computer science where many things that are possible are not fully understood by the public.  It is entirely possible for your data to stay on your phone and by federated learning for the laboratories that work on the data to get better and better and better so you get a better experience.  There's nothing wrong with it.  Similarly, genomes can be downloaded.  They can stay on the same place.  My intuit probably has the largest collection of genomes in the country.  We will not want to let people download it because you can always crack a genome to some degree to second level especially in a country like India where people are very illiterate because of lack of communities over thousands of years but at the same time we would want that decision health systems to Indians to become better and that's very important.  Why?  Recently we did 1,000 genomes for Indians.  We discovered 13 million new genetic variants not described in any genomic data across the world at that point.  I assure you if this kind of study 1,000 whole genomes is done in Africa you'll find another 15 million.
The genomic data is very dominated by white western European determinant in America and western European for this purpose.
And yet you must make this data available around the world.
It should not simply become a point of if you spend a few thousand on sequencing somebody.  I think there's a lot more ‑‑ we must prevent misuse, yes.  We must lock data up so nobody can use it.  No.
I'll stop here for the time being.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That's a very interesting point obviously.  I see a very likely debate here in the chat about these questions.  There was a question on have there already been cases where companies, multilateral organizations and hospitals and communities regarding COVID‑19 investigations of patient data that links very practically to how to secure the systems and then there is also this more ethical discussion about who is taking decisions and where is the interface between human being and digital world.  I think that that is something that is really to shape for the future as we see that there is a big potential in digital technology and at the same time it is entering a space where we didn't expect it maybe so much.
It's quite different to be used ‑‑ to use a mobile phone to check your friends and family or your peers or to see your doctor only on the mobile phone and sending some data to the doctor for consultation.  Very short because I want to move to the next step in the discussion to look a little bit in the future and to start developing some recommendations, some points that you want to give to the community to deal with that challenge.  But one point, again, on trust.
Why you have this experience with vaccination which implies a direct contact?  Tell us very briefly what you see the fact that one must work most if you turn more health services into digital?  What is the point to temper to make that work?  .
>> 
>> ANURADHA GUPTA: I think we have to be very deliberate on how we choose to use them.  The value of human interface also needs to be reshifted so I think that's the point made by Anrag also.  Whatever we can digitize we must for example we're doing it dashboards to understand the functionality of coaching, right?  And to the point that Anurag was making would you argue that countries should not be uploading that data or would you argue that that data is added for global good, right?  That's one debate.  But the second is that the trust that communities repose in front line health workers and their providers should not be underestimated.  And therefore, you know, I think that human intervase and human intervention will continue to be extremely critical.  One thing that I think that hasn't been touched and I is about equity.  So we talked about fairness but I would really want to sort of highlight if we have to make sure that the digital divide that already exists is not exacerbated.
You know?  And that we ‑‑ the pendulum does not swing to the other end and lose sight of the fact that there is highly access to technology and digital technology and that if we are serious about SDG, we will have a, you know, file aspect of leaving no one behind, that is something that must absolutely be kept in mind.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That is exactly the point where I wanted to come now.  We are not equal in our online.  We have discussed that.  Systems are quite set up in different regions of the world.
Roughly half of the planet is still unconnected.  Many are not meaningfully connected.
Most of them in remote areas of the rural areas, digital technologies are not accessible to all and often they're not equally accessible.  And it seems to me that it builds on the situation that we have seen before that many vulnerbles that have been vulnerable to other conditions are also vulnerable to digital improvement somehow because that is exactly the groups that we need to connect?  Now, here's the question:  How to endure digital connection for all and how do we make sure leaving someone behind?  I would turn to a very structured I proach now and give you one by one again two to three minutes to give us some very practical points from your standpoint and your experience how we have to make sure that digital health innovation delivers for all and we make sure that no one is left behind.  Let's start with Bernardo.
>> BERNARDO MARIANO: Thank you, Patrick.  I think some panelists alluded that the issue about what we ‑‑ the challenge we have in the physical world and the challenges that we have in the digital world and some leaders are already starting to also discuss and I recognize that we need new rules in the digital world because of the trying to trance ‑‑ the rules in physical to digital are not necessarily working.  From equity I also wanted to ensure that we don't fore guest the gender equality in addition to health equity approach but also accessibility for people with disabilities as we create these digital ecosystems.  From our perspective we see it as our role to support countries as they get digital health strategies to make sure those are included.
But I think we ‑‑ today we have a digital divide.  Close to half the world still don't have access to broadband.  So do we work ‑‑ the way we're trying to address that is to ensure that as we promote the use of digital technologies, we also promote the accessibility to those that are not connected by working with the entities that are working on the ground with countries to ensure connectivity.  So we have ITUs, we have the national governments to ensure that ‑‑ and I think even Precious mentioned it's not an issue of health but of finance and technology.  So I think bringing those entities together to address those multiple challenges but also in understand better, we are in the framework to ensure that we have all the benefits in the center of what we strapping issue in global strategy and digital health where we blan to implement a number of solutions, frameworks and technologies to ensure we all have the benefits that digital technology can bring.  So yes, we are recognizing that the fact that there's still the world is not equal.  But also we are recognizing that by working with the all levels, even community level because we cannot forget the community health workers that require the skills and the knowledge to ensure that we transcend and create information on digital that we can bring benefits.
So working together is key.  Working together in a different way of that we've been working in the past is very key to ensure that we bring those benefits.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Bernardo.  Precious?
>> Precious Matsoso:  Yes.  Thank you.  We have to address the fulcrum of inequality and inequity.  And to do that, we have to reset and reform our health system so that we can meet the challenges of digital health advances.  As we do that, it must be with the explicit purpose of improving access.  And ensuring that regulation safeguards are in place.  Now, in resource con trained settings, the investments in human capacity development are important.  They're important because they they need to match this digital revolution.  What Anurag was saying in countries where the basics are needed, we need to ensure that you can benefit from both high‑tech technology and the basic day‑to‑day things that can help us improve access to quality healthcare.
So this must ensure that the health system is transformed.  The health system as we know it, it must be transformed in such a way that service delivery is improved.
But it must be done in such a way that the users of services are empowered.  They're empowered to manage and monitor their own health.
So that they do not run to leather facilities for every small health problem.
And if this is the case, it must help us reduce costs and ensure that health is affordable and accessible.  But that extension of services is also for the benefit of those who are in remote settings.
Those that are in rural environments.  It cannot be that when you have a particular address then it is a access and geographic location must no longer be a barrier to access.  So we have an opportunity to improve our outcomes and an opportunity to improve the effectiveness of our patient management with these digital decision tools that refer to that area.  Of course, this will improve our targets for the SDGs and SDG in 2030.  Thank you.
 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, precious.  Let me point a little bit on this.  I ‑‑ do I understand you correctly that your hope is that with digital technology if you organize the skills you can overcome the injustice and access to health services.  That is your perspective?  While when I understand Bernardo correctly, he's fearing a little bit more that digital health ‑‑ digital health based services risk to mirror the circumstances that we have fl the physical world and are not necessarily overcoming this injustice.
If I'm correct, there is a risk of mirroring if you're not looking at the whole infrastructure in the country.
I know Anudhra, I'm hunger to you now.  Which side do you have a little more to Bernard or precious.
>> This is something here because we're working on understanding inequities immunization and we've been trying to study why 11 million children in GOVI supported countries do not receive a single dose of the most basic vaccine.  and for that we call that child zero dose child is actually an acute marker of inequity and you would be surprised by what we discovered.
You know what we discovered was that contrary to this popular notion that these children are living in remote areas, you know, it is all about delivery, actually a lot of them are living right under the nose of the governments and capitals in urban slums.  And a lot of these children actually existed in every village and every town because actually, the barriers that are operating, you know, against access to these populations are embedded in poverty.   You know, 2 out of 3 zero dose children live in households that subsist on less than $1.90 a day.  So there's a connection again extreme poverty and zero dose children.
Ethnicity is a big barrier.  And then gender barriers.
You know, because the mother is not educated, mother is not empowered.  So there are complex predictors and strat fires of these inequities.  So my first humble plea here is not to synonymize inequities with geographical locations which are difficult to access.
Now the next insight I would want to share is therefore, it is possible for us to actually use big data.  And artificial intelligence to try and ‑‑ very complex data sources to understand where exactly these marginalized populations live and what exactly are the latent profiles.  Why is it that they're missing all those?  So it's not ‑‑ this is not directly linked to connectivity issue on the issue or challenge of digital domain.  We can still use our leverage technologies to improve access for marginalized populations.
And the last thing I would say is that you know the level of technology that exists in some some of the remostest areas that is not connected is highly variable.  So we really therefore, have to think about differentiating and contextualized approaches.  For example am some of the countries we found that the use of mobile phones could actually access the gender divide because women did not have ownership of mobile phones.  Some other context be found there was high ownership on the part of women, of mobile phones.  So I just think that just retaining that ability to actually study habitation by habitation community by community some of the barriers and then making an intelligent sort of decision about how do we leverage technology would be extremely important.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Very good example.
Anurag, again, how to ensure digital healthcare delivers for all.
>> ANURAG AGRAWAL:  Thanks.  I'm going to start with a comment for the most precious comment today was made by Precious 57D how do you keem from unnecessarily visiting healthcare systems?  That is absolutely critical in most systems.  In India the average time for a patient to be seen by a doctor is under five minutes.  Of that 50% of time is in prescription refills and basic measurements.  Proof you want to extract the maximum value of every time, every patient, spends with an experience the medical personnel and minimize the wastage of time otherwise.  So you must alow people with non‑specific complaints to get advice in their own houses or community such that numbers of doctors.  You must enable the system with digital health codes they have to be built by the government.  How the government will pay for them is a question I leave for smarter people like Bernardo.
On the other hand, after these basic health services are taken care of and internationally we have to find models, on top of it you need the private sector to create innovative ecosystem for more and more high quality products.  So I see both Bernardo's vision in the end there will be high cost differentiated products not available for everybody.  Whether you stay digital or not.  I don't know.  But essential good services should be available to everybody by public distribution of goods and commitment towards making sure that basic medical advice can be given to people without having to leave their houses, without having to waste time in which they could have gone.  Huge number of people get into poverty because they're unnecessarily going around all over the place wasting ‑‑ getting answers that could have come to their houses.  I'll stop here.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for this contribution, particularly on this human interface that you're mentioning.  I could share from Germany that the impression here the study between patient and doctor you see many, many visits are from a health perspective, obsolete.  It's more obviously a social thing.  So it's more kind of to have contact which applies obviously to many elderly people that are doing kind of doctor hopping also.
And that is filling the waiting rooms and that is challenging the system.  But on the other hand it's needs.
But the question is there ‑‑ is it the right place to fill that need obviously?  Thank you very much and very interesting point I think.
Kira, how to make sure that digital healthcare delivers for all?
>> Kira:  I'll touch on several points.  One is there's algorithmic methods sowing that an AR algorithm is fair.  But I think let's talk about virtual care.  Actually brought the notion democratization of healthcare, everybody can get a doctor no matter where they are and which home they live to get the best doctors to where they are.  The problem is access.
Even in virtual care, 75% of the population even the western countries doesn't know they have the possibility of using virtual care.
And I'm talking not about poor people.  Most people just don't know they can have this.
So we need to work a lot about education around this.  Maybe this would be part of the education in school.  Aus virtual care at least once, know that you have the possibility of using something that's going to change your life dramatically.  Number 2.
And number 3 is Gwyneth indication even for physicians, physicians at different countries have different education times, different training.  And I think building decision support systems across all the data in all the world in the best institutions and giving access to those decision for systems for physicians during training an other countries is going to help us supply the knowledge in a much more equal and fair way.
 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That's very clear.
So last step in our panel ‑‑ I'm asking you to be even more concise than you have been in your contributions so far ‑‑ now when we look at what we have said, what would be the policy message or the concrete action point or recommendation that should come out from that panel when we look at the points that we have discussed before?
So I'm really looking at the clock now.  You are all very experienced in shaping policy messages or knowing what one should do and what would be the message that comes out of that panel to challenge what we have ahead of us to make match the digital world and the health world for best purpose for best purpose for the patient.  So what is what you want to see on the document when we close this session here?  Anurag starting with you, max one minute
>> Okay. digital health is not just usual health.  It requires a comprehensive strategy that takes into account local consideration, infrastructure and goals.  Each country should have a national health mission subject to its own preeptness in a digital world and health needs of its populations and I'm glad to see a mission.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Very good point.  Anudhra.
>> I think a good healthcare delivery has to be applied and focus now followed by efficiency and accountability.
And digital health actually is an enable letter and we have to stay ‑‑ enabler and we have to stay focused on these objectives and exploit digital health technologies to allocate resources much more prudently and equitably to make sure that we actually leave no one behind and we constantly improve the quality of services that are provided to population at large.
>> MODERATOR: Mm‑hmm.  Thank you very much.  Kira?
>> Kira:  So in addition to all the topics we raised about equality and better collaboration between government and private sector, I want to raise the concept of data sharing.
I think on a global level if they would have shared data from medical conclusions that made during the pandemic we could have saved more lives in the country.  I think getting to a pint we have shared resource or all researchers can work on the same data, all government have visibility even to other countries can bring lots of healthcare and treatment.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Very interesting point I guess.  Bernardo?
>> BERNARDO MARIANO: Thank you.
I think from a key recommendation will be for certainly to reinforce some of what the other panelists mentioned is every country should have a structure ‑‑ a digital health strategy.  With that strategy we shall address a number of issues including health data, interoperability, and equity and all others such as ethical and privacy that was mentioned.  So that's first thing.  Second, each country needs to understand before the country is in that ‑‑ in the digital health and maturity.  So ensure that the third part that the investments are addressing ‑‑ taking that kind of maturity from where it is to the next level.  So my understanding that the maturity of the country in digital health implementation use the digital technologies, then we can drive investments into appropriate areas to enhance that maturity.  And last, but not least, is that the digital health or digital ecosystem requires a constant improvement and enhancement.
10 years of digital technologies is equal to 60 years of human life.  So let's make sure that we do not create strategies that are sit there for 10 years and five years thinking it still work, if a country vild a strategy five years ago, it needs to develop a in you one.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you I think this strategy must be argyle if I have gained any understanding of change that has occurred by data in our world sm so it's more like you know, design thinking process than having a five year strategy.  I have to understand that.  Okay.
The last, but not least, precious.
>> Yes, we need good digital health governance and improved access.  But of course for that to work, we must invest in human capacity development.
So that we can match the digital revolution and ensure that you've got a sustainable infrastructure that is expandable and maintainable.
It's not good to just say infrastructure.
It must be expandable and maintainable.
Thank you.
 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  You made very, very very clear points I guess and I'm looking at what you have said earlier.  And I think these six recommendations or points that you've raised is really at the key of the challenge.  I particularly took in mind a subtopic that ‑‑ or a kind of kroses cutting issue that ‑‑ crosscutting issue that was skills.
Skills on all levels to know more about how digital healthcare, digital systems can work, what it can do.  And skills is not only to know ‑‑ to manage them but also to understand how they work which is linked to transparency that was mentioned several times and Anurag also said if the systems are transparent.  Kira came in in the same point that is very important.  And somebody said digital list receipt which, obviously is a challenge in many sectors but I keep this is really key when it comes to health because as Bernardo said, we are ‑‑ we are bringing together here two very different cultures when he said that on one hand the ‑‑ the health, very much is based on relations between humans and on the other hand you have digital world and he described how far from culture they are one from each other that was for me a very interesting point when he said that is something that we barely need to address how do we make that match for any operator for any people that is dealing with it, be it in the role of a doctor or physician or scientists or in the role of a patient and even in the role of governance.
I would like to thank you very, very much for that very, very inspiring high‑level panel.  Thank you very much for your time, for your contributions.  All this is recorded and will stay on the YouTube channel of the IGF on the UN web TV from what I understand.  You also can follow the chat.  Thank you all for your questions, your remarks that are in the chat.  Some of them we could address and others are self‑explang and interesting to see because you can see what people think about this very, very complex topic.
I would like to thank the organizers, the team behind it.  And have a great day wherever you are.  And I hope that the next IGF, despite the fact this is very interesting format ‑‑ I really hope that the physical aspect will not completely drop out in this pandemic and while have the chance to meet in person and discuss this further as we'll keep really the topic will really be kept on the agenda.  Thank you very much.
 
** 
>> Do we have captioning working?  And ready to go.
 
>> Good morning, everybody.  Good afternoon and good evening.  Wherever you are in the world.  Welcome to our session profession or participation child rights in a new normal.  I'm Natasha Jackson representing the GSNA, the global mobile organization.  This session is provided by both the GSMA and, you know, ENICEF and we have UNSIF on the lierch as well.  And we are having a debate session today.  So hopefully we'll be able to get good interaction with all of you participating wherever you are in the world.
We have got an amazing panel of people who are going to talk to us today about the issue.  Really we're focused initially oncyo individual.  And the global COVID‑19 crisis which we know has brought into sharp focus many challenges related to children's rights in the global context and particularly around participation.  And profession and that's been pushing the considerations that many people, many child rights stakeholders and those who have been interested in child rights from very different perspectives have been pushing over the years.  Issues like digital inclusion, on line safety, youth participation and so on.
And whilst it has been in a very difficult time in many countries in fact I'm sure in all countries around the world, I think there has been one positive coming out of COVID‑19 in some way and that is that the need to address the digital divide that children face the need to address is much more widely acknowledged and understood.  And I think that's one of the positives as I said.  But there are also of course many, many concerns and many issues have come up and those concerns include of course Internet safety issues.  We know many parents and careers and oirnlz have had to climb a steep hill on this period.  That's now the opportunity for us to get this child rights agenda up up up on the policy agenda and we have to use this and we need to get ahead with policy makers of any sort of knee jerk approaches whether that's by policy makers or parents or careers that these sort of knee jerk approaches that can favor protection for children over participation or even vice versa and look for solutions which maximize the opportunity that children have while also combating the risks.  UNICEF released a report oncyo individual in July.  Josi will put that on the links in the chat so anyone when wants to see it can access it.  It identified the 10 key rights issues that they see thrown up by children's engagement with a digital world and those are the particularly pressing in the context of this new COVID normal.  Is in that document there are business and policy maker messages on each of the tep points and also lots of other sources of information.  So please do go have a look at that if you haven't seen it together.  Our objective today is to have a deso we're going to bring together the collective experience we have in the panelists and insights they have and hope to bring in also you sort of the wider group, anyone participating to propose a debate on workable solutions to issues that have been eye lighted during the pandemic.  The way we're going to structure it is that each of our four panelists are going to have the opportunity to outline the issues that they've been encountering relating to children and young people during COVID‑19 whether that's closing of schools or educational settings, the role of information or disinformation and keeping children safe and healthy as well as impact of social ieses lation.  Social distances, and we will have two panelists speaking from the protection angle and two from the participation angle.
Participants, anyone watching remotely, you'll be given the opportunity to ask questions and debate any of the recommendations for messages they're giving.  Please can you euses the chat function on the right for any comments any reactions to things that panelists are saying to share any research or studies or own experiences and use the Q&A panel for questions for the panelists.  We'll be monitoring both of those at the same time.  My eyes might be darting around as we're doing that.  I apologize for that.  And we will post them back.  After the opening statements we will open it up and we will ask panelists your questions, get into a bit of debate on that and then we will close with some closing statements and also because of the IGF this year have asked for voluntary commitments.  We will be also be asking panelists if there are any voluntaryr commitments related to IGF2020 that they want to share with us.
So we will kick off on the protection side.  So our first panelist is Uri Sadeh, the coordinator.  Uri Sadeh trained as a lawyer, worked on various human rights top ibz in Israel including trafficking human beings, asylum seekers and Palestinian human rights and in 2007 after obtaining his master's degree in human rights from the London school of economics he joined INTERPOL focusing contentious crimes against children.  Five or six years ago he went on sabbatical and returned to Israel Florida to take part in the creation of online crimes against children unit within the national police there before he led investigations into online child sexual exploitation.  So he has really hands‑on experience in investigating these crimes and bringing child sexual exploitation and criminals to justice.  In in 2019, so last year, Uri returned to INTERPOL and now heads the crimes against children's unit.  So Uri, welcome to the panel.  We're delighted to have you here.
I'll give you about five minutes to give some opening statements on your experience during COVID‑19 and messages that you have from INTERPOL.  Welcome.
>> URI SADEH: Thank you very much, Natasha, and thank you for the opportunity to present during this and participate in the panel and present during this event.  Ten seconds I'll sail INTERPOL is the international criminal police organization bringing together 194 police forces in different countries around the world seeking primarily to provide for international cooperation between them, help build capacity on different topics and provide operational support for those ‑‑ to those police forces globally.  Crimes against children unit within the organization is in touch with numerous specialized units around the world working on crimes against children predominantly online.  Crimes against children to build better capacity in the same manner, deliver trainings, create cooperation in this international crime and ensure victims and offenders are identified and either safeguarded or arrested.
What I'll focus on today is the COVID report that we've issued early September.  Trying to look at what the pandemic is doing to law enforcement's efforts and phenomenal in general of online child exploitation.
Now, see if we can have any lessons from what we saw over the first or the half a year of the pandemic.
The sources for our report which is available on the Web site of INTERPOL were predominantly law enforcement information.  Some private industry and partners, information whether they work on childhood expectation international NGOs provided input and obviously the open source.  And we look at it obviously the setting nor this interest and the peculiar situation is the fact that schools have been closed largely for extended periods during this time adults spend on line.  The home environment and restrictions on international travel.
So with the limited minutes that I have, I'll try to focus on a few of the findings which again people are interested can be found in the report.  So, if we look at law enforcement itself, we saw law enforcement around the world reported reduction in the number of reports they got concerning child exploitation cases from the public.
So it was obviously the limitations have affected their ability of the public of children or perhaps of caregivers to report incidents.  There's also we noticed a reduction in the usage of our specialized toads for investigating this specific crime area by law enforcement, colleagues in our member countries.
We saw a change in the level of reporting that industry is providing on a regular basis.  So many industry platforms, Internet platforms report regularly to law enforcement incidents that are expected as being child sexual exploitation and there was reduction in the reports and sometimes a change in the manner and the depth if you want of the reports due to the work from home environment which gives less access to different systems.
Also the cases for law enforcement where we saw the ‑‑ in some cases some of the force was diverted to other policing tasks related to the COVID pandemic.  Therefore, having less access to specialized network providing access to international child exploitation based in INTERPOL which was hindering their investigations.
If we look in general about the phenomenas as we saw it, we saw a significant increase in exchange of child abuse materials, videos and images depicting children being sexually exploited.  It was done in peer‑to‑peer sharing file sharing networks.  We could see an increase in discussions on dedicated pedophile forums which exist in abundance, especially on the dark net where often it is our sharing experience and material and discussing the crimes they're committing.  We saw an increase in that.  There was more time and more activity spent there.  We saw the significant increase in viral content circulating.  So police forces reporting more and more cases of videos that go viral and actually revictimmize the children that are depicted within this material and also exposes more people that are not necessarily seeking such exposure to child abuse material.
We saw pretty natural an increasing self‑generating materials.  So victims, minors producing child abuse material on behalf of ‑‑ or at the request of offenders that are contacting them online.  And these going ‑‑ being distributed.  We didn't see actually ‑‑ this can be revisited ‑‑ all of those findings I'm talking about are initial because data available was still limited.  We wrote this over summer which was worth looking at a few months or even a year down the road.  In the gaming industry where we know there is abuse as well children in online gaming are being groomed into abusive situations or extortion situations, we didn't see ‑‑ there were no reports of increased incidents.
We did see suggestions that there is more online payment for wild exploitation material and that's linked to streaming that's phenomena of offenders sitting in one country and paying someone else an adult elsewhere to abuse kids live on camera for them in exchange for payment.  We saw indications of increase on this phenomena.
And we saw an increase in natural increase in obstacles for victims to report where children are not in school and don't have this route of reporting or teacher or caregiver being able to detect abuse and therefore, reported ‑‑ expose it.  There is obviously less access to medical care and social services because of lockdown.
In a nutshell these are some of the findings in the report I encourage you to go and read the full report.
We have questions later on.  I hope I'm within the time limit.
>> MODERATOR: Great.  Thank you, Uri.  Quite sobering stuff there in the report.
Really all of the issues in there are really, really upsetting as well.  I have a question for you, you mentioned this reduction in reporting of cases.  With schools being closed and children being confined much more, that's been the case.  But how do you think those sort of barriers and vulnerability they create for children can be mitigated?
>> URI SADEH: It seems crucial now that we have lessons of the first confinement and some results of the nature it had that hotlines for example must remain open.  Hotlines reporting ‑‑ hotlines ta are served oftentor reporting incidents material and actual cases should remain open and accessible to the public.
There's other technological solution that's can be put in place even on law enforcement side.  Find online reporting mechanisms allowing children to put their complaints or initial complaints in online to reports can be a toll‑free texting service.  It can be integrated channels within the social platforms where children are, that sort of thing.
gaming, again, messaging applications.  The online environment should be exploited to that end in order to ensure that we have continuous service.  And the same goes for social services and medical services related sexual abuse, those must be seen as essential services that must be ‑‑ must remain open and people should be able to access them.
>> MODERATOR: That is a great link to our next panelist.  Thank you, Uri.  Our next panelist the general director of the SOA organization in Palestine.  She's an experienced trainer in gender‑based violence.  Developed anti‑violence programs, published manual on eye eliminating violence particularly against children and women.  She's helped establish five help lines for women survivors of violence and child protection in Palestine and in the wider Middle East region.  She's also a consultant, published research.  And of course has been running a child protection help line which is part of an international network of child help lines called child help line international.
So welcome to the session.  We heard just now from Uri about the importance of hotlines staying available all the time.  And accessible to children.  Perhaps you could talk a little bit about your experience over the COVID period with the help line for children and women that you've been running in Palestine.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  Thank you.  Yes, I will share my experience.
>> Your video is not showing yet. 
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  I don't have the choice to open.  Okay.
 
>> MODERATOR: There you go.  Nice to see your face.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  Okay.
As an organization we are running child protection help line.  And with the support of our partners we continue to provide our services remotely during 24 hours by 7 for children during the lockdown.  As our services were not affected during lockdown and in particular the protection system doesn't work and doesn't function as usual during the emergency situation.
And there were increase in number of children that contacted the help line services.  Mainly they reported physical violence, sexual exploitation, cyber harassment, attempted suicide.  And the high percentage of calls was from male and young men.  Increased 20%.  Many children didn't get basic needs as a result of economic situation for their families.  Some children didn't have enough food or they couldn't continue their study because they don't have the ability to attend the e‑learning.
And also the protection was very weak during this time.  I will relate this to the mainly poor countries that many families lost their job and they didn't have also enough space in their houses and the number of families is very big.  So it makes a lot of clashes or a lot of stress inside the house and the result of that children were suffering from different types of violence and especially we can ‑‑ as I explained before, it's for cases of incest, suicide, we started to hear, like, children report more about these cases and it talks the country and government a few months until they scatter to give services and I mean here the protection systems start to be active and we have like the first two months of the lock down it was really difficult.  To prefer children to the protection system we have in Palestine.  We find there is a big need to have help line and the help line givers an opportunity for children to raise their voices and we can hear their voices and give them space that they can report and talk about the difficulties they face inside the family.  So the help line was like a window or open the whole for children that they can call the help line and get the psychosocial support to continue on their life and also when they have any problem inside the family they will find a place where they can get help.
And I can say from our experience that we published a lot of FAQ sheets during this time.  The FAQ sheets give us a real information about the ground and to what's going on the ground with children.  And because these FAQ sheets result from our database that we document the cases that we receive on this database can show us what the ‑‑ what the needs of the children are.  Is we can see the difference between each month between the needs of the children like from the beginning of the lock down until today.  The graph is different each month but the FAQ sheets gives us rich information how to address our services and what to add.  And how also to prepare our staff for the response of the needs for the children during this time.  Yeah, so this is mainly what I like to share with you and I'm ready to answer any questions you have related to our experience.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thanks very., OHAILA.  Again sobering message of the experiences you've noted for the first hand from the help lines.  You talk very much about how governments were slow to follow‑up.  If you took away the participation side of the equation and just focused on the protection, what would be your key recommendation or ask if you just focused on that?  .
>> It's ‑‑ I mean it's very important to have the communication with the government and with the protection system.  Because as I mentioned, after two months we tried to advocate a lot for that.
And we succeed to function the protection system and we get for example, a training for the government and the mainly for minister of social development, how to continue thif services through the online services.  How to be prepared for any emergency situation.  So planning is very important like to have a plan for emergency responses is very important.  This is what we tried to do with the government institution and with other referral systems in the country.
>> MODERATOR: Okay, interesting.  We have some questions coming through.  We will get to those questions.  Also, just for remote participants, if you have experience from your countries that match what Ohaila is saying or if you have even different experiences, please feel free to comment in the chat and we'll monitor those as well.  It will be interesting to see the experiences from other parts of the world as a commonalities and differences.  So thank you, Ohaila.  I think your overview has been really interesting and helpful and is ‑‑ I want to now turn to a student himself at the University of Johannesburg in South Africa.  He's studying politics and international relations there.  He's a student leader and also amen ter for students in his department and he's representative for the South Africa for the commonwealth student association.  Bongani also volunteers for UNICEF South Africa and directed and produced a short film for UNICEF Africa and he's the limited youth reporter.  And he uses films and other methods to spread information and the stories and talk about from a youth perspective.  You can see his story on the GMSA on the youth site there's a video there I made at a workshop with Vodac ooh m at a photo storing workshop.  Bongani welcome to the panel today.  I think you are closer to school years than anyone else on our panel.  We're delighted to have a young voice on our panel as well.
And I think we'd really like to hear your experiences.  What have you been hearing from your community of young people, your network, how do they match what what we heard.  Please share your information with us and your experiences and those of your colleagues or compatriots.  Thanks.  Are we getting B or ngani.  He's having laptop issues.  That just shows that that is a key issue on keblghttivity that is not ‑‑ r ‑‑ connectivity that is not unfamiliar to many of us during COVID‑19.  So he's going to sort those outs and we'll switch to him later.  We'll now move to professor Amanda Third, codirector of the young and resilient research sefnter at western eurch varsity in Sydney.  She's an expert in child centered participatory research and lid child centered projects for children in the digital age in over 70 countries around the world.  She's worked with partners on corporate government not for profit sectors, children and young people themselves.  And she's part of the team led by the five rights Foundation that's drafting the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child general comment on children's rights in the digital environment.
So Amanda, sorry, she's also professional research fellow in institute for culture and society at western Sydney university, faculty associate in the center for Internet and society at Harvard.  Wow.  Great credentials and most recent book is "young people in digital society" which is published by Hargrave..  So Amanda, you do this research directly with young ‑‑ with children and not just young people but with children.  Perhaps can share some of your experiences and the trends and threats that you saw during the COVID period compared to prepandemic.
>> Amanda Third:  Thanks very much, Natasha and UNICEF and GMSA for organizing this panel.  It's wonderful and terribly sobering to listen to the perspectives being shared so far and clearly there are lots of challenges ahead of us.
I want to begin by engaging with the title of this panel.  Protection or participation?
And I thought I would throw out a challenge to organizations that facilitate children's access to and use of technology around the world.
The con vks on the rights of the child, which is still the most widely ratified human rights treaty in history ‑‑ calls on states and other duty bearers to respect, protect and up hold children's provision, protection, and participation rights.
So from perspective of the convention then it's not a question of either protection or participation but in fact of provision, protection, and participation.
It's our task as stipulated by the convention, to realize all three in con srt.
And this is a very complicated necessary and indeed urgent task in the world we've suddenly encountered.
Children are not particularly vulnerable to developing COVID‑19 and emerging evidence is suggesting that children around the world are not particularly concerned that either they or their loved once will contract the virus.  Nonetheless, children have been seriously affected by the crisis of the every Dave that's been brought about by the pandemic.
They say they've feeling intense and omp new emotions like anger, grief and anxiety and I worry that they're not equipped to deal with those emotions, they feel disconnected from peers and activities that support day‑to‑day well‑being.
And many are experiencing heightened tensions and even violence at home as families grapple with the very really infects of the pandemic on job losses and financial pressure.
So like many adults, children have a sense that the world will never be normal again.  It's quite likely that they're right.  In short, children are experiencing a crisis in the social f social worlds and this will potentially are long‑term effects on their lives.  My concern is that under these conditions because thrair not seen as a group that's vul theirble to the virus, their needs, rights and aspirations have remained under the radar.  They are, if you like, the invisible victims of this pandemic.
Now more than ever we have to make a concerted effort to address children's needs.  We have to keep their concerns front and center as we take decisions to deal with this crisis.  Which also means that we need good ways to listen to what children need and want.
Throughout the pandemic technologies provided many children with a vital point of continuity and connection.  It's really helped to structure their day‑to‑day life and give life under the pandemic order and meaning.
Of course this is not true for all children as Natasha noted in her introduction.  We urgently need mechanisms for addressing the digital inclusion of those children who don't have regular and reliable access to technology and the Internet.
But for those with access, technology has been key to tir well‑being through the pandemic and this is reflected in the sharp increases in their use of technology.
By virtual of being online, ever more children are more exposed to risks of harm as by fellow panelists already pointed out we've seen escalating rights of forms of violence that range from cyber bullying at the more pointy end of the child protection challenge alarming increases of child exploitation and these require urgent remedy.  But at the same time I want to suggest that we need to expand our thinking about protection beyond conventional online safety risks because children are experiencing a crisis in their social world that's compromising their well‑being.  And they need protection from these factors.
We need to keep children safe emotionally as well as physically in it the broader lives beyond the online world.
While we have been quite good at providing children with child‑friendly information about how to protect their physical health from the virus, we've not yelt learned how to leverage technology to protect children's rights to other vital rights of information and support to deal with the other dimensions of the pandemic.  Indeed, we're net to imagine all the waises that technology can be Han esed to shore up children's broad range of rights beyond those that play out in online spaces.
Technology if we're smart about it could be a much more powerful part of the solution.  But some solutions need to be driven by children's own insights and experiences about what they need and this is one example where we see that participation is not only critical but interconnected deeply with their protection.
Many of our responses to the pandemic to date have been driven by the sheer requirement to respond at speed.  We've seen a massive movement namely for example to get children's education online and on the surface it looks as though we've begun to recognize the possibilities of online education, making the kinds of changes that some educators have fought for for decades overnight.
And yet, many children are reporting that their experience of education is less than adequate.
Although the evidence is yet to come in, I do think that in our rush to get education online we've not stopped to think about what good education in online settings needs to look like.
Despite the massive efforts of educators all around the world, we haven't had time to think about how we might need to rethink education for online delivery.
And as with many other domains of children's lives we haven't stopt to involve children in the project of reenvisaging education for 21st Century onhine world.  Indeed, you might say that children's participation has been one of the big casualties of the pandemic.
If we're to take up the challenge of protecting children's rights seriously, we need to urgently prioritize children's right to participate in the decision making that impacts their lives.  We need to recognize that children have important insights.  That they're an enormous resource in helping us respond toe this new normal.  But to tap into this, we need to really rethink our structures and processes of governance.  We need ways of engaging children effectively in times of physical distancing.
And we need to make space for children to contribute to those processes of decision making not in one off kind of ways but as an ongoing and integral part of our processes awlings remembering that their protection and participation rights are intertwined.
Thanks, Natasha.
>> MODERATOR:  
>> Thanks, Amanda, really interesting I have a question for you actually.  So you know you talk about how we really need to we think but how do we actually engage with children meaningfully?  And you know I'm talking particularly, you know, as GSMA, our members are corporate.  So how do we engage with them?
And how do others engage with them meaningfully rather than lip service or in any other ways?
>> Amanda Third:  Thanks that's a great question and one that ‑‑ a question that many people have because children's participation rights are notoriously difficult to realize, much more difficult to realize than protection rights in many senses.  Yeah?
And I think there are lots of things to take away from experience to date.  Obviously things ‑‑ it's best to reach out to children in the spaces that they're already in.   You know, speak in child friendly language, et cetera, et cetera.  There are lots of good principles for engaging children effectively that we can turn it to for support here.
But I think the major challenge is really to move beyond tokenistic participation as your question subjects.  And to me that really involves a radical rethink of the ways that we set up our decision‑making processes.  It really involves corporations thinking about well, okay.
so we make decisions about children's lives all the time.  How do we invite them into those processes in ways are meaningful to children?  And in an on going way, how do we expand the possibilities to interface with children?  I think there's wonderful examples of the ways that's been done.  For example just a non‑technology one is that I'm part of an entity called the 216 site children's Parliament run by the Liverpool city council in western Sydney university.
And the council has set up a children's Parliament which sits alongside the adult Parliament and members of the adult Parliament attend and listen to the decision making that children undertake and then there's a series of advocates who advocate for adults to take those decisions up in the broader world if you like.
And I think these are the kinds of examples that we could turn to to really think about more meaningful forms of participation for children.  In all kinds of practices governments and civil society to private enterprise
>> MODERATOR: Okay, great.  That's the perfect segue to move to Bongani who I believe has fixed his laptop issues.  So Bongani already gave his bio.  But actually talking about corporate talking to young people so Bongani we had invited this GSMA to come to world Congress earlier this year and talk to business leaders there so start getting that communication from young people to the corporate sector.  Unfortunately, of course, COVID put an end to that and we had to cancel the conference.
But Bongani, please give us your perspective of the pandemic in terms of the experience that you have had personally or experiences from those you're connected with.  And also perhaps afterwards maybe you can touch on how the sort of youth voice and listening to young people and engaging them more in all the issues and responses and the measures that can be taken to improve the situation in these times of pandemic and other challenges, thank you.
>> Bongani:  You're still on mute, Bongani.
>> Bongani:  Sorry about that.  Thank you for having me.  I'm not sure if I'm audible enough?
>> MODERATOR: You just need to speak a little louder and then I think you're fine.  We can see you.  Just a little low on volume.
>> Bongani:  Am I audible enough?
>> Yes.
>> Okay
hello?  Oh, perfect.
Thank you for having me.  It's really important for us to identify or recognize that there's more dangers for kids being on the Internet as opposed to not being on the Internet.
And as we've seen, things such as child trafficking which has already been spoken about, cyber bullying which has also been spoken about, we've seen how drastically increasing those things have been during the pandemic.  But with these incidents also being highlighted, I think it's also important for us to also ensure that young people ‑‑ that regulation that's are put there in place for kids and young people to be able to actively engage on Internet and online platforms.
Ask
>> MODERATOR: It looks like we've lost Bongani again.  Such a shame.  That's one of the key challenges we've come up against is actually what do we do about children and young people who don't have access to the Internet?  Now, we'll get into that with the panel ‑‑ Bongani, you're back.  Please if you can take yourself off mute and continue, that will be great and I was just saying that this is sort of lack of connectivity that a lot of people are experiencing is one of the key issues and I expect with children it's even more so whether it's because of technology or because their parents or others are trying to protect them from what they perceive as the dangers online.
>> Bongani:  Thank you.  Sorry about that.  But as I was saying, I think most of the work that I do at the moment with UNICEF when volunteering with them so it's going to schools around the country, facilitates workshops on capacity building.
And what the pandemic has basically done is that now because of lockdown everything we're unable to reach out to the kids and have the normal workshops we have with them and I think a very critical thing with these workshops is also being able to provide some of the kids because they come not having any form of food.
And so amart from this, what we kind of do is that we've taken the workshops to an online space.  So now we have workshops on using Zoom an engage with them kids remain to creating we need to engage or have young people and children in online platforms regardless of the danger that may be there.  As I stated earlier on we need to have regulations that ensure that kids are safe online.  Regulation that's ensure that parents as well are involved on their kids online activity.
Another thing that I think the pandemic has also taught us is how unequal society is.  Inequality within our society.
So with the pandemic and lockdown happening, most of the kids who had, like, proper resources were able to continue with e‑learning, online learning.  While kids who come from disadvantaged backgrounds weren't able to engage online with the education and reed.  With academics, this speaks to the need for us to ensuring that kids to go to schools in different communities have the same opportunities and resources as kids who are offered better advantage.  And apart from this, I think another thing to also take note of is Amanda spoke a bit on this ‑‑ the need for meaningful engagement of young people within decision‑making processes.  And why there is this critical need for children to also be involved.  This speaks to representation.  And it also speaks to people's experiences.  So, if there are decisions that are to be taken that speaks to the Internet and also speaks to young people's involved, we can't take any dispitions without involving those people who will be affected by whatever decisions that will be taken.
And apart from this, I think another thing that we also need to take note of is the fact that when addressing issues of
>> MODERATOR: We lost Bongani I suspect he'll be able to come back in a minute and join on the panel.  There were really interesting and quite clear messages from him there about regulation not everything stopped they were able to continue with the workshops.  We have quite a number of questions on the Q&A and also chat.  People have been sharing experiences.  I'm going to just open up for wider questions.  Hi, Bongani, I see you're back now.  We're going to open up to the panel and give you an opportunity to talk.  Don't worry if you go off and on, that's fine.  We'll keep bringing you in.  I'm going to bring Sosi from UNICEF who what particular questions do you want to start with to direct to the panelists.
 
>> Thank you for the introduction sessions.  False dichotomy has been picked up.  We wanted to get the debate flowing and once we come to the end come to concrete ways off course protection and participation need to be both upheld onlien so it's great to have that kind of picked up on instantly.  I see a question here that talks about right to privacy during COVID as consequence of children's increased participation online.  What does this ‑‑ the impact this has on collection of children's personal data and sews yated risks.  I just want to take the opportunity and thank you, Natasha forgiving me the chance to quickly jump in and share a brief that was published recently on the record impacts on child rights dimensions of that which I recommend to everyone but I wonder if any panelists have comments to pick up own this dimension of children's right to privacy during lock down and increase the data collection and associated issues with that. 
>> Sorry, would you mind repeating the question in brief.
>> 
>> JOSIANNE GALEA: Sure, we had a question in the Q&A that disoomedz in on the right to privacy and the increased data collection on children during COVID specific issues there and potentially some solutions as well.
>> Yes.  Certainly, thanks, Josi.  So privacy is just a key challenge to by virtue of the fact they're spending more time online and also interfacing with variety of different platforms.  So privacy is really being challenged, I guess.  One thing I would draw attention to is that I've just recently done some work in fact working with 700 children around the world in 28 countries.  To try to understand their rights in the digital age.
And when it comes to issues of privacy, for the first time in my history of working with children in this kind of way, children have really been sensitized to the issues around data protection and privacy.  When we talked to them previously, they tended to highlight interpersonal privacy as key challenge.  Watching what they're doing and feeling surveilled by the people around them.  But I think you know what they're atune to and it's no doubt connected to the fact that around the world we have begun to have deeper conversations around data protection, as a consequence of some of the events that ‑‑ or breaches I guess you might say of data protection internationally.  And those conversations that adults have been having are indeed filtering down into children's consciousness and they are ‑‑ I think the only word for it is out wage.  People might collect data in ways that are not transparent to them.  They're worried about who collects data, what they collect it for and why.
And yeah, lots and lots of unanswered questions.
But I think you know what we need to really think carefully about ‑‑ and obviously there are things that can be done by governments to enforce data protection laws and you know the GDPR legislation is obviously critical there are 24EU7BGZ going on in a similar way beyond legislative protections and what's happening to our culture and the level of culture.  Our children have been taught that it's normal to be surveilled.  And it's ‑‑ you know, you're ‑‑ there are constantly under someone's watchful eye whether it be a parent or a private company who's willing to exploit them for economic section.  This is not just a breach of I right to privacy but a breach of the right to freedom of thought.  We're teaching Ching children not to think and do things that might come naturally to them because they live in this highly curated world.
So I think the challenges run very, very deep.  But I also think talking to children that there is a rising call.  I think they're going to be demeaning more from their platforms because they don't think that having a free social media service is a fair trade for privacy.  So watch.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Amanda, that's really interesting.  And speaking from the more corporate side, we have seen a few companies already started to have youth panels I think Talia, the operator that operates in Sweden arpd parts of the Nordics and other countries has a youth panel where they have young people coming and talking directly to the business and hopefully that's a trend that we'll start to see more of and certainly at GSMA we're encouraging all that and our commitment will be along that.
I want to stay with little bit about this idea on the data protection angle a little bit and also move over to Uri on this.  So Uri.  There were two anglesser hoo.  One of course is the debate that sometimes comes up which is the right to confidentiality and privacy that can also impede law enforcement investigations into criminals.  So the fact that you know they also have a right to privacy and a lot of the forms on which some of the ‑‑ you know ped files and others are interconnecting is encrypted and law enforcement don't have access to it.  So there's one sort of policy debate on that which I know the European mission and others are starting to think about in a vexing law enforcement.  Other of course is the fact that children are only really many children are finding the tfdz to turn to the hotlines and help lines when they're away from perpetrators.  And what sort of evidence there is and that's a question I'll ask for you.  And what sort of evidence you may have for insights from other countries on that.  So sort of two questions there.  Take both or take one.
>> URI SADEH: I'll answer the second first.  It is an interesting aspect that we didn't see in the initial data we received.  There wasn't a lot of data from hotlines at the time.  So that might be something interesting to look at now or a little later.  It is logic that gives it suddenly find ourselves at the home environment especially if it's supportive home environment.  Away from abuse if the abuse is in school or kindergarten have the chance to disclose the chance to break away a little bit from the routine abuse they're facing so this is in fact a beneficial side of it.  Obviously there's the other side some victims must have been locked up with their abusers but there's a whole variety there.
Actually I should put in more details after I saw the comment in the chat here.
Another aspect we should be aware of we talked about privacy of children putting on those platforms and educated that's the way to learn or to communicate is the early exposures.  And it has been put online and earlier than they would have otherwise now because schooling and social communicating within their social group has moved online due to lockdown so you have a whole group of children who have been predictive arms.  Earlier than I think how do we ‑‑ can you then stop it at that we go back to normal school or how you have kids that are as lounge as first graders that are communicating online and therefore, exposed to abuse very early before they have protective mechanisms.  This coupled with the fact that while we are in remote studying if you're not online you don't exist.
The question about encryption obviously the encryption privacy while we of course want to protect protect, the police work to protect privacy while we talk about child sexual exploitation on line, you very often depend on the service providers providing some information about the abusers active offending against children online.  There is an increased usage of encryption on platforms which indeed blinds not only law enforcement but provides service providers themselves to the abuse that they know and we know and numbers are enormous is occurring on the platform and indeed stand on this if you're providing a platform where children are becoming ‑‑ are being abused this is not an assumption, this is a fact and you know it and we're talking about millions of reports coming out of platforms.  Going encryption going blind on it doesn't solve the problem.  Only serves the offenders.
And of course again, European legislation which is some aspects of protecting the privacy must take into consideration the need to protect vulnerable relations online there predominantly children and they leave some leeway for industry to work with law enforcement and try to detect chimed abuse and try to filter out child abuse material which is what this revictimizing the children that were once abused and NOI consumed again and again by offenders that gain reviewing.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, yeah.  The question on balancing rights is always there.  Participation in any of these crimes and disadvantages.  And I just want to quickly before we start summing summing up to go back to issues there, bs, Bongani if you're there put the video on and then I know when you're on.
Because I think both Ohaila and Bongani it would be interesting to hear quickly one of the other issues that we've heard of, which is around misinformation.  So you know whether ‑‑ or disinformation even where children have come across information that is false or misleading or deliberately so.  Any of the issues that you've seen coming up in the help lines and that's ‑‑ Ohaila if you could say something first and Bongani is this an issue disinformation and fake news type issues in relation to COVID.  What's been your experience there?  Thanks.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  I want to add I mean more about what what my other colleagues mentioned.  We start to receive calls from children that they don't want to continue also the e‑learning because they face a lot of bullying during the class session.
Because they're using the e‑learning through different social media and like Zoom or other programs.  But the children use this program in a bad way.
So children should know how to use these channels as a safe channel for each child.  Not to use it as a channel to bullying or to attack other children.  Because children are afraid also to enter to the e‑learning and we received some calls in the help line like this.
The other thing is children spending a lot of time on the Internet.  So we don't know which area they are chatting or getting through.
And some of the families they don't have the knowledge how to use the digital ‑‑ I mean digital knowledge.  And how to make it more safe for their children.
So I think it's very important to have raising awareness to parents and to the children and use digital channel and if we are not to any other children or also to protect our ‑‑ to protect their sons.  It's very important.
>> MODERATOR: The morns of education is always something that has come up.  I mean, children often also learn from each other as well.  And Bongani, do you have a particular message on that or experience on that in terms of learning to be safe online?  You're still on mute?
>> Bongani:  Sorry about that.  Technology is really getting the most of us today.
But yeah, I think there has been a lot of miss information going on during lock down and during this entire Pablo Allietti.  And this guys back to a point I made earlier on.  Rejust touched on it the issue of education, what I wanted to bring up is the need for partnerships with grass root level organizations.
I'll be engaging with meaningful sharing information with not just schools but parents as well.  How to use the Internet on the safe ways of using the Internet.  I think as much as children and kids are exposed to their Internet, not all parents have safe information or knowledge on how to use the Internet or how to not regulate or say but guide the kids on the safe use of intreft.  So I think that's one key thing that is really important.  That partnership between the private sector government as billion as grassroots level organizations.  And another point I wanted to make was on the kinds of information that organizations such as GSMA and UNICEF for instance put up on the Internet.  So with some of the work I'm doing which is taking short films ands raising awareness, I think that's another really important thing.  Ensuring that organizations also come in and share good information and basically two ways of to raise awareness for kids in the Internet on how to best use the Internet.
So yeah, I think those videos by different organizations kind of raise awareness are they important.
So best way of engaging with kids who are already on the Internet so yeah, I think that's my contribution to this question.
 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, Bongani, that's really interesting because was we know from a lot of research, children are spending a lot of time watching videos and that's where they get a lot of the informal information and Amanda do you want to jump in and talk about what you see?
>> Amanda Third:  I just warchlted to echo Bongani's points about the importance of parents.
it's very true that a lot of children have not had adequate supervision during the pandemic because even though parents are not in the home they're preok pied can dealing with the fallout of the pandemic.  And I think there's real scope for us to think creatively here.  We also know a lot of parents don't have their own digital lit rasies are not strong enough to be able to support their children adds quatly and that's been bowrn on in the study on on online safety in the Pacific where parents often didn't have an understanding of how the Internet worked that they could communicate to their children.
And so I think children do have a tendency to explore technology and use it intuitively.  And find its strengths and limitations, they're very keen on doing that.  So I do wander if there's actually a really strong opportunity for us to think about how to use children as educators inside their own families.  To think about how we promote children to teach across generations some of those digital skills.  I think these are ‑‑ you know, I think if we come at these questions with a child participation, sometimes we can find little worm holes that open up perhaps different opportunities
>> MODERATOR: That's really interesting.  And one of the things we've brn thinking about at GSMA is also on inequality side, it's ‑‑ you know we've heard about how in countries where there is ‑‑ there are less people connected so where there may be coverage but there are a lot of barriers to people going online, one of those is often fear, fear of the parents who are worried about letting their children go online and also the fact that they don't have the literacy there.  And GSMA is a quick plug on development we have a program that deals with mobile Internet tools and trainings which is a mechanism by which mobile operators and some of the subSaharan Africa are doing this.  I have people out in the shops or communities who are helping adults learn more about how to use some of the tools.  And that's a first step.
If that were to be complimented with probably some kids who may not have access all the time to those technologies if they also can sort of double up that by teaching within the home, I think that might be a good step to start filling in digital inequalities.  Across different parts of the world.
>> MODERATOR: Natasha, I think there's another really interesting phenomena that is going on in many parts of the world and that is the device sharing phenomenon where families don't all have every member of the family doesn't have a mobile phone.  And I think you know device sharing comes with certain kinds of risks and pressures and children certainly speak about di device sharing as a constraint on their time online and they can be exposed to content that's not appropriate because they're viewing it on the device that's shared with all the family members sm but again, device sharing if we thought about it from a strength space, perspective, could really be Han esed to build lit rasies across generations and so I guess I'm quite interested to hear Ohaila and Bongani's views on device sharing and how that works and whether that might be a possibility. 
>>.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  I can quote an initiative we're wawnching right now and that's ‑‑ I mean we try to launch an initiative to collect devices, like people can donate these devices. we can get devices for children at schools because there is some schools they do research about the children that they have access to e‑learning and we find that many children male and female young girls don't have access to e‑learning because they have one device in the home.
And if there are more than one child so they will use the same device it will put them at high risk to use the same device as the parents use and children use and also keep ‑‑ I mean it will not give all the children the right to continue the e‑learning.  So we try to have this jish tiff to have one device for each child and we talk about families that are going to have large number.
This is what we try to do.
>> MODERATOR: Great initiative.  Bongani, device sharing.  How many ‑‑ how much is that been an issue people having only intermittent access to devices and how have you ‑‑ what have you come across on that aspect?  .
>> Bongani:  Please repeat that.  Don't worry.  Actually we need to move to closing statements.  We've got about 10 minutes left of this.  We'll come back to you Bongani at ‑‑ in a minute.
But perhaps we can move first to Uri to see finally what are your recommendations and closing sort of messages for participants here listening and you know what is the most important thing you want us to help move forward on these issues?
>> URI SADEH: One of the main things to remember is while COVID is a good opportunity to highlight issues we've discussed here today, especially when we're talking about child sexual exploitation online, this exists before COVID and it will exist after COVID.
it is not bad.  This has a lot of if you want media and got closer to people and awareness has been raised as to the extent of the dangers online for children and need for services to be accessible for victims, parents to be aware, et cetera, this is a very prevalent phenomena that is happening regularly.  We're talking here about the need for access to devices, access to Internet and indeed from the points of view of investigators working morning to evening on trying to save children who are sexually exploited using those devices.  This very same Internet and catch offenders that are spending their time onthose devices and network to try and harm kids.
It's not necessarily ‑‑ there's conflicting interests for the good and for the bad of children and youth in this connectivity.
I think the key things that we need to keep bringing up is the need the need to spend the funds or allocate the funds necessary to address child sexual exploitation on line to ensure that the law enforcement is equipped for it.  That it is accessible to children, that there are mechanisms in there for victims to raise their abuse to complain, to seek help.  There's clearer need for continuous cooperation between industry and plans if you want and law enforcement around this because there is no ennorse ourselves arrest ourselves out of this phenomena this is huge and collaboration of all of those to raise awareness, equip children with the tools they need to try to prevent more of the abuse and enable them to complain and enable law enforcement to then try to identify and bring an end to the abuse thank you.
>> Thanks, Uri.  I've just been reminded by the colleagues that we actually finish at 10 past so we have a little bit longer.  That's good.  My apologies for that.  But I but I wanted to then move back to Amanda actually.  Amanda, you heard UUri's call there for the technology, the cape be cts for law enforcement, for children to be online.
If you were to be extreme in your ask and request what would be your wish list, your really extreme wish list?  And how do we take more realistic steps to get there?  Right?  What are the small things we can do next that will start us down the path.  Sometimes the first step is the most important.
>> Amanda Third:  Yes.  Natasha,, I do hear Uri's call and indeed, I would echo his call in the sense that I think what the pandemic has really highlighted for us is that we require urgent action to address some of the challenges to children's rights increased use of technology during this time.
And I ‑‑ you know, I think it's very clear that the risks of harm for children are real and they're distressing and to be frank with you, I feel quite overwhelmed when I think about what it is that we need to do to resolve those problems.
But I also think that whilst I know we are all looking for a simple straightforward and immediate solution, actually, much of the work that we need to do is difficult and it's going to take time and thought.  And, of course, good solid processes for engaging children.  And we really have to commence this long term work now.
That's the urgent thing is to think about the long term future and commence the work now.
I think the issue of digital exclusion ‑‑ and I see that's coming up in the chat ‑‑ is a really critical one.  Regulatory and legislative frameworks.  Parents having access to meaningful resources that support them to guide their children.  Technology companies undertaking threat assessments and ensuring that children have what they need and children having the information and support that addresses the social and economic impacts of the pandemic on their lives.  But that's ‑‑ with that said, I think there's also an important opportunity in this pandemic for us all to ‑‑ this would be a big bold audacious hope, Natasha.  It's sometimes suggested and I think one way to think our way into this is that they want us to reflect briefly on the moon landing.  I know that sounds like a bizarre thing.
But what's sometimes suggested about the 196 soafn moon landing it was a pivotal idea of globalization around the world.  Broadcast live on television and in the process of being broadcast, the moon landing assembled something of an international audience and broadcast images of a globe without boundaries back to the international audience.  Compelling us to imagine ourselves in the part of a global community.
So in the same way under the pandemic children are engaging online as an international audience if you will to do every day things like going to school.  So for the first time in history there's a mechanism for children to think of themselves as a global constituency.  And I think there's a really radical and unprecedented possibility in that very fact.
Imagine if we could enable children to unite to address their common concerns, so imagine and enact social change at school as we see them begin to do around the climate change challenge.  What a powerful movement of change that would be.  And I guess we can only realize that by taking children's participation rights really seriously but it's tapping into that power that would be my one great hope for our current generation of children growing up in a pandemic.
>> MODERATOR: That is a really exciting prospect.  I must say the idea of children uniting for change.  Bongani, if you're connected at the moment, put your video on because you are in a way, one of those youth leaders the idea of children coming together and uniting around areas that can ‑‑ like climate change.  What do you think you can do.  What would be your call out to your fellow sort of youth leaders in terms of that.  And what can can we do as industry or academics or civil society to help bring that about and bring that about in safe manner.
 
>> I think it's a really great point that Amanda brought.  We need to Royce that the world is evolving.  The role of children and young people within the senior order has been evolved.  We've seen the youth activists how they're able to organize the Internet as a way of organizing themselves.  And also getting more people and more momentum in the activism.  So I think what's really important at the moment is for us to ensure that we'll be really ‑‑ we put everyone ‑‑ we champion the slogan of leave no one behind.
I think the slogan is always being used but when it comes to decision making platforms, young people only use as a token if I can say.
So organizations such as GSMA, UNICEF as well as government the way though have more engagement consultations may be with young people making decisions ensuring that young people do have seats at the table and yes, ensuring that young people do have a seat on the table and apart from that a critical issue that also came up on this discussion of issue of security as well as resources, I think as we've seen with this engagement that connectivity is a critical issue.
So we need to ensure that there is enough effort that I've been young people from across the road are able to engage and have proper connectivity in order to engage on the Internet.
And maybe my last point will touch on the issue that more kids are being involved, more kids are being ‑‑ starting their own YouTube channels and all that.  Hence, there is a drit Cal need, a role that government needs to play.  So it's not only ane issue of government doing things only but it's an issue of everyone understanding that they have a role to play and they need to come to the table.  So I think I'll leave it there for now.  And yeah.
 
>> MODERATOR: Yes, leave no one behind.  That's a really nice segue to UNICEF.  JSosi, if I can bring you back in you heard what Bongani was saying and I know UNICEF's idea that no one child is left behind is quite key.  Do you have any additional comments or findings sort of closing thoughts from UNICEF that you'd like to share with us?
>> JOSIANNE GALEA: Thank you for that.  Very, very briefly.  Mostly to thank the panelists for your contributions.  It's a very valuable to hear directly from you this terms of what you have seen Ohaila your work and Uri seeing those trends in that report.  Bongani thank you for sharing your directs experience and helping us think through what meaningful involvement really looks like and what the different roles for stakeholders are.
And Amanda, all the insights from your research.  It's great to hear such hope in some of the proposals andoid I can't see that we've heard that really seizing the opportunity and in this crisis while also being very fragmentic about the real risks and harms that are taking place and it would be great to follow up on parties pafnts.  Sorry we dptd have time to address everything that's come up in the chat but I've seen really interesting comments about curricula and digital and things I'm keen to continue this conversation and thank you for engaging in the topic and framing of the debate we put forward so looking forward to continuing this debate in the future.
>> MODERATOR: Okay.
Great, we're not finished yet.  Oaila, I want to bring you back in.  Okay.
So in terms of your closing statements or your really extreme wish list, what would you really, number one, want people to be doing, not just from governments and policy makers but also as industry and everyone listening on the call.  Please go ahead. 
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  Thank you.  I think it's very important to keep the child help line running in each country.  It's the children trust and children can talk with the high confidentiality.  They can express themselves so keep the child help line running and support them to continue their work is very important.
Also, to help low income governmental to empower the education system.
E‑learning efnlg indication system that children can continue their learning and to see children dropping from the school and not continue their learning.
Also for the parents, like to to be more close to your children, to listen to them, to talk to them and not to talk above them.  Because children, parents spend a lot of time talking about their children but listening to them.
So to listen to the children is very important.  I hope that we can move in a safe way from the pandemic because I think the word of the child will be will be different for the future.  They are with a lot of information to be safe in this world.  Thank you.
 
>> MODERATOR: IGF has issued a voluntary commitment that will further the golds of the IGF and also the digital cooperation roadmap.  Is there something that either you as an individual or your organization will do in the next year as a sort of new commitment that you are ‑‑ that you'd like to share with us?  .
>> Yeah, I talked about the initiative of the laptop or the iPad for each child.  And it's an initiative that we launch as voluntary work.  I mean it's not as part of the organization work.  So we can share this niche tifer with you.  And give you information how we did this.
Because we try to ask that inside the community to support this initiative because it's important that each child have access to learn.
And this initiative is voluntary work that I do with other colleagues, you know, so I can share this experience with you.
 
>> MODERATOR: All right.  Thank you.  There is actually a link on the IGF2020 site.  I think Josi will put it in the chat where people about can record their commitments as well.  I think the panelists here we'll talk about our commitments but also everyone on the call please have a look at that and share any commitments, even now and in our chat or also on the IGF link.  So Uri, just closing over to you, briefly, on voluntary commitments.
>> URI SADEH: Is there something that you as an individual personally or something that your crimes against children unit voluntarily in this way? putting him on the spot there.
>> URI SADEH:   We can will continue our daily restless struggle for this ‑‑ in fact as I stated, everyone is overwhelmed with the amount of protection that is needed.  And we do it daily.  I commend my team for the having to face the material that we have to face daily, they have to face daily, which is not something your brain is prepared to face.  I think.
And takes time to cope with.
And I think what drives us all is the knowledge that we are actually struggling to safeguard the child at the end of the road.  And to put an offender behind bars if needed so they do not harm further children.
So I would ‑‑ my commitment would be limited to that, to promoting the protection of children and their rights.  And through continuous work of INTERPOL's crimes against children unit
>> MODERATOR: It really is terrific work and full admiration to you and all of your team and all those around the world who are working through the sorts of material that you have to deal with.
Really, it's really appreciated and another thing I would say is the report that you put out in September of this year was really interesting and as things change, if they change that would be really welcome by all of us so can keep on our side assessing what we're doing and see where we need to do more.  So thank you very much.  I'll pass over to Amanda, Amanda, do you have a voluntary commitment or something that you'd like to share?
>> Amanda Third:  ICANN Uri I'm feeling on the spo the but gut instrifntle we need to find ways to realize children's partition pace rights under the children's physical distancing, so my commitment would be to explore that question between now and the next IGF and to report back.
>> MODERATOR: Okay, thank you.  I think just to share with the audience as well am I personal commitment.  I'll come do you Bongani.  Great to see you're still on.  My commitment is similar to Amanda is around participation and listening to the youth voices so within GSMA continually encouraging our leaders to get young voices on the agenda and at our events to listen to them and to encourage business leaders and CEO tion of our members to do more to listen to young voices and hear directly from them about what they need.  That would be my commitment.  So Bongani, I'm going to leave you with the final say as the youngest on our panel.  So please just give us some insight into any voluntary commitment you'll be doing also think wider with your university, thank you.  I think you're still on mute, Bongani.
>> Bongani:  Thank you, once again.  And I'm really sorry once again for the technical issues today.
>> MODERATOR: No worries gives us a reminder of how important it is to keep you and others like you connected.
>> Bongani:  True.  I think I have three commitments that I'll volunteer to.  One is continue sharing and creating stories.  For raising awareness on the Internet.  So being in a different social media platforms.  This will be engaging directly with young people and issues that they face as well as safe to use on Internet.  My second commitment is hopefully continue having more road shows with around the country with UNICEF.  That way I get to engage more with young people and kids.  And utilize that more on sharing very important safe use of the Internet.
With kids because they're the ones who are more volumenerble to the Internet.
And basically share positive information with them as well.  I think my third and last commitment is I volunteer my time for organizations such as GSMA as well as UNICEF and other organizations in consulting with them, sharing our experiences as young people.  And what we can possibly do moving forward.  So yeah, those are my three commitments and yeah, thank you so much for having me as well today.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I think that says it all so we ask for voluntary commitment from everyone and from our imrowng youth speaker we get three commitments.  I mean what more can I say?  Thank you so much Bongani.  And thank you to all our panelists.  Is it has been a really great session.  I hope you found it interesting.  And please get in contact with us if you want to share more.  We will continue to be talking about these issues.  So thanks all, very much.  And I hope the other IGF sessions go as well.  Great, thank you.  Bye.
 
**  WS 289 Women and the platform Economy(Looking for Zoom link) testing for captioning.  Had to recognize some safety delivery workers that have trade union are represented by that and then we have floarnlg new type of which is called app which is process that is really interesting because it's workers that are struggling to have a new a new union be registered in the ministry of labor that is for representing all the apps.  Nonetheless one thing that is really ‑‑ that it's really bringing hope in the trade union process of the platform economy in Latin America is how they are becoming regional.  We have some ‑‑ we have had some experiences of trikes that are all over the region at the same moment in the same day.  And so we have strikes coming from Ecuador, Klum Bongani, Argentina and Chile, all the same day making a regional movement to protect the working cons of these workers.
Bogota.
>> Their their representation of Argentina and Ecuador is remarkable how women are leading the process of manage who have the trade union being shown and having demands of workers being put out so government tried to find a solution for these workers public opinion started talking about workers because they are in really bad conditions.  Leapt with struggles and need solution to the state.  In Argentina we're preparing a law to find an answer for workers and this will give them collective rights but also will do if you work less than 32 hours a week, then you have a more flexibles what you can do for timetables and what you can choose and also you have minimum coverage and if you work more than 32 hours, we're trying to prepare to put it in Congress and approve it in the next couple months they should be rights as worker but also the representation as a trade union improvement in artificial intelligence teefn ain Chile also the struggles and organization of workers is really answering some of the demands and they are also gaining some right but it's all through the judicial sector.  They have to case the file and have to make it a trial and gain rights, case by case.  And there's not ‑‑ even though there's some projects of law going in the Congress they didn't find a solution yet.  In some countries like alcohol ba this is not in the table.  The governments do not want to speak about ‑‑ Colombia.  They say they're entrepreneurs but I think ‑‑
>> Sophia, would you rap up in a minute.
>> Yeah.  I'm wrapping up.
>> Okay
S occasioner FIA:  I think the reg nam struggle is bringing flowers into this struggle because some countries do not want to answer to these demands and to the trade union boom and in general in Latin America the regional union, the regional strategy that these workers are having with the feminist movement specifically is going to bring answers I think in the next couple of months and years to come.
 
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for that Sofia overview of worker strategies as well as some gains made in the Latin America context which you already pointed out to give some kind of hope for workers globally.  So next we have looking at issues around autonomy.  So researcher, social entrepreneur and coordinator of social law project at the University of western Cape and she's also project manager for digital platform cooperative project.  Over to you.
 
>> F AI RU Z: Mullagee *   It's afternoon here and thanks to the previous speakers, I wasn't entirely sure how the program was run but I'm pleased that I've been left for the last input because I do believe that autonomy depends access and action that will determine the nature of ought on me.  Access and agency.  As I preparing this I thought it was necessary when we look at how to imagine social protection of platform work, my background, my research has been with domestic work sector in South Africa mainly.  And familiarity with domestic work in other parts of Africa.
And I think it's important also to note that you know South Africa was one of the few countries to have legislation specifically for domestic workers as early as 2012.  Played a very important role in the adoption of convention win eat 9.  That as a background alsos in terms of when we're reimagining social protection in the age of platform work, we assume that there has been a shift.  And I felt it's important to just reflect on what that shift has been.  We talked about you know we come from a kind of organizational work ‑‑ organization of work in terms of what we referred to as standard work.
Somebody goes to an office or whatever the case may be.  And legislation has been sort of very much developed around standard work and organization of work in a very standard kind of way.
Then we saw a shift to non‑standard work with agencies, sort of intervening in that relationship process.   You know, so taking the direct relationship between employer and employee away.  Until we find ourselves in this situation referred to as the platform economy.  And bear in mind that my you know what sort of lies behind my thinking is very much the domestic work sector which is predominantly women in South Africa.
So what has been the digital impact.  I think there's a lot of mist fiction of technology which I think also clouds the issues that we've been dealing with.  And so the challenges and over time from standard work to platform work what we've seen is the evolution of labor acts and Social Security rights.
So that is sort of permeated the shift that you see to where we are now.  And what does that really mean.  Economic and social exclusion, unemployment, poverty and hunger.  And sadly, the pandemic has amplified those issues and the cracks in our society.
At the same time we do believe ‑‑ and having worked in the sector which has often been described as hard to organize sector, we see the technology as an opportunity as a tool for transformation.  So on one hand we see it as a tool for transformation.  And on the other hand, we see it as an opportunity for reorganizing work and society with improved collective bargaining because we've seen out collective bargaining has also been eroded.  So.
So I'm pleased to hear what's happening in Latin America.  And the kind of solidarity which has been both among platform workers there.
One of the big issues and it's come up here.  I think Sofia mentioned it.  Is this notion of misclassification.  The misclassification of workers as independent contractors.  And that obviously revolves around the relationships and it's about ‑‑ we talk about misclassification in terms of relationships based on existing laws.
So we see with platform owners, the obfuscation of employment relations.  They've given up the responsibility as employers.  They argue and we've seen it in our platforms with domestic workers as well.
They are kind of driven by algorithms, and they can turn you off if they establish a patterns of organization so they just discontinue or disconnect you from the platform.  They found that the same would apply for workers who become ill, you know, you just get deactivated from the platform.  When you inform your company that you've ‑‑ that you're pregnant.  And in total contravention of the laws.  So those are relationships.  The misclassification enabled platform owners to have the kind of power that we've seen exerted over workers acrosser the world.  But we've also seen challenges to that kind of misclassification.
So in terms of this relationship you have a platform owner, and you have the end users.  And you have the providers of goods and services what we would refer to as workers.  I've spoken about some of the deficits, the social prediction deficits created by this new way of work.  Exclusion, we see greater unemployment.  Digital inequality itself is exclusionary.  Many platform workers are less skilled, you know, your more informal workers, exclusion is a big problem.  Remuneration another big problem.
You know, platform workers are made to be we are told constantly, in terms of the domestic work in this country the minimum wage is very, very low and platform companies will tell you but we pay our workers way above the minimum wage.  They don't tell you that they have now excluded ‑‑ may seem like you're learning a lot more on a gig by gig basis but you've been totally excluded from the kind of social predictions that the law and labor law in the country and constitution allows for.  So you're made to believe that you're earning more when in fact you're actually have been excluded from other social benefits.
Working conditions again it's made ‑‑ workers are made to believe that you have great flexibility.  But what is not communicated or it's kind of how people are fooled to believe that you're flexible.  You can work when you like.  But what in fact happens isation of work ‑‑ fragmentation of work.  On one hand workers are required to carry the cost between gigs which doesn't happen.  A standard employment situation.  For that to organize another deficit which you know curtails the ability to conditions companies name an algorithm.  It's all about the tick.  In domestic work in women's work we also we very diminishment reducing work we see this constantly cleaning services and perpetuating old cleavages.  So you know, where do we go from here.  How do we ensure greater protections.   You know, based on literature, based on our domestic workers of the year's ‑‑ I'd also like to point out that the issues that domestic workers have faced in the 10 years that I've been working in the sector, are exactly the same issues that workers are facing today.  Definitely of organizing fragmentation.  The fact that work is so optimized, which makes it hard.  You don't know who the employer is.  You are running to create and ensure that you have an interim that organizing ‑‑ you know becomes secondary to your survival.
So in terms of going forward, what kind of regulated frameworks can be designed to protect platform workers.
And you believe promotion of rights and protection should be the underlying feature of the new ‑‑ way regulation isn't adequate when new regulation is required.  So a pushback against this super exploitation that we've witnessed with platforms in recent times.
So promotion of rights and protection which actually seriously pushes back this super exploitation, appropriate regulation of work especially platforms, and then that needs to be placed on the agenda once again it doesn't matter whether you are in a platform or what is a platform anyway?  The issue of misclassification ‑‑
>> MODERATOR: Sorry, just ask you to wrap up now in another minute, Fairuz.
>> FAI RU Z MULLAGEE:  Just quickly in terms of principles that should govern such a prork, preliminaries of fair work, principles that counter act monopolistic behavior.
And if I can just wrap up, you know, and say again, autonomy based on principles of fairness as the outcome of access and agency would require organized and empowered platform workers.
And thank you for the time.
 
>> Thank you, thank you for taking us through some key structural challenges around the needs of work ‑‑ nature of work as well as some of the solutions and ways to go forward.
So I would just request all the participants to type on chat if you have any preferences for the breakout sessions that you want to join.
So there are three breakout rooms and each of the speakers will be in the breakout rooms that they spoke about.  So there's one on agency.  There's one on autonomy and one on access.
You can just type in the chat if you have a preference for any of these.
And I would request Maria to just assign randomly if there are people who haven't shared their preferences as well.
So we have about 20 minutes left in the session.  So we'll take about 15 minutes.  And I would ask Maria to bring us back with five minutes to close.
(Breakout session) the law gives you all the rights of the national law but with the flexibility, let's say if you work two hours, then your employer should be putting the amount of money to the Social Security that corresponds to those two hours.  And if you want Social Security, you need to pay the rest.  And if you want to enter to healthcare system for example.
And for example vacations, you have vacations but only for those two hours that you work.  So it's like they give you a personage of the amount of hours you work in a month.  And the salary also it's a calculus made by our minimum wage law.  And it's a little bit above the minimum wage but you need to have the salary according to the amount of hours you work.  And the only thing that we did is that we put a clause that says you cannot reflect assignment that the platform is giving to you because otherwise the problem will be that workers will say I have a minimum wage but I do not take any jobs.  And the company has to pay me nonetheless.
So we said that you can't unless you case a file ‑‑ you file a case saying that you don't want to do some specific delivery because the customer is really bad and harasses you or ever.  In that case you can but can it not say no.  You are too far away and whatever.  If you work more than 32 hours a week, you work more than 32 hours a week, then you have the right to ask for all the coverage that our national law has.  And so in that case, the company has to pay you full Social Security, full healthcare, full full wage, you have the right to have vacation as normal as any other, woulder in Argentina and you have to work more than 32 hours a week.  If you work less, then you have this flexible type of system where you get paid by a percentage of what you work.
And .
>> Sorry, Sofia, I wanted to know about the women workers.  So this law is for all the workers.  But what about ‑‑ what are the issues and concerns about women workers there?
>> With women workers there's a specific clauses in the law that says that the algorithms cannot discriminate against them and that the ministry of labor can see the algorithm and source code whenever they want to.  To check if there's discrimination against women and if there's an algorithmic bias.  And also you can choose your schedules according to your care work that you have at home.  Even if you are into the more than 32 hours a week system, you can choose your schedules.  And you can conciliate the productive and reproductive work.  In case you work more than 32 hours.
So that's the answers that we gave to women.  To check the source code and to check the algorithm because there's a lot of algorithmic bias and that's the answer that we gave to women.  This is being discussed.  It's not approved yet.  You cannot say that this is the case for the Argentine law because it's in this discussion and they're preparing this to send it to Congress.  It's not in Congress yet.  But we're trying to make a solution for them in terms of technical issues and in terms of care work.
 
>> MODERATOR: Sofia, do you think this will address the issues that were highlighted in the presentation around unfair pay as well as company policies that are disallowed women workers from designing schedules where they can take up work in the night for example. 
>> SOFIA:  Well I don't think a law can answer all the problems but, if the ministry of labor closed the right to check the algorithm and check evaluation system, maybe you can stop some of the problems like the pay problem and algorithmic bias.  But the fact that women tend to choose night hours because during the day ‑‑ thaptz not something the law can solve.  You need a more social and national policy to address that.  That the problem is that you don't have care networks to give ‑‑ to leave your kids.  That's the problem.  You cannot go through a law and platform workers but it should be solved in another way trying to build care networks.
Because that's the main issue that women do not have a place to leave their children so they have to work in crazy hours.
And so I think it's not the answer you should not be looking at the platform law but to other type of instruments.
 
>> We have two more minutes if anybody has any other questions or things to discuss?  If not, I can just talk about another issue that we were looking at in the Pakistan i context.  We found that there was a solution to the fact that platforms often outsource, there's a message to return to the main session.  But I'll just quickly finish.  We saw that in the Pakistan i context a lot of women were continuing to remain with on demand platforms because instead of outsourcing indirect costs like transportation, the main platforms there specifically for domestic workers are covering those indirect costs such as transportation such as using data packs in that.  So that actually went the long way in retaining workers on the platforms.  And we hadn't seen this before in other countries.  So I wanted to mention that as a strategy.  Retain women workers.
As a message to return to the main group, I think we can just click on leave room and we can return to the main session.
Thanks to Sofia and everyone else for this discussion.
 
>> Can we take an extra five minutes?
>> Okay, thanks.
We'll just wait another minute for everyone to come back.  And then we can start with the report back.
So just for people who are joining in now, we are doing a short report back.  Because it's okay for us to run over by around 10 minutes.
So we'll start with the session on agency if that's okay. 
>> TANDON:  You want me to speak.
>> We'll just do a short report back, I meant access, not agency.  Sorry.
>> SOFIA.
>> AAY USH:  Yeah, so one of the key questions that came up was around sort of what skills would be important in especially in light of the sort of barriers to ‑‑ and then sort of enabling effect of participation in the platform economy.  And none of us were very well placed to completely answer that question.
 
Yeah.  We spoke about how we have the ability to do financial transactions continues to be an important problem.
Someone spoke about how learning for government when it comes to getting for using digital application is different dpr that for men and women.  That is smag that needs to be factored in.  We spoke about how it is important to further non‑technical without which they receive ‑‑ more and more unavailable to men especially ‑‑ and this is a finding especially from our experience at the grassroots.  And then we spoke about what can we do to make sort of access to the platform economy more sort of equitable in terms of design the platforms or behavior or even government action.  We ‑‑ the group specifically about how we need to talk about ‑‑ talk more about how accessing it is not regularly helpful and as someone pointed out in presentation does not lead to effective participation.  And yeah and how the experience ‑‑ how sort of the offline norms sort of that country existed and structuring of society already precludes access to phones, access to financial agency.  And how the SNG model could be an effective one and someone else talked about an interesting point again on how men learn from other men but the rest of the thought was we got interrupted by us coming into the main.  If you'd like to finish thoughts on chat, please do.
 
>> Thanks for that would Sofia or anyone else want to report back on the second group on agency?  .
>> I think you can go ahead
>> Okay. great.
>> Tandon:  Great.  So there was a session on agency we were largely discussing Argentinean law and soaf I don't was telling us about how the process actually came about so there was a lot of national coverage and attention paid to workersish eufs in the platform economy and after that gained traction there was some discussion and consultation around not putting workers in the sort of national law because that might be the easiest solution the national labor law that might be an easy solution but but a lot of workers were migrants or students and they wanted the flexibility that the platform economy was bringing.  So the draft law that came up after this consultation process sort of prorated some of these benefits such as taking or getting social security contributions from employers.  These are all ro rated and salary as well, of course, are prorated to the number of hours that you are working.  If you're working more than 32 hours a week, you get all the rights that are available in the national labor law.
And with regards to women workers in particular, there is a provision for an audit which would allow ministries to look at whether or not there are gender biases and women workers can choose try to make their schedules more flexible even if they are working for more than 32 hours.  They will try to balance the productive work.
So this was all insight on the Argentinean law by Sofia which was very useful.
And yeah, we briefly discussed some industry strategies as well but this was a lot of our discussion.
I'll hand it over to the third group to do report back as well.
 
>> Hi, everyone.  I can report back ‑‑ if Fairuz if that's okay with both of you.
So we had ‑‑ we mainly focused on the question of what kind of regulatory framework could we design to make platforms more accountable.  It was generally agreed that regulatory frameworks are essential.  But only if their implemented properly and yeah, the implementation of such frameworks was raised as something that's quite difficult to do and there was a focus on South Africa context where it was mentioned that in South Africa particularly for the domestic work sector there have been specific laws created to protect domestic workers.  However, these laws haven't had the best implementation which kind of limits their effectiveness.
There was also a discussion around kind of what Fairuz mentioned in her presentation.  We really need better working agency and access to improve laws under implementation.
So both workers and users of the service need to be empowered to demand more equitable use of the services.  Unless that level of organization is improved, difficult to implement the kind of changes we'd like to see.
Moe mentioned there's been a lot of movement in the platform economy organization space particularly in India over the past several years.  Also in other countries as well.  In India there are several unrecognized worker collectives for gig workers.  But still without improving worker agency these laws are not going to change.
At the end Fairuz mentioned that fair work's code of good practice is a good starting point for considering how to improve the platform economy in terms of contract management pay and representation.
And that, like, discussing the fair work principles in kind of such a setting as this with like minded individuals is a good place to start to kind of push for better regulatory frameworks.
I hope I covered everything, if not, then please step in, someone.
 
>> I think that brings us to the end of our session.  And it was really interesting.  The presentation about the nuances of women's access to platform work you know the way access doesn't guarantee good work.  Thank you to Sofia for bringing us insights from what's happening in Latin America and how worker agency is being rethought of and immunization efforts going on there.  Thank you to Fairuz telling us about autonomy and how access and agency is really needed to forward that and the principles of fair work need to be followed in order to improve working conditions for everyone.
Thank you, everyone, for joining us and participating in the breakout rooms and for all your contributions as well.  I do have to ask if anyone would like to make voluntary commitments for the IGF.  If you would like to we can put the form in the chat box where you can sign up.  This will run for the next year.  So until the next IGF session.
Thanks, everyone.  Thank you.
Mawii
 
** Main session.
Testing for captioning.  Testing for captioning.  Tatiana Tropino.
 
>> TATIANA TROPINO: .
>> I'll kick the ball and give it to Hunan he'll be Hanane but over to Hanane.
>> Thank you very much.  Tatianna.  I'm just waiting for I'm waiting for the sign we're ready to go.  If we're ready to.
>> HUNANE:  Welcome to the main session on the IGF coalition.
My name is Hanane Boujemi and I'll be comoderating this with my colleague Tatiana Tropino.  The main session of dynamic cocollisions which is part of the intersessional work of the Internet Governance Forum in its first virtual edition will focus on a theme that is basically closed to all of us at the moment we're all battling a local pandemic and it becomes evidenceds that the Internet plays a key role in our lives in general.  So this session will focus on the socioeconomic recovery after COVID‑19 and more specifically the role of dynamic coalitions.
Without further ado I'm going to go through setting the scene for this session will include four phases each phase is focusing on a specific thing.  So we have digital divide.  Following education and empowerment and the last one would be the future of the IGF.  So this is pretty much a multi‑layered discussion because we were trying to identify the future of the Internet and its role post pandemic and the role of BCs facilitating the work needed to make sure you know that's all the issues at stake.  Abeing addressed and input of the dynamic coalitions with regards to the future of the Internet Governance Forum.  And the role it can play there as well.
We do have most of the dynamic coalitions substantive papers to contribute to the session represented in the panel.  Each speaker will have two minutes to ask specific policy questions.  We do have a timer.  Myself and my colleague Tatianna which will be displayed on our iPhone.  I hope you can see it.  It's literally two minutes.  The conference is structured in an organic way.  There's also the opportunity for the SM D attendees to ask questions after each phase.  In terms of the format, was highlighted earlier but by the secretariat that this session is broadcasted live on YouTube on Facebook Live as well and on the U.N. channel.
Sth this is a webinar format which means most of the participants are not able to see who is on the list of the participants in this session.
But I'm pleased to inform you that we have 87 participants.  Fifty‑two attendees and 35 technical staff, panelists and support team and translators and the interpreters, thank you very:  We do have the opportunity this session is actually interpreted into the main seven languages of the U.N. 
Right.  So without further ado, I think we would like to give the floor to our panelists and maybe I'll kick off by asking one of the key questions on this session is the need ‑‑ what do we need?  Obviously, COVID‑19 highlighted a significantly a number of beyond the usual digital divide that we were talking about.  So we realized that the Internet is crucial but it came with a huge disadvantage to a number of communities and luckily we do have many DCs representing these communities across the world.
So inclusion is crucial in this case.
And the barriers that we're encount ring beats at the heart of the work that is being done by the dynamic coalition on gender.  So I would like to start with Sumita because we tend to give priority to access equally to gender and maybe she can take us through what are the first priorities the governmented should focus on worldwide when can comes to sack tackling the issue of gender digital divide in the context of COVID‑19.  And I'll take the opportunity to remind you that all the sessions, the panelists are advised or you know ‑‑ it is good to voluntarily contribute with a policy recommendation towards the issue that you are speaking to.  So we can gather all this input and present it later on to the Secretariat.  So, if you can, consider that in your answer, that would be great.  So you can speak to now from your experience, what are the first priorities that the government should tackle when it comes to addressing the issue of gender digital divide in the context of COVID‑19?  Smita?
>> SMITA V.
>> .  Thank you, I hope I'm audible.  I'm having a power issue here.  Thank you for answering this question and it's a gh way to kick start this conversation because in all honesty, you can guarantee meaningful access to everyone how are we talking about Internet governance and information for that?
>> I think in the context of COVID‑19, what has happened is that a lot of lived realities, a lot of realities around access to digital spaces has just become amplified.  And saidly it's a spotlight on it.  It's not that these issues came up now.  It's just that you're noticing it now.  The governments are feeling the impact of lack of access for example.  It's not access.  Right?  For example, beyond that there's a gender digital divide.  But the thing is that one of the impact of this?  And also can you really tackle this only at the point of COVID at the point of a crisis.  One of the reasons behind the digital divide is not the lack of access, yes, I did participate in last year with the Internet.  More importantly we need to have issues which govern lack of access.  Right?  And important issues of patriarchy of misogyny, of you know language divides, language barriers, all of these are core issues and of course much accessibility.  Of accessibility for persons with disabilities.  Without addressing these issues there's no point on distributing orn laptops that's been done it didn't work for a reason.  Another thing is when we talk about the digital divide, we often start the conversation with a binary agenda.  Right?  Where we talk about men and women.
Gender is not just that.  There's more literature now and more conversation lived realities that say that gender is not just ‑‑ it's a whole universe.  So when you talk about gender divide can we stop is another question.  And what happened when we stop the binary.  One of the big issues happening and it wasn't acknowledged is that a lot of ‑‑ I know this for a fact in India ‑‑ suddenly lost access to very important medication that is positive people who lost access to medication and transfer who were transitioning and lost access to HIV medication but none of this would be spoken about publicly.
This is small organizations which were working to then bridge this divide.
And finally, in the situation that COVID where information is key, and a lot of the governments took the route of the Internet or apps, so‑called apps as a way to curtail COVID‑19.  But how will that work when so much of the country is unconnected and doesn't have meaningful access?  So many people in your country don't have ways to access mobile phones.  Small cities would rely on small mobile shops in a day there was a lockdown and they didn't have aaccess to charge their phone.
>> Thank you, these are very good points and I hope we'll have the opportunity to come back to you so you can elaborate further on the points you mentioned.  I just would like to remind the attendees, we have around 70 people now that we have the opportunity to ask questions and to the panelists.  But you can use I think the Q&A screen that you have on the ‑‑ on the Zoom window to ask your questions if you have any.  We will try to make this session as interactive as possible.
So without further delays, I'll just kindly like to ask the panelists to stick to the 2002 minutes I'm going to move immediately to Gerry who 12 working on DC and how the COVID‑19 crisis highlighted for the issue that speaks to this DC.  So what do you think the priorities of the governments should be in the light of the current crisis?
>> Thank you.  As I ‑‑ 20 or 30 second warning so I don't go over my time.  I'll break that question down into two things, one of course is discriminations that people with disabilities have built over the last while and then maybe advantages including people with disabilities.  And after that we'll come to policy questions.
So first let's say that there are 1.3 billion people with disabilities in the world.  That's about 1 in seven people or else the entire population of China, equivalent to the population China.  That's a huge amount of people.  As we know that access to digital services and products disproportionate advantage to those who are strong access but there are eye disproportionate barrier to those who don't.  This is true for everyone but particularly people with disabilities because we typically do not have access to alternatives.  COVID‑19‑related lockdown has moved the whole society more on to digital areas but we want to highlight areas where we as people with disabilities really don't have access.
So there's inaccessibility of key Web sites, of key services over the Internet the likes of online shopping sites and we don't have access to the alternative.  Public information including COVID‑19 related information is often created very quickly so normal accessibility scrutiny doesn't take place and we don't often have access to that.  Terms of support education and employment, very, very key because if you can't work or you can't get your education during COVID as other people do, then you lose out and that can be a lifelong disadvantage.
People with disabilities are often poor and have less access to the likes of broadband and the latest and greatest tools.  Particularly in rural cells geographically.
>> Thank you, Gerry that was two minutes on the dot if you'd like to stop there.  But you raise important points about the importance of having accessible Web sites.  I think that is a very good point and I hope that you know the different providers take the lead to adjust their platforms so people with disabilities can access them.  Thank you very much for your contribution.  And I'm going to speak to another maybe related topic which can loop us a little bit in terms of the educational aspects that the libraries provide especially in an era of a pandemic.  Valencia is representing the D.C. on public access in libraries and maybe she'd like to elaborate further on the efforts deployed during this time.
>> VanENSIYA.
>> .  Thank you, looking at the difference ways that libraries and public access facilities have adapted to continue to support digital inclusion even when they're doors were closed has pointed to possible considerations and for us actually we could see these as falling alongside three key elements that empower people to make full and effective use of the Internet.  That's connectivity, that's skills and that is content.  So in terms of connectivity, one possible consideration is the continued demand for and use of public access facilities across various countries, different measures from lap toch and mobile hotspot loans to reopening public spayings was public Wi‑Fi when possible or free computer use for essential purposes during lock dunes with an employment.  These are measures that have been taken to support and speak to the demand and help meet users' needs and these can be important for groups who are more vulnerable.  They're often used for job seeking for benefits and other essential tasks and priority that we'd like to draw attention to of course is supporting users who may not always have decent quality connection or devices to carry out essential tasks at home.  Second r second consideration as you have pointed out digital skills of course.  We have seen promising examples of how traditional skills programming in libraries can be delivered remotely from Trinidad and to be ago 0 weekly library ‑‑ virtual 2020 in London able to offer many, many others.  With digital skills clearly essential, focus and a question and a priority for us is having and supporting entry points, additional skills skills, learning alongside formal structures, this can help reach a lot of people especially adults who may not have access to such learning opportunities elsewhere and finally the third element is digital content.
In so many countries where connectivity per misted libraries saw a steep growth in demand for digital content and they significantly broadened their opportunities for demand.  It has been a key resource for study, research, work, you will skilling, and simply well‑being during the pandemic.
>> MODERATOR: Excellent.  Thank you.  Very good points.  Very concise and I will invite the tendies to use the Q&A window please to ask your questions.  Take this opportunity to have an interaction with the speakers, I know we have other DCs represented and I think they can speak to the possible recommendations to governments and what should change actually in the context of COVID‑19 when it comes to the specific work they're doing.
And we do have June Parrish with us from IRPC coalition and I wonder if you have any input with this regard.  June, you have two minutes.  Thank you.
June Parris:  Can you repeat what the input is.
>> It's about what do you think based on the work you're doing at IRPC the government should prioritize to guarantee digital inclusion.
>> June Parris.  The IRPC is based on human rights and we focus mainly on ‑‑ in our charter and this is human rights and governments are corrected ‑‑ connected in a very strong way.  I mean as we're going into lockdown and online environment took life, the fundamental rights and freedoms in a virtual space is paramount.  Tackth the digital divide is no urgent need on access and it becomes crucial being able to work, study and social engagements so it's vital to ensure that government responses to the crisis go hand in hand with international human rights and norms so as to fulfill the obligations to promote and up hold fundamental rights and freedoms both online and offline.
Unfortunately, many governments have seen the outbreak as an opportunity to implement more repressive measures from using artificial intelligence, increased surveillance and data collection to restrictions on freedom of expression and information and discrimination online.
We in the IRPC are looking at all this and covering what is going on with COVID and hopefully we can make some sort of change in regards to this.
 
>> MODERATOR: Excellent, well thank you very much, June, for this contribution and that was two minutes, bang on.  We will wrap up the first phase on digital divide and just to sum up quickly the contributions we had so far from Smita which highlighted the societyal influences when it comes to addressing issues such as gender, digital divide.  We did have also hear how important it is for Web sites to guarantee accessibility to people who are ‑‑ who have limited accessibility issues.  Also the importance of public spaces and libraries generating energy and raising awareness about specific issues and finally the human rights based approach and importance of digital rights in a crisis and the phases like COVID‑19.  So I invite these panelists, our esteemed panelists to write their recommendations so we can pass them on as an outcome of this session later on to the secretariat and that brings us to 25 minutes that we dedicated to the first phase of this session on digital technologies and I'm going to give the floor to my colleague Tatianna to take the lead on phase 2 which will speak to the fundamental rights and freedoms in the phase of COVID‑19.  Tatianna, the floor is yours.
>> Thank you very much Hanane.  I'd like to provide a wrap upup to phase one.  There is a question on the Q&A.  I think this is from Vanncyia what has been the extent of libraries and community centers during COVID.  If you have the ability to type up the answer, please do.  If not, we can come back to this question later because we do have another aspect where coalition of public ‑‑ on access to public layers is going to be included.  The second phase we have is actually focused on human rights.  Fundamental freedoms and protection of fundamental rights.  And we wanted to ask the coalitions working in this area.  I know almost any work of anyone would relate to rights and freedoms to some extent.  But some of them are dealing with these issues directly like for example, you heard from June intervention.
How governments and private industry are dealing with handling and promoting human rights during the COVID pandemic and they're not always doing well.  So based on the contribution provided by June, I would like to move here to sustainability.  Your paper focuses a lot on the post COVID recovery.
And on journalists and what you call info demics.  I wanted to ask you from your perspective, what are the main issues during the pandemic and hopefully on the road to recovery.  I believe that we have Michael who is going to speak from this coalition.  Michael, you have two minutes.
>> Michael:  Thank you for having us.  Essentially there are a few things to stress in this particular time.  Oghia.  And that is that indeed, journalism at the moment and news media in the world are facing really an extinction level event where, according to one survey for instance that was just very recently released, essentially even though readership audience reach has been up over the past ever since the beginning started, almost 80% of small and independent journalism outlets around the world are reporting a significant drop in revenue.  Why is this important and why is it relatedded to Internet governance?  It has to do with the, one, so much of what is happening online is as it relates to journalism and news media, it means ‑‑ includes the fact that funding is under threat because of changing advertising revenues and market Dynamics that impact the journalism sector.  But also there's a critical ‑‑ rather ‑‑ there's a critical lack of good.
>> We lost Michael.
>> Michael OGHIA:  One thing we say ‑‑ can you hear me?
>> TATIANA TROPINO: Now, yes.
>> .
>> One thing we like to say a lot, an axiom we like to a is that you cannot have press freedom without the press.  So one of the things we're dealing with at the moment is the fact that ‑‑ but in order to actually enable press freedom, we need to have sustainable journalism and that is exactly what I'm trying to ‑‑ is our point that it is under threat in part and we need support from governments, technology organizations, technology companies, advertising firms in order to shore up the sector as a whole.
Hanane:  I can't see how much time I have left.
>> Zero.
>> That's a start for now.  Happy to take more. 
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you.  I'm sure you can see if there are questions, I hope there are questions for discussion.  Olivier you will have the floor and you're going to speak about digital di viet and connected to fundamental rights so you have the flow of the session here.  Before we go to Olive yay, I would like to give the floor to child online protection because we're talking about human rights and fundamental freedoms but there's a big debate going on about how pandemics actually affected children.  So how do we protect them online.  What is being done by your coalition and in general.
John Carr, the floor is yours.
>> John CARR:  Thank you very much.  I hope we get a chance to come in and strongly support the things Michael was saying in the previous session because that absolutely raises questions about clirn and young people's rights..  Just briefly I say you sometimes hear it said that professional journalism is not dead.  You just have to pay for it now.
Well, you know what?  I have a number of subscriptions to the economist, new scientists.  They cost a lot of money.  Children don't and can't pay to hear the truth.  Would they rely on professional journalism, governed by the ethics of journalism and governed by the laws of liable and slander that have always governed NORCal newspaper outputs ‑‑ libel.  These laws simply do not apply to online platforms which is where children and young people are increasingly getting their news from?  So this whole question of journalism is a human rights question.  And it is a human rights question which is particular in children.  I just want to briefly say I very much agree with what Smiti was saying at the beginning.  What the COVID crisis has revealed is nothing new.  It's just put it all on steroids.
The number of children calling help lines during the lockdown has gone up by 50%, 60%.  The number of children who haven't been able to connect to school remotely in England was 1.34 million.  They didn't have adequate Internet connectivity or device at loam that would allow them to do their homework.  By the way equivalent figure in the United States is 9 million.  If that's the position if two of the richest countries in the world you have to wonder what's been happening to children elsewhere in the world in less affluent countries, having a mobile phone is no good if you're trying to do your chemistry homework.  Having a mobile phone is no good if you're trying to write an essay about war and peace.
So COVID is revealed stuff that we already knew but it was magnified and amplified it if I can borrow the phrase that Smiti used in her opening remarks.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you, John.  Time.  Thank you.  We'll get back to you, thanks.  We're just saving time for discussion.
Now I would like to Olivier Crepin‑Leblond.  This is the core anything on the Internet.  We know there are different from principles.  We hold these interventions about human rights, fundamental rights, rights of children, journalism, media and support.  So how can the work‑related to core Internet values support all these and maybe bring these issues together?  Is there any chance?  Olivier, the floor is yours.
>> Olivier Crepin‑Leblond:  Thank you very much.  I've heard a lot of sensible points being made here.  The dynamic coalition on core Internet values focused on technical issues with regards to the Internet and core values, technical values in which the Internet was built on, TCP/IP, all these technical things with end‑to‑end principle and Internet being open, being non‑discriminatory, et cetera.  Unfortunately what we're seerg here at present that governments are doing is exactly somehow the opposite of what they should be doing.  We've heard from so many DCs here that the primary problem is going to be access and access for those children and grownups that do not have access to the Internet at the moment because the COVID‑19 has just brought so much business online and if you're not online, you can't have it.  And instead of doing that, governments have been focusing on exactly the opposite.
To the extent that the dynamic coalition of core Internet values and other dynamic coalitions have released a statement on Internet on excessive Internet control which touches on suppression of political dissent because technologically this is something that's being done and can be done especially with artificial intelligence, national firewalls which are now being rolled out for some reason.  National shutdowns, fragmentation.  Internet and data prioritization and shaping.  And we understand there needs to be traffic shaping for maybe new services that come out.  When it's being used politically, in order to provide this sort of edge, this competitive edge to the biggest companies out there, the expense of the smaller voices out there that we really have a problem and that completely breaks core Internet values.  So that's where we stand at the moment and several DCs have assigned this dynamic coalition that went on to Internet of things, Internet principles coalition and youth coalition on Internet governance, thank you.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you for being short and on the spot.  And this gives us some means for discussion and for maybe some of the panelists answering to the interventions of each other.  But before we go there, I think that many of the fundamental rights and freedoms problems, I see on the chat as well, we're talking about gender, we're talking about boys and girls.  We're talking about how gender is affected and I see that the chat is actually bringing some of the issues and I wanted to ask Smita, listening to the first three panelists talking about fundamental rights, protection, core Internet values, do you have anything to add here?  .
>> Hi, yes, thank you.  I think one of the things which we talked about is what I put in the chat is one thing that you talk about access to education and information who is prioritized to whom is another question.  What happens once you enter the digital space and start losing technical is another question.  Right?  One of the things that's happened during scween there is a sudden dramatic increase in online silence and this ‑‑ and this is you know you can actually trace it lock downs happening in different countries.  And what this means is that once again this infringes on fundamental rights against discrimination.  Education because it is the access to technology and monitored council and whether they are the ones subjected, the fact is that Kay, this is happening to you so stop using your mobile phone.  Right?  And these are ‑‑ you know, the nuances of individual needs to be spoken about.  And finally, when we talk about access and you know the right to access, what also happens to spaces like IGF why we need to have these conversations, is it easy access?  Is it welcome to persons or people who do not speak English or the U.N. languages because more people speak in spaces ‑‑ there are a whole bunch of languages which are not in the U.N. list of languages as well. 
Also when you come here how easy is it for me to join a panel?  Am I clicking in five different spaces and then coming here?  What does this mean to people who want to talk this and have a lot to add, for example school teachers, college professors and journalists in small cities who don't report in English have a lot to say here.  But, if I have to click in five different places just to find a log in link then happens?  Are we making access easier.
As a queer person I didn't like the registration form which when I had to register for IGF because after man, woman, there was other.  Am I so fluid that it's all or another?  So I think when we talk about core values, these are things which we need to reflect on by ourselves and see how we can do better by communities who want to bring their own questions and are we doing the actions required for the same?  I'll stop here for now.  Thank you.  Tlt Tatiana Tropino thank you, Smita.  I know you see John's excellent intervention on the chat.  Do you want to add anything else because I see that the issue about access fundamental rights, children's rights.  Gender issues are coming together in this panel.  So John, over to you.
>> Not much to add to what I said in the chat.  John CARR:  I was very impressed by Michael's presentation.  It's a shame we don't have longer to talk about it.  Set up systems where apparently we're now expected to pay for the truth.  Children can't pay for the truth.  So when they go to Web sites that say the Holocaust never happened, or when they go to Web sites that tell us that won the Second World War and the Soviet Union had nothing to do with it that's a human rights question, a child rights protection question and if the Internet governance member nims questions can't address it, we're wasting our time.
>> Thank you, John.  Actually, we do have time to talk about this because I was cutting off brutally.  So Michael, now over to you.  Do you think Internet governance can address these issues?  .
>> Michael OGHIA:  Yes, when it comes to journal system sustainability there are crosscutting issues not just one specific group of actors that need to be included in the conversation in order to drive change.  What we really need is concerted multistakeholder effort.  If anything, that's one of the exact reasons why we need to be here at the IGF, why the IGF can facilitate those kinds of connections and cross pollinated ‑‑ that kind of cross pollination.  I talk about that with environmental sustainability.  It's just as much of an issue within journalism sustainability.  And one thing that we've done for instance earlier this year is we actually released and emergency joint appeal that was signed by now over 180 different organizations calling on recommendations for across ‑‑ for stakeholders from across the sectors.  Talk talking about what they can do.  For instance advertisers and technology organizations need to stop black listing certain kind of advertising from journalism article or journalistic articles that for instance talk about COVID‑19.  Earlier in the year a lot of advertisers were ‑‑ stopped allowing for COVID‑19 related posts to include their branding and their adverts.  That obviously hurt journalism organizations even though those ‑‑ you know that was something that was meant to be ‑‑ that was something that could help support that.
So that's a one instance.  But of course there are so many others to highlight including the need to continue expanding access.  That is something that is absolutely critical for the up take of journalism in new media especially in global south and hard to access areas.  There is a need to discuss how ‑‑ what for instance governments, technology companies can do to help facilitate the kinds of support that is needed.  I mean especially financial support and things like that.
So there's quite a lot that we can do here and that's exactly why the DC sustainability thinks that it's so important for journalists and news media akters to be involved in the digital policy discussion else specially that historically we've been we've been relatively excluded not necessarily on purpose but we're makeing that concerted effort to make our community heard.
>> TATIANA TROPINA: We still have a few minutes left in this session.  I wanted to ask, John, did you want to say something.
>> on CARR:  Michael, where is the vast majority of money that used to pay the advertising that kept journalism going?  Where is all that money going?  It's not going to anybody who 12 in this session or anybody listening to the IGF?  If a government were to legislate to tell Google and Facebook to give money to support professional journalism, what would you say?  That the government has nothing to do with governance?
>> Michael ooh GHIA:  I would say we do need significant market‑based mechanisms for how to address this.  Because you know there's a clear imbalance between what publishers and what not ‑‑ what publishers, journalism organizations, what they're dealing with at the moment and then what especially large technology companies without naming any names per se are now reaping the benefits of that.  I mean there's a lot of interesting regulation and a lot of interesting developments happening in Australia now within the EU and also within the U.  Is.  I don't mean to just highlight northern examples but those specific examples are where there's a lot of ‑‑ where a lot of this conversation is being driven.  And I would say that I mean it's ‑‑ I really don't see ‑‑ of course, I welcome dialogue but I don't really see any significant changes happening without more ‑‑
>> John CARR:  Michael you did see that Facebook threatened to draw all its services from Australia if they promised to go ahead with those laws.  You know we need to be realistic about this.  Two or three small companies are doing all the damage and they are not involved in this discussion.
>> TATIANA TROPINA: Hello, dear panelists.  I'm going to wrap up the discussion right now and Mariana you got it right in the chat.  I was going to give the floor we still have a couple minutes left to DC on human rights and principles and I was going to call either Marianna or somebody please, the floor is yours for the next two minutes.
>> Marianne Franklin.  Is that okay?  We haven't cued ourselves off this line.  Thank you very much.  This issue around right of access to the Internet as Michael quite rightly sh sorry, had I, as Michael quite rightly says these are cost cutting issues and why this DC main session is so important and underscores how important the issues are.  Access is more than pushing a butted unor entering details.  It begins once you enter your detail.  The other A word is availability.  And Michael ising the fact that we have less and less availability and rich diverse forms of Dev Anand Teelucksingh 10 years old underscores this within its article six freedom of expression by including the right to information.  A 5‑year‑old has a right to information.  As that is made up by you in ‑‑ so this is what the problem is and we know that governments are reneging on their actual human rights obligations by allowing private sector actors to provide emergency provisions and using pandemic as a cloak and this must stop and we must be firmer and clearer for governments to comply with their own human rights standards and intervene in ways only they can by avoiding private sector domination of all forms of information.  And finally, that with information comes dismissed skewed information with all this availability becomes difference, diversity, contradictions.  It's not about all saying the same thing at the same time.  It's about being able to discern the difference between rubbish, bitter rushish, worse rubbish, truth, fact, fiction and all the rest.  That's the concern.  I don't want us to get locked into an either/or situation, we have to allow diverse information and let people who want to spread lies spread the lies but come back with truths, our own truths, substantiated truths and Internet can provide this but governments have to step up to the mark.  I'm getting increasingly impatient.  Thank you very much.
>> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you, and with this this is basically a perfect wrapup for this session on fundamental rights and freedoms because you made a point which leads us to the phase 3 about awareness, about education and empowerment.
And I will give the floor back to Hanane who will moderate the next phase.
>> Thank you very much very shall Tatianna and all the speakers about the passionate plea.  We do have various contributions which touch closely on the key issues that we're facing as humans and Internet users so the role of the media is very important and that takes me to flip the coin and take us to another important segment of the society.  And that speaks to you know the next phase of this session and specifically the role of youth when it comes to how they have been you know tackling the area of digital inclusion and I'm happy to invite the conversation what is the other side of the coin, you know, of you know this pandemic from the perspective of the youth.  So Gustav is representing the coalition of youth in the IGF, not sure if you can hear me.
>> Gustavo Paiva:  I already have my time here, first of all, I have to agree with the points represented before.  If anything I would really highlight that maybe a way to sum rye what was discussed so far is the COVID pandemic potential liced three existing inequalities across tle board.  All of them.  Economic inequalities.  Age and even in access.  Mainly in access.
And not only that, when it comes to the youth in education in particular, political issues, national political issues, election issues.  Took precedence over the essential things that are important for youth to our education.
Basically, the youth became absolutely secondary.  The whole next‑generation became completely secondary to all these political issues going on around the world.  Mainly and we can see this in elections even today.
Not only that, one of the things we identified in a workshop in Brazilian IGF is that going forward, Internet governance as in the holistic understanding of what the Internet is and the role it has in society and professional world is no longer something which people cannot know.  It is becoming increasingly pressing that educating people about what the Internet is, how it works and even platforms and all these issues we're facing with disinformation, this is necessary.  This is necessary in universities in basic education.  This is no longer something which we can keep in a specific (audio cutting out) all across the globe and in families.  This is going forward and essential life skill.  Thank you. 
>> H anane:  Thank you Gustavo.  Good points.  I'd like to ask Christopher Yu connecting the connects and unconnected.  I think through your paper that I read you play the key role during the pandemic addressing the key issues that have arisen due to COVID‑19 especially in the health sector so you might want to share with us you know what role did you play in terms of raising awareness.  Educating the authorities about the needs of citizens.
 
>> She ‑‑ he has to be here in a minute.  Chris, I hope you can unmute yourself now.
 
>> Christopher, I'm not sure if you were able to hear  
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: Me.
>> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
>> Hi, you're muted so I don't think we can hear you.  .  We'll sort out your technical issue and come back to you.  with regards to raising awareness on these issues.  I have to go back now to Gerry.  Gerry, so I now that you're doing a lot of work on the ground.  Meanwhile, Christopher is back.  Gerry if you would like to take us through your efforts to raise awareness and play your educational card when it comes to addressing inclusion issues?
>> Gerry Ellis:  Thank youin.  One of the things that we want to raise awareness is that we're not the only people who are saying that inclusion of people with disabilities are good for society.
All of society is saying that.  I'll give examples of that.  U.N. general secretary Antonio Gutierrez launched the disability inclusion strategy in 2019 and stated from a remote in 2 or or tackles for people with disabilities the whole world benefits.  Accenture launched a report in 2018 called ‑‑ let me just check the name.  Getting to call.  What that showed is the economic benefits of organizations of including people with disabilities as employees and making their products accessible to society in general.
There's an economic benefit to those organizations.
Of course, U.N. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.  Of course, people with disabilities are mentioned 7 times in the sustainable development goals.
The roadmap to equality and sustainability includes the 1.3 billion people with disabilities.  It is a benefit to all of society.  And that's one of the main things that we're raising.
Let me Geoff you a small example just before we go.  This IGF that we're attending, there are hundreds of sessions.  And if that was ‑‑ if you were trying to watch all those on video to get an idea of what's going on, it would take you three years, two years, who knows.  But because there is captioning there which was originally done for people who are deaf, you can now search through those.  You can do deaf mated searches, you can search for common themes through different things.  Much more easily.  That benefits everyone.  Not just people with disabilities.  I'll leave it with that for now.
>> HUNANE BOUJEMI: I'm going to go back to Christopher we'd like to hear from you in the role you're playing in terms of raising awareness with the communities you're working with.  Hi Christopher, it's good to see you.
So the floor is yours.
>> Christopher Yoo:  Can you hear me now?
>> Loud and clear.
>> Thank you very much we're delighted to be here representing the dynamic coalition on innovative approaches to connecting the unconnected.
We continue our work trying to gather to try to avoid reinventing the wheel, to learn from the wonderful work that people all over the world but are convinces that unfortunately, very little information or data is collected on a success of failures which means that everyone is pretty much starting from scratch and unfortunately, also what little data is being collected does not allow for cross project comparisons.  The heart of the work is a database with a mass of over 1100 innovative ways to connect people to the Internet both on increase of connectivity but also of overcoming demand side obstacles such as digital literacy and the like.
And gender disability access as Gerry mentioned, senior access, any one of a number of dimensions.  We then reaped out to all 1100 of the initiatives that were identified and have now conducted case study interviews with everyone who convented they're in 125.  All of these are available on one world connected.org.  And we're trying to create an information base that will help to give insights to people all over the world, give a new ideas about ways to try but also information on what's working and what's not working.  Because many people are too busy, people are doing this in the field don't have time to document what they're doing.  And what is documented often is perceived success stories without much often attention to failure stories and this is important for learning project to project.
Based on my understanding of this meeting ‑‑ and I apologize if I got the time wrong ‑‑ because I thought I was joining just before it began.
I was asked to address in particular issues surrounding education.
Which has been one of the focuses of the dynamic coalition's work.  In fact, what we participated in two major efforts one is initiative to connects everything in school by UNICEF for the ITU and the educating project led by Tim Unwin a professor in the U.K. called education for post in the nallized in post COVID‑19.  What we learned is a case study of importance in the work that the IGF is doing is that the Internet connectivity is critical.  If that's ‑‑ anyone who has school‑aged children involved in education have become aware that the pandemic nearly through a huge spotlight on the necessity of Internet connectivity.  And that's a really wonderful chance to understand its importance and what we learned among other things is that the pandemic is actually exacerbated learning.  In July Kenya admitted that they had lost the ‑‑ and conceded that they will reopen in 2021 but have no real way in effectively conduct education for its students for most of that year.
So there are alarming problems but at the same time we've seen the number of very innovative responses and solutions which have been tremendous ‑‑ it's a wonderful chance to learn, wonderful chance to try new things and mother of necessity ‑‑ necessity being the mother of invention what you see is an outpouring of fascinating efforts to expand into connectivity with urgency of need to educate people.  Many joint efforts with private sector with edge tiffs being launched all over the world but for example in South Africa alone, they ‑‑ additional spectrum to wireless broadband.  Spec data, provided laptops, tablets to make this possible.  And a very common phenomenon all over the world South Africa zero rated content to make it easier to access.  These are all very interesting, innovative responses which we thought was incredibly beneficial.  Interestingly also we learned there are a number of prerequisites for delivering educational.  There's a bunch prereq easiest one for all of us to understand is the necessity of Internet connectivity for students.  And so first it has to exist and it also has to be affordable.  But we also learned that quality matters a great deal.  We see in the middle of pandemic because of the multiple use there was a spike in usage and that would cause slow downs in a number of countries. 
And in fact we saw even countries with connectivity ‑‑ the story is Italy.  They have a good base level connectivity but not enough to support the video learning, submission of assignments and all that that brought things down.
>> HUNANE BOUJEMI: Thank you, Chris fer.  I don't mean cut you, you're doing great work and I invite everybody to read your paper on the IGF Web site but I have to cut you because there is another aspect that I really want to touch upon before we broke up this phase and see a few questions and I invite people to keep an eye on the chat window because there's a very interesting discussion and input consistently and constantly added by the panelists and different participants we have.  We also have three questions and I hope we answered a few of them through the different interventions that we have.  But the last item on the agenda speaks to the role of empowerment which we know empowering people to join the conversation on Internet governance integrated into national policy processes is not easy.  So we thought that having our work done online will help include more people in important key policy processes.  But I think one panelist I'll have to turn to Stuarh to speak and Gustavo if he has anything to add to how do we empower least represented communities in processes such as Internet governance so we can have actually a dlary view of what's at stake exactly?  So Stewart?  Maybe.
>> Stewart Hamilton:  I have to confess I was coming with research and learning but I mean, I think libraries replay a good role through the connectivity that we offer to allow people to take part in Internet governance, but you know there are things that you know people need if they're going to be able to participate accurately in this and that of course is the sort of skills that come with a good education and that's where we've been trying to do our best during the pandemic to make use of library facilities and extend online education whilst the doors and places like libraries are closed.  So I wanted to point out a couple things which I think are important for the over all debate which do cover that context of engagement.
We've seen a tremendous amount of use of digital library resources by all user groups which I think bodes well for engagement.  There mightbe an idea it's only younger people but we've seen it across the board and lenciya.  We've seen this big shift to online education and research and learning which Christopher was alluding to as well.  It's there I want to point out things we need too keep a close eye on as we go forward.  There are problems.
And some of these problems are around the licensing environments for the sorts of information that libraries make available.
Limits on number of simultaneous users that people can connect textbooks, ebooks, restrictions on lending.  Information op libraries across countries and restrictions on test and data mining which is extremely important because access to knowledge is very much in a pandemic a public health issue.  There are major issues around the costs of things like electronic textbooks.  I'll play us a link in the chat in a moment which will let you see the mattive differences between the cost of a print book and electronic book and huge issues around copyright.  If you think about a situation where lecturers are telling people it would be better to get a Netflix subscription because we don't have media studies courses take place.  This is something we need to be careful of.  In terms of what we want in policy recommendations we need clarity on the exceptions and limitations that be can use for online education and things libraries can provide.  We need an investigation into ebook pricing which is scandalous and we need more options to purchase them.  And something we haven't touched upon which is di Seth Reiss we talked about connectivity.  We need to talk about deadvice poverty in the future.  Hb hb thank you very much, Stewart.  Knowledge is power and educational aspect is also equally important in the issue of empowerment.  And I do have two hands, I think.  Two panelists that can speak to probably the issue of panel grating minorities and disilings making processes and I'll give the floor to ‑‑ Smita to reflect on this point.
If you can hear me, so the question speaks to the role of empowerments.  Of minorities or communities that are not represented properly.
>> Muhammad:  Yes, thank you very much.  Ladies and gentlemen, my apologies for you not being able to see me because I have a one key Internet connection so I would really apologize for that so you have to rely on my voice.
I would like to see two or three points here with regards to inclusion and awareness and particularly about the empowerment.  We have to have if we want to make people we we need to bring communities as we ‑‑ people with disabilities like to say.  Nothing about us without us..
If you want to have a discussion about persons with disabilities, you need to bring people with disabilities on to that level for having these kind of discussions about their issues.
With regard to their dynamic coalition on accessibility and disability this year, since were hearing that this IGF is going to go online, we thanks to a guard from Google and Vint Cerf, we supported people with disabilities all with regards to Internet connectivity.  We provided fellowships to enable people with disabilities with regards to accessing the Internet and availing the opportunity to attend IGF.  We also organized a hub in Italy to persons with disabilities but also supported by the grant provided by Google and Vint Cerf.  So thanks hats off to that.  We quo also provide some next year IGF goes back to in hitch person participation, there would be funds as well.  Two minutes is up.  You made cool suggestions on how to include basically guarantee more contributions in general so second recommendation in writing so we can put it forward and I'll give the floor to Smita because I know she has something to say about empowerment of minority in general.
 
>> Thank you very much.  I think one of the things that we really need in terms of bringing more people to this conversation, one in which ‑‑ I have two points to make, I think one of the reasons people live here in different conversations around IGF and less policy spaces is because they cannot connect to their own realities.  If you cannot connect with people on what is actually happening to them and convey why these policies matter to them in real life, why will they care about it?  Until you get people who care, policies and guidelines are just words in the cloud.  And second thing is that in a lot of conversations what happens, especially with regards to communities and women and other gender and sexual minority is the possibility speak establish all of this is that we constantly remain in disguys as intervention mode and we talk about problems.  Gender came into IGF spaces because online grew to the point that we couldn't ignore it and there were people smarter and wiser than me who spoke about it and said we can bring to Internet governance spaces.  Question not stop.  You need pleasure and access to spaces and technology for fun.  You need access to do what you want.  Policies need to support this.  I don't want a policy only to protect me.
I want a policy this will will allow me to have fun.  It's like demanding equality and this equality to loiter on online spaces equality to participate in policy and bring up topics that are relevant to you.  Access tomorrow.  But I think that is the way we can actually bring in more people.
>> HUNANE BOUJEMI: Very concrete suggestions and inputs as usual.  Thank you very much.  And I think with that, I am going to wrap up the section on empowerment and education and we will have to spend the last 20 minutes of this session talking about the future of the IGF and contribution of ‑‑ to Tatiana will be moderating that specific space.  The last note it is very important at this point that the IGF works on cross fertilization of ideas between different segments that are not represented and I received information yesterday that the high level roundtable which included Parliamentarians would like to collaborate with the DCs and I think this is good news because then you can actually work with various entities on specific issues to advocate on whatever is at stake on the ground, on the floor to make sure your voice is heard.  An with that I will pass the floor to Tatianna.  AT&T AT&T thank you, Hanane:  As you said we want to ensure that all voices are heard and allow Gustavo to make the last word about the last phase.  I'll give you two minutes.  We will make it.
>> I'll be very brief.  On the topic of empowerment I think there are many ways to approach this especially when they talk about the youth.  Many of the young people who come to government spaces coming from other industries.  They come from economic activities which already are closely tied to Internet policy making so for them, it's only about matter of quickly learning about topic and then just jumping in.  For other youth who want these people, these young people they often do not have continued engagement if we want to create continued engagement, especially from youth or people, people in general, not only youth but underrepresented people such as LGBT people, we need to address a fact that for many pro fetionals, continuing engagement in Internet governance is not feasible.  There are very few incentives in terms of how it applies to their inactivity and we in the Internet governance community we benefit immensely from extremely hard working volunteers, it is uphill battle.  And this continued engagement especially for young people and people fl from the global ‑‑ it is when you have so many professional obligations when making enough to live by is so difficult.  It is very difficult.
To justify the kind ‑‑ this kind of engagement with global ‑‑ thank you.
Hb hb thank you, Gustavo and thank you for building another bring from our previous discussion to the wrapping up phase of this session.  We are going to talk Tatiana you're of IGF.  What can the IGF community do to make these ‑‑ the IGF catalyst, a cause for these Qian tomorrow changes during pandemic and post pandemic?  And is IGF doing enough we have two speakers in my mind for this phase of the session.  I would like to actually ‑‑ we wrapped up the previous one with youth and I would like to give the floor to another speaker from youth to Ellen.  What is your take on this and future of IGF in this regard?
>> Eileen CEJAS:  I'll be as short as possible.  From youth coalition we've been seeing that the current situation is that the disease had an a key player in the get governance and on youth coalition where we brought the topic of the table of which is the role that we have as youth how we want to play it and facility and empowering the next‑generation of leaders, we in the IGF/IG environment.  A good example is how we've been working closely with Internet Society to build mentorship training for interns who say youth and others of this years because we believe that we need more voices that can ‑‑ to be able to have voices who can give proper treatment of the topics that matter to us in IGF.  This has been part of our efforts targeting youth and participating at the youth and strategy.  So future within dynamic coalition we shall address the importance of eye lighting intersectional work as this has been happening with the BPMs, they may not get enough recognition to most of the discussion is concentrated at the developments in the IGF space.  But I would like to bring to this excellent panel the future application of IGF plus model.  It has been highly recommendation to the U.N. high level panel on digital korntion and especial other stakeholders and global citizens they organize this year.  Dynamic coalitions and other parts of the IGF intersectional work should be the basis to strengthen Internet in the terms of digital corporation as a introductory remark we have participated in IGF often behalf of the YC.  In addition we promote dynamic coalitions.  This year we have collaborated with statement on assistive Internet controls that my colleague 0 whrif live yay colleague Olivier mentioned before.  We have participated at a section organized by rights and principles coalition, these examples show us the work of dynamic coalition that should become more relevant than ever.  We are part of of a larger community.  We need to contribute the improvements of the IGF towards the future.
Finally I would like to remark that it is essential to have representation of youth including youth Parliamentarians at IGF intersection activities.  We shall decide in out future and encourage stakeholders to avoid tokenism of youth.  We are here to address the matters we care about.  Our voice should be heard and taken into consideration to shape the future of the IGF in the intreft governance space.  Internet governance.
>> Thank you very much eye even.  It's very nice to see youth being so active in all these processes.  I would like to give the floor to Olivier Crepin‑Leblond because I believe in a way the dynamic cocollision of core Internet values can tell us how core Internet values contribute to all these Qian tum changes.  Olivier you have 20 seconds to add something.  To add something to youth.
>> Olivier Crepin‑Leblond:  Oh, dear you're so tough.  Twenty minutes would have been just barely enough.  No, I'm not going to purport to say it's only dine applicant coalitions on values that has all the issues.  What this session is showing is that every coalition has got a different angle covered and covered extremely well.  And as Eileen just mentioned I'm not going to have to repeat what Eileen said but I can say that the future of IGF has got the core Internet ‑‑ sorry, dynamic coalitions and its real core.  It's vitally important that this intersectional work continues ‑‑ intersessional work continues.  That's only possible with the people of you, the people watching this, the audience here because the vibrancy of dynamic coalitions is only there because of the people that make it.  That's all I wanted to say.
>> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you very much Olivier.  And I would like to remind us all because I can see how many people are attending right now.  I have 103 people in this room.  And I hope that you're all enjoying this session.
We still have a couple minutes to wrap up this phase which was pretty short for this very big issue on the future of IGF.  If any dynamic coalitions weren't to say so this, yes, Gerry, go ahead. 
>> Gerry Ellis:  People with disabilities want to be involved and be included and to a large extent include.  DCED made standards on making meetings accessible so we say please lock it.  Make improving the Web site, I know it's going to be rebuilt.  These include our needs in those.  But as we get away from COVID‑19 and we move back toward physical access and then hopefully Poland next year, there is a recognition or there needs to be a recognition that it costs usually a lot more for people with disabilities to attend because of inaccessible transport and to able hotels and physical buildings where meetings are held.  I know IGF doesn't have funds but hopefully you'll work with us to find funders to help support people coming from particularly poorer areas of the world to have their themselves heard.  Keep in mind, please.  The basic saying of people with disabilities, nothing about us without us.  Consult us.  Talk with us.
we'll help you, you can help us.
>> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you very much.  Gerry, with them I'm going do Close the.  Peter you first and then Marianne.  Please be brief.  Uti, the floor is yours.
>> Jutta Croll:  I'm not speaking on behalf of dynamic co list I might belong to but as cofacilitator for all the dynamic cocollisions and I'm grateful for the richness of this depate.  I've seen a lot of points that will bring us forward into the future not only post pandemic but also considering how intersessional work will be done by dynamic coalitions in the IGF plus model suggested by the HLPDC.  If I can report back also from the roundtable of Parliament airians it's not only the roundtable itself but all the Parliamentarians that took part in that session yesterday.  Really had a great interest in working with this dynamic coalitions intersessional between Internet governance forum.  So we have achieved to arouse interest in that during the IGF last year.  And I would really suggest to pick up on that dynamic coalitions to have a look out for Parliamentarians who can work with them and also bring the work forward because that is the major step moving forward for all of us, thank you so much for this.  Thank you for all the work you do to facilitate this work Tatiana Tropino tts this work of dynamic coalition and everything you did for the preparation of this session.  Marianne we want to wrap this up with your contribution so please go ahead.
>> Thank you very briefly.  I want to the comment that shu just made to the charter of human rights and principles.  Starts with quality of service.  The quality of service to which people are entitled acts shall involve in line with advancing technological possibility.  I do not believe the quality of service is evolving in line with advancing technological facilities.  So I think we had a serious task ahead of us and this is why the IGF has proven its worth and Olivier, finally, a huge call out, thank you to everyone here who puts all their additional time their weekends, their leaping time to get up at 3 and 4 in the morning to be part of this.  I just want to say all this is voluntary, unpaid and underpaid and underrecognized laip and we need to start noticing it because our time is also money and we're descroating 0 you are time and money to this process.  So I want to thank everyone for all their time and all the extra hours.  And organizing committee for this DC9 session and professional paid support teams as well.  Let's give the IGF more money, more resources and more grunt because we make it so show us put your money where your mouth is, governments, private sector, technical communities and anyone with any member and give it to us without strings money taxed or you're noft not worth your salt.
>> Thank you very much.  I
>> TATIANA TROPINA: I want to tell the number of funds ‑‑ there are 107 who heard your intervention and with this I'm going to give it back to Haane for the wrapup.  It's yours now.
>> Thank you very much.  Thank you, Tatianna, thank you to all the panelists and vibrant attendees of the session who made the discussion really interesting.  It's ‑‑ we're lucky that we have a transcript and I think we can always go back to look at all the contributions across the board, you know, through the whole of the phases you know that we had during this session.  So we can actually have a concise ‑‑ you know summary of all the recommendations and also I would like to thank the ‑‑ what do you call that the godfather and godmother of the intersessional work, specific to the DC work and that is Markus Kummer and Jutta for their encouragements and all the work that is being done by the DCs themselves.  I know what it takes because I cochaired one of them and I understand inside out how they can influence policy making processes in various contexts.  So I would encourage people to chose the topic that is close to their heart and join the DC work because it speaks to the heart, to the core of the issues tackle in the IG and there is a little bit of everything for everyone.  So ‑‑ and you know, for the people who are asking how to join, the DCs I invite you to check the Internet governance Web site, Secretariat.  There is a mailing list for each DC and you can actually choose which one that speaks to you most.  So you can join the work.  It's unpaid work.  It's voluntary.
It feeds usually to the full‑time job of all of us somehow.  Just to that none of us are paid.  We're doing it because we love what we're doing and we'd like to contribute to enrich enthe agenda of the IGF and make it more substantive and meaningful.
And I guess the sum up of this session speaks to us all.  We know that youth has a role to play.  We need to be more inclusive when it comes to representing making sure that every segment of the society is actually represented.  That pandemic made us all realize that the Internet is so crucial.  Now everybody who is not compelled or convinced that the Internet can may play actually a key role sites and economies, now is the time they understand that.  Having said that we also realize how the pandemic actually widened the gap whether it's gender gap, be disabilities gaps.  So we need to be wary.  We need to address these issues to make sure that nobody's left behind, that that we are actually practicing what we're preaching and that is very important.  And I hope this platform has been you know important you know to call out all the decision‑makers and policy makers to take into account and be accountable also to the feedback we're receiving from communities all around the world.
I have to say this is one of the most active sessions I've ever moderated or contributed to and that's thanks to the rich discussion that we had so far.
I invite the S and Ds to also read the substantive papers that were submitted by the DCs because they actually Zoom in to these issues that we're trying to speak to at a high level.  And that's what we do usually in these kinds of panels.  So maybe we don't have a silver bullet that kind of ‑‑ let's say creates solutions to solve things but this is a process.  I think a lot of people on this call understand what does it mean to be involved in the IGF.  For so many years at least two decades now we're doing this and we're doing it for a reason.  We can see the impact.  We can see how we manage finally to include actually more segments from you know Parliamentarians to youth into the discussion and I heap you enjoyed the session as much as I did.  Thank you very much, everyone.  Thank you to the interpreters, thank you Tatiannathank you Markus, Jutta and work of DCs and thank you to all the panelists and I think that's all from me today.  Thank you very much.  And good‑bye.
 
>> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you, good‑bye.  All.
>> Thanks to you both.  Wonderful moderation.  Thank you so much.
>> Bye, everybody and to the sign language interpreters and captioners vmentd yes, captioners and sign language interpreters.
>> wonderful session, thanks, everybody. 
>> Excellent, bye.
>> Thank you, everyone.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-main-session-inclusion^^

 
>> Whenever you want, we can start if you want.
>> You can start sharing your screen at the moment.
>> Good morning, good afternoon to everyone.  Welcome to all the people that has joined us in this very important session about inclusion.  My name is Karim Attoumani, PMO and regulatory project manager at a company of action group and Vice President of ISO chapter.  In this session, committed actions for connecting and enabling the remaining billions together with our panelists who have a opportunity to analyze and comment about reductions that can be taken from the different perspective in order to achieve meaningful Internet connection for all.  Today we have a fantastic panel as you can see with people that you already know very well because of their contributions to shape the Internet, representing different sectors and regions all around the world.  Let me introduce them.  I would like to start with Sylvia Cadena, head of program at APNIC, the Asia and Pacific region coordinator for Information Society innovation fund, and MAG member.  We also have Sonia Jorge, Executive Director of Alliance for Affordable Internet.  We have in this panel one of the creator of the very first protocols that were part of the Internet from the beginning and continue using today, Mr. Vint Cerf, Google Vice President and Internet evangelist.  We have our colleague, Christian O'Flaherty, Internet society Vice President for Latin America and Caribbean regions.  Then coming from Orange, we have senior Vice President of Internet and sustainable energy governance, Mongi Marzoug, and Moctar Yedaly, head of Information Society division for African Union Commission.  They all have remarkable contribution in their respective fields.  You might know more about them visiting the IGF portal, we thank them to accept to join us as speakers.  I also introduce Roberto Zambrana, President of Internet Society Bolivia chapter and La Paz City Hall, Roberto will be facilitating the session.  All participants, you are encouraged to write any question in the Q&A section or comments in the chat.  I will be reading them in their corresponding action section of session.
We might start the session now, Roberto, go ahead, please take the floor.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Karim and thank you to our appreciated panelists for accepting to be part in this session.  As you know during the last, the previous week from the beginning of this one, in most of our, most of those were great sessions, and first to be part of in a very first virtual IGF, and with listening repeatedly a couple of concepts.  One of those was related to the COVID pandemic that forced us to face a global lockdown that we had to follow in the most of our countries.  This situation made all of humanity to react, think and plan in different ways about how to overcome this crisis, trying to continue with our lives, during this IGF many speakers shared their experiences and fantastic stories about how to bring normality to our way of living, having Internet as the main resource to succeed in this.  For sure, those are great lessons for resilience.  Sadly, this wasn't the case for most of humanity, and I say most because despite the encouraging statistics about Internet penetration, the reality showed us different situations in which there is still so much to do in order to really achieve meaningful connectivity for everyone.
This was the second concept that was present in many of the previous sessions.  But among other things, this is relevant matter that had a main attention from the UN Secretary‑General and not only was included as a key theme in analysis of High Level Panel on Digital Cooperation convened by His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, but it's present as the first set of recommendations in the role for digital cooperation that international community must work together in the near future.
Today in this session, we will discuss about what are the actions that actually made this dream come true, made all the countries, all the people finally to achieve this meaningful connectivity for all.  We have some questions, some policy questions that we would like to discuss with the panel, and after that, we will have three rounds of discussions with this policy questions, and after that we will listen in to the people that is attending to this session.
Beginning with Sylvia, please, and we are going to go through three or four of our panelists going to one first question and then we are changing idea with the other panelists.  Sylvia, what are obstacles to achieving affordable access to Internet in recent years despite significant expansion of mobile infrastructure deploying around the world, what are your thoughts about it?  And welcome again to the session.
>> SYLVIA CADENA: Thank you very much.  My name is Sylvia Cadena, head of programs of the foundation.  Good morning, the sun is coming up.  My apologies if coffee did not kick in yet.  I would like to thank you for the invitation to join the panel, as outgoing of the MAG it took many months of preparation.  I'm looking forward to the discussion.  The focus of the session is particularly relevant to me as we look into the future.  The current situation has highlighted disparities between urban and rural cities, not only in developing countries, and the challenges to maximize the benefits of Internet use adoption.  The Asia Pacific region a vast, culturally and linguistically diverse and diversity are reflected across the regulatory frameworks that are in place, the ways businesses are managed which are not western like, and how Internet infrastructure is operated.  To give you a personal example, I live less than ten kilometers from four hospitals, I can literally walk to the hospital.  But our family doctor was not ready to offer telehealth services during isolation, even though his practice has access to excellent Internet connectivity.  Australians live in more than 1500 kilometers away without leaving Queensland, are picked up by the royal flying doctor service to reach the same hospital that I can walk to, but they have years of experience providing and accessing telehealth services.  As same as my personal experience differs from that of a fellow Australian living around the corner, meaningful affordable Internet access experiences are different, depending on your needs, which may be different depending on where you are.  The question around meaningful access needs in my personal opinion to be rooted in a deeper understanding of the local context, to have meaningful access every individual, every community should find on the Internet a way to solve a existing problem, Internet service providers, operators are looking at innovative granular approaches to deploy their network and serve their customers.  They are open to explore in majority of cases hybrid business models, because they have realized they alone cannot do it and are looking for collaboration while regulators are looking at the barriers to entering the market.  Others are exploring community driven business models.  In terms of affordability, I would highlight three elements important in the context of Asia Pacific.  As the part of the world more prone to be affected by natural disasters, such as bush fires in Australia earlier this year, earthquakes and cyclones to name a few, the cost associated with preparedness and recovery has a direct impact on affordability.  The distances, equipment and technicians and distribution chains for equipment not manufactured in the region, to have it available after a disasters requires investments that can vanish in the wind.  The second is about compliance with regulatory requirements in light of concerns around online safety and security, which leads me to my third and final point, which is the need to build technical capacity locally to manage threats, plan, deploy, operate and maintain the infrastructure.  Thank you, Roberto.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you, Sylvia, interesting about this region of the world.  Now welcoming Vint Cerf to the panel, you have the floor.
>> VINT CERF: Thank you, Roberto.  I want to thank Sylvia for being so crisp in her characterization of the problem.  I think her perspective applies almost everywhere, let me give you an example, in the United States, we do not have uniform access to the Internet, either.  We are particularly poorly served in the rural parts of the country, most especially in Native‑American reservations but also we find problems even in the core cities.  Some of the problems are physical equipment and availability, but in other cases, it's affordable, and this is a extremely important component of the utility of the Internet, if you can't afford it, you are not going to be able to use it.  I love very much Sylvia's point about Internet being a enabling experience, so if we think more broadly about what it means to be inclusive with regard to Internet access and use, not only do we have to worry about physical facilities and their ability to be operated sustainably, and affordably, but we have to worry about whether the Internet is useful, and that of course implies whether or not it has content which is locally useful, whether or not it provides services that are needed, very good example of that arising out of the pandemic and related to Sylvia's points, remote medicine has turned out to be very important all of a sudden, here in the U.S. even if I could walk to my hospital, which I sort of could if I were really, well, I don't know if I were really sick and couldn't make it to the hospital, that is several miles away, I don't know if I could walk or not.  The problem here is that they don't want you here, the doctors say don't come into the office, I'm worried about COVID‑19, we don't have adequate protective equipment, please call me or have a video call and of course my reaction is what kind of medicine is that?  You didn't take my temperature, my blood pressure, my weight and height and other physical things that make me feel like you are paying attention to the state of my body.
The implications of this in the Internet context are that more and more devices are going to be both needed and invented in order to capture our state of health so that remote medicine is possible, and that is going to be true whether you are in the middle of the city or whether you are off in some very distant and rural location.  We can anticipate over the course of the next several years that remote medicine will become more relevant than it ever has been before, to more people.
Last point is new technologies and we are starting to see the emergence not only of a increasing amount of mobile capability but also increasing speeds as we have heard and seen from 4G, now 5G and there is rumors of 6G.  There are the low earth orbiting satellite assets going up including those from SpaceX which are in beta test.  Recently several of my colleagues and I participated in a test of a solar powered aircraft which is flying at 65,000 feet and loitering over a area providing LTE service, in analog, to another alphabet company, holding company of Google, Loon, which has balloons at 65,000 feet that are circulating in a given part of latitude, circulating in a given latitude, and being managed by headwinds and tailwinds by going up and down in altitude.
Those are also delivering 4G kinds of services to the ground.  You don't need any special equipment other than a mobile in order to take advantage of that kind of service.  We also are starting to see the use of free space lasers in order to extend, for example, underlying, either undersea or surface fiber capacity, if it doesn't make sense to put fiber on poles because of the expense or to trench, sometimes straight laser shots will help you extend access to the Internet.
My sense right now is that we have a lot of angles that we need to attend to in order to make the Internet useful, most importantly now, content, which is enabling, so people can solve the kinds of problems that Sylvia alluded to.  I'll stop there, but thank you so much for allowing this intervention.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much.  You mention one important factor about all the emerging technologies that are relating mobile like 5G or 6G as you said, but perhaps most of the population right now will be grateful having 4G deployed around the world.  That lead us to, I want to welcome again to Mongi to share with us of his view, can inform a important mobile company in the world, what were the actions, what can we say about the first topic that we are discussing with.  You have the floor.
>> MONGI MARZOUG:  Thank you very much.  Good afternoon and good morning, for all attendees, I'm happy to be with you today, and happy to discuss with you a very important topic regarding digital inclusion, all of us, in my first introduction I will highlight the impetus of digital inclusion, what are the main gap in digital skills, for ability of access, and the local usage.  In the end of the first introduction, I will speak about many programs launched by international and national and local operators, tech companies, in order to contribute to and improve digital inclusion.  As you know, digital technology, Sustainable Development and global inclusion and during COVID‑19 pandemic it's frequently stated that the world really, the Internet never has been greater and connectivity has never been more important to secure basic needs, to continue social relationships, and to entail many economic activities.  As confirmed by many statistics and studies, the Internet access is far from being a coverage issue.  Approximately we have 3.4 billion people who live in area covered by a mobile broadband network, 3G and more, and don't use mobile Internet.
However, we have around 600 million who live in area without network coverage, so compare 600 million to 3.4 billion.  The fact that coverage is not the top barrier is confirmed as to, by many figures reported by ITU last year, by the end of last year in the document regional digital developments, when we see that almost the entire world population, 97 percent lives within reach of mobile coverage and 93 percent of the world population lives within reach of mobile broadband, 3G and more.  However, only 53 percent are actually using Internet.  We have some important gap between developing countries where close to 87 percent are using Internet, however in least developed countries, 90 percent are online.  What are the top reasons.  The Chairman of Orange, sorry, Chairman of GSMA, the association of mobile network operators, presented three reasons for why most African are not on the Internet, and how to connect them.  The first one is affordability, the cost of headsets, energy, or many African countries and as to the cost of data are still too high.  Also the UN commission for Sustainable Development said in 2018 as a target for 2055 that should be less than 2 percent of gross national income.  In 2019 the commission reported that in 61 countries a subscription include five gigabyte of data cost less than 2 percent and 89 countries, including four low developed countries, mobile subscription with one to five gigabyte data cost less than, but considerable progress has been made in recent years, affordable remain a challenge in many countries especially in not developed countries.
The first barrier is affordability.  The second is lack of digital skills and literacy.  This one is the top barrier to mobile Internet use in low and middle income countries, as well as issue in developed countries.  The third presented the lack of content in local language represents a major issue outside of U.S., Europe and China, contents must be relevant to citizens and meet their needs.  Since 2015 IGF community has identified five main dimensions and policy options for increasing connectivity, for the future usability and local content, enable users, digital citizenship, affordability and creating enabling environment, at the national and local institution organized, relevant companies are aware of the aspects of Internet access, as many of them are working to address those gaps.  For example, GSMA's worldwide association of mobile network operators has launched connected society program and platform GSMA thrive Africa platform, toward mobile industry technology companies, development community, to address adoption of mobile Internet focusing on underserved population, groups in developing markets.  This program activity include cooperating and disseminating sites and learning on the mobile Internet coverage and usage, supporting mobile operators to extend coverage and advocacy and policy work to ensure mobile operators afford to achieve greater digital inclusion, being actively supported by Government, international community and other stakeholders.  I thank you.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you, Mongi.  There is a nice conversation among the chat.  I encourage you all participants to exchange ideas.  There are some actually regarding one of the statistics that Mongi mentioned before, and that leads us to, first again, welcome Sonia, and we know that in your institution you produce a lot of information, statistics about this affordability issue.  We would love to know about your thoughts regarding this first subject.
>> SONIA JORGE:  Thank you for the opportunity to be here with you today.  This discussion has been interesting just listening to all of you, especially reading the comments from the chat.  Many of you made clear starting with Sylvia from what it means to be meaningfully connected, but also what it means to have affordable and meaningful access, it's absolutely core and center stage for us at the Alliance for Affordable Internet, as you know.  This is precisely why we actually, developed the concept, with many of you and our partners, of what we believe Internet access should look like, and how should we measure Internet access around the world, from this perspective of affordable and meaningful access.
I wanted to cover two items in response to this first question that you pose, Roberto.  One is in response to what others already are asking.  For us, affordable and meaningful access means that everyone has access to the Internet every day, with enough data, with a fast connection and with appropriate device.  If you don't have that, what you have is never going to be meaningful connectivity, because you will not be able to have or to benefit from the kinds of opportunities, services and needs that Sylvia, Vint and others have already mentioned on the chat.
What do we mean by that precisely, when we are talking about the right speed, we are talking about at a minimum a 4G equivalent type of connection with sufficient data ideally unlimited data, and appropriate device that needs to start at the level of the functionality of a smart phone, and anything less than that, unless it provides functionality, is not something that we should accept.
Most importantly, people should be able to have access to information, to services, be innovative, creative and conduct themselves and their family every day however they decide.  Unless we collectively are not thinking about affordable and meaningful connectivity from that perspective, that brings all of those critical elements together, we are shortchanging the world, and very much contributing to further inequality and exclusion in the world, instead of making sure that the investment that is required, the policy and regulatory frameworks that we need to think of and support are such the supported environment where affordable and meaningful connectivity is reality.
With that in mind, I want to challenge some of the assertions that were made, and I apologize, Mongi, as you know, operators are wonderful partners, but often they have a different understanding of what we need in our sector for true digital development to be a reality.  I'll start by mentioning something that actually someone on the chat mentioned which is about coverage, and you too, Roberto.  To me, it starts with that, when someone tells me that 85 percent of the world is covered by mobile networks, I start cringing and getting very uncomfortable, because the reality is that that is not true.  A large percentage of the population of the world is covered by networks that are unreliable, lack quality, and do not provide affordable and meaningful connectivity of the kind that many of my colleague panelists have already outlined.
That kind of coverage has been a wonderful progress, and it's been a good contribution to a sector that now we know it's more urgent and more important than ever in the concept, in our wider ecosystem of development.  We cannot think of digital access and meaningful connectivity as an add on, as a luxury, as something that people may have if it's possible.  It is a necessity.  It is a public good.  It is a basic right.  Anything less than that is not acceptable for the world.
What I would say is that I want to hear the numbers of coverage, when that coverage is about everyone being covered by 4G connections, everywhere, not just in urban areas, not just in groups of population that are high revenue generating customers but everyone.  No one should be shortchanged by different policies, we should not discriminate, should not contribute to further exclusion and inequality.  We collectively have a responsibility to change mindsets, not just in terms of the investment, in terms of our objectives for the digital development, and most importantly, to make sure that our policy and regulatory frameworks everywhere in the world, at the global level, at the regional level, and at the national level respond to these needs, respond to these reality, and in fact support not only growth that we want to see in the sector, including with really smart investments by the private sector, but also very smart investments from the public sector, in partnership with multilateral development organizations, by governments, and most importantly, here we are at IGF, you need to listen to what Civil Society wants from digital development.  If we don't hear what people want, if we don't have a clear understanding of how people want to engage with technology, then we are not serving people and we are not serving the public.
So our role is to change the mind‑set to focus on the public interest, and to make sure that any decisions that we make have that as core and center to any and all of their actions.  I look forward to more of the discussion and to hear more, especially from the participants, the chat and the comments keep growing.  I wish I could be there with you at the same time.  But here we are and a lot more to say.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Sonia.  The chat is growing and growing.  Thank you, this was a nice closure for this first round.  Now we can move to the second policy questions which says, what principles approaches, incentives and coordinated actions as enabling environment should be central to telecommunications, regulatory frameworks, in order to spur investment in, afford better Internet access and solutions in developing countries particularly in order to accelerate its penetration in the region.  Welcoming Moctar, we can start with you this one, the floor is yours.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY:  Thank you very much.  Thank you for having me.  Before going to this second round, I would like to take you back a little bit on what does it mean inclusiveness and meaningful access that most of the people do, to reset what I'm going to say, I'm going to give you example.  I'm in Addis Ababa and actually the capital of Africa, and I have almost one gigabit coming to my house, but my problem is when the power is cut, I lose everything.  I find myself with a very good car which is BMW, without know how to use it.  This is one of the biggest mistakes sometimes people do, the issue of power.  If you look at this very much, there is a good correlation specific in Africa, correlation function between the access to electricity and clean cooking, and the rate of access to Internet.  You see that they are close, 40 percent, 40 percent.  If you look at the discrimination, 40 percent of the people are in urban areas, other 40 percent cannot access Internet.  When we were doing engineering and setting up the network, what do we do?  First we ask the question, how will I power my station.  How will I power my station, my station in the sky or the earth, the first question I ask is, if I'm not able to power that station, it is useless.
Then this is what is happening most of the time.  Say there is 95 percent coverage, yes, probably, there is, on 2G, 1G, if 1G has existed, but the issue is even those people who do have the good signal of 4G cannot afford to access because simply there is no power in their houses, and there is no devices that they can be used to access meaningfully to specific application.  This is fundamental question.  And we as people from ICT we think that is not our responsibility.  We assume that the public sector or the English sector have done its job by providing the power and we have just to plug in.  That is not true.  We need at this point of time to coordinate and see that we cannot comprehend the issue of access to Internet without taking into account all things.  Why do we think the rate of urbanization, how to stop that, why don't you think there is a better way to invest and keep the population somewhere else.  Two or three years ago I have calculated the number of bandwidth that exist in Africa, tremendous amount of bandwidth, and guess what, digitalization rate of the current existing bandwidth of Africa is below 35 percent.  Tremendous amount of megahertz floating everywhere, but that is just noise, there is transport sector have capacity, they have fiber, everybody has fiber somewhere, but it is not being used.  This is where we have to shape our policy in taking into consideration the fact that we need to apprehend the development of access to Internet in a 360‑degree vision rather than focus on what is related to us.  With that I stop here and I'll be glad to answer your questions.
There was a good suggestion from everybody.  Thank you very much.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Moctar.  African region is similar, belonging to the global south from Latin America.  From there we have Christian, we welcome him in this panel.  We would love to hear your thoughts, the floor is yours.
>> Thank you very much, Roberto.  I'm grateful being part of this panel with such distinguished colleagues.  Some of you, I met Vint and Sylvia 20 years ago in the '90s.  We were building the networks.  We were deploying the equipment, learning and some others were teaching how to do that.  At the time we had to make a huge effort to reach the Internet, to build, in our countries, in Latin America, at that time there were no routers in our countries, no proper infrastructure.  Everything was built from scratch, to build something that nobody knew about at that time.  We had to convince our bosses, to convince everyone that it was worth investing on something that they didn't know.
  (audio breaking up).
A few years later, the landscape changed completely.  There were businesses surrounding Internet and service providers that saw the business case and started to deploy their own networks, and got used to wait for the Internet to reach to us, to connect our houses, to connect our universities, so in a few years, it was for Internet reaching place willing to connect, we recognized that it was something that was for good, not only for entertainment but a lot of value.  Not only the business around the Internet was clear, but also the need and the governments regulated accordingly.  So the whole system was ready in place to develop the Internet based on the business models for Internet service providers.  It was very successful, with that system we were able to connect almost half of the world.
But now we are in a situation that is similar to what happened in the early stages, where the current business model it's more encouraging the service providers to improve the access whenever people disconnected with more speed and not as much in reaching those areas where people are not yet connected.
We have to go back to the style that we have at the beginning, and try to enable those unconnected places to build their networks, small businesses, communities, whatever, so they are able to bridge unconnected place, they are able to deploy their own affordable access and connect to a connected place, to the Internet.
In order for that to happen, we need to adapt, we need several changes, we have to build another environment as it's proposed in the question, about regulatory changes environment, for those place that is need to get access so we have to adapt, we have to change.  We have to try new things in those areas that are not yet connecting, not only rural areas but also in cities, there are places nearby where there is a need for access, sometimes it's affordability, sometimes it's infrastructure, sometimes it's power.  So there are many reasons.
We have to create this new environment.  In order to do that, we need to change several things.  We need to be open to new approaches and changes and doing things differently.  That is sometimes difficult to get or to convince regulators and businesses and those that got used to work the way they did so far.
So we have to be prepared to adapt, because sometimes when there are changes you have to correct them so eventually you have to correct things that you decided, because some of the changes in the field that you tried did not work.  But you have to be open for those new approaches.  You have to involve as many people as possible in the decision, so when governments, new projects for infrastructure or new rules or new regulations, spectrum, whatever it is decided, deciding to connect people, you need to involve as many parties as possible in the discussion, because if you want things to change, you need to address and to analyze all the possibilities.
Also, we have to be fearless, and nowadays, it's not that difficult because there is support on connecting those that are unconnected.  We are all aligned on this.  This year ...
  (audio breaking up).
Things are more obvious than they were in the past.  Nowadays, no one doubts the value of the Internet, the Internet is a force for good, so it's easy to convince people that we might try things that might look risky or pushback.  Let's try to benefit from that.  Let's try to identify and remove barriers for ways to deploy new infrastructure.  Often as I mentioned before, all the systems prepared for businesses and oftentimes those are at the same time barriers for new small companies or community networks or those trying to build a small part of the network to reach, everything is usually prepared for big companies.  The process, there are business agents that need to be involved to go to the capital cities, everything is problematic when you think about a rural area or distant place.  Let's try to identify those barriers, involve those that are, the ones that we want to help, see what do they need and how can we support them.  That would be my proposal.  And on the second question we can think about commitments.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Christian.  You started this, action oriented comments, and you mentioned the difficulties that we have to overcome and include in the analysis, and it's similar to what Sylvia said.  Now we may go with Sylvia about what actions can be taken in order to overcome what you mentioned in your first intervention.  You have the floor.
>> SYLVIA CADENA: Thanks, Roberto.  Going back to the points that I made on my ‑‑ sorry, there is window from the Secretariat, that is blocking my view.  Sorry.  I lost my train of thought.
Going back to the points that I made in my initial intervention, I'm not now going to go to traverse over, I would like to highlight first the importance of increasing the level of investment in building technical capacity locally.  The Internet is as fast as secure as reliable, and affordable as the capacity of the engineers that deploy it, operate it and maintain it.
They may be in, they might be invisible when your connectivity doesn't work as you expected, but they are certainly the fairy dust that make it look like magic.  That resonates with the comment that Christian made about how we met over 20 years ago, when Vint was our teacher and we were trying to figure out how to bring the Internet to our countries in Latin America.  Now that I'm living in Asia, in 20 something years later, many of those challenges remain.  If you give me a second, I'm having to engage with my notes, give me a minute.  Sorry.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: If I may in the meantime, we are of course receiving your questions.  You may use if you want the question and answer button, but we have, I know that there is a lot of chats going on.  Some of you are also using this section, so again you are encouraged to put your questions using this button question, questions and answers Q&A.  Karim is also registering and systematizing them in order for our panelists to react later.
>> SYLVIA CADENA: I'm sorry.  The second point that I wanted to make was about, also resonates with what Christian mentioned, is that it's so important to have clear honest and open conversations between regulators, the Government agencies and operators, the operational and financially but with compliance, regulatory requirements, that may be negatively affecting targets when exploring deployment of new technologies like mentioned in the first segment, when facilitating access to remote communities, for example, can help regulators to obtain a deeper understanding of the challenges that new players in the market may experience to be sustainable like what Christian mentioned, as well as support change of the larger operators where compliance take a large portion of their business, something that resonates with what Mongi mentioned before.
There is a big misunderstanding between what actually happens in between in those closed doors, and the challenges that those operators actually face, they are large and small.  That dialogue needs to happen in a open way, which means sometimes it's difficult because when you put all the cards on the table, you are giving away part of your competitive advantage.  That is why having network operators groups, NOGs as we call them in the technical community, is important to make those bridges between network operators to discuss technical and business topics, that affects them, and compliance with regulatory requirements is one of those.
Finally, I think it's extremely important to continue to support effective coordination around disaster management and raise investment around disaster preparedness, so that recovery is faster.  In that regard, as an example of what happened when cyclone Pam hit Vanuatu, for example, trying to understand what providers back then, we were engaging with one that they had to have 17 towers that they used to connect different islands all start back under the ground, ready to go, in case the other towers were knocked down.  If you have to do that and bring a tower in a ship from New Zealand already put together over the ocean in a boat, it makes a whole different, it takes a lot of effort to actually make it happen.  In that cost of rebuilding the infrastructure, again and again every summer when a cyclone hits, is seriously affect affordability in economies about the population is small, to be able to make the margins that that investment requires.
One example to go back to what Moctar mentioned on electricity, I think he read my mind (chuckles) one of the examples of coordinated action which is the point of the second action around regulatory frameworks that could benefit the community is a deeper exploration across the global south of the connection between the Internet connectivity provision and electricity provision, which is as you mentioned Moctar intrinsically linked across the world as well as in many isolated areas of developed countries.  There are technical innovations already in place that support the provision of Internet access in combination with green electricity provision, that could support the development of sustainable business models targeting real community needs.  In those models, the electricity provision is what supports the sustainability of the Internet access.  But that literally hits two birds with one stone, but because the regulatory frameworks for those two services are most commonly managed by independent agencies, then those working on scaling up those technologies face considerable hurdles to be able to make it sustainable.  You can check, I will post later in the chat, there is a interesting innovation in region that is supported by Microsoft that is linking the technology for Internet provision and technology for electricity approach, but the regulatory framework doesn't allow them to make that more sustainable.  There are many others working similar solutions.  Thank you, Roberto.  Back to you.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much.  For closing this second round, we are going with Vint now.  We know that he had a opportunity to deal with several regulatory things, but I think he is also going to repeat several of his comments that he's provided in the chat, for those that are following the other channels, and not allow for them to see the messages, and they are really rich.  You have the floor, Vint.
>> VINT CERF: Thank you very much again, Roberto.  I have to say about the chat, I've seen some very interesting things happen between a serial presentation which is what our oral part is about, and the fact that people can be simultaneously saying things without colliding with each other, because the system spreads them out and puts them in some sequence.
I watched some of these discussions suddenly fall silent, where everyone goes over here to the chat, because they don't have to wait for their turn to type something.  That of course raises the other question as someone raised in the chat, which is how the heck do you follow all this because it's not in any particular order.  It is like a giant cocktail party.
Let me come back to the points that have been made already.  The first one is that there are a wide range of different requirements that need to be satisfied in order to make the Internet a useful facility.  It goes all the way from the provision of electricity to physical facilities for radio and wiring and optical fiber, and then into the application space, languages, in which the information is available and discoverable, literacy in the use of the system, and also knowledge about how to use the Internet safely.  That topic hasn't come up yet, but we all understand this environment is not necessarily the safest in the whole world.  The equipment that you get that has software in it may or may not be able to defend itself against a serious denial of service attack or against malware which is exploiting bugs in the software.
This is actually a very serious problem, and most people, including probably a good many of us, me included, are not in a position to actually go and secure their own equipment, we don't have access to the source code, not everyone is a programmer.  There are many different programming languages used in order to implement the technologies that we are relying on.  There is a safety and security and literacy component to all of this, that we should keep in the back of our minds as well.
Then I think the final point that I'd like to make as I listen to the aspirations and the expression of problems that need to be solved, is that even if we manage to solve all those problems, we will have created what I consider to be a potentially fragile infrastructure that we are depending on, and I'm nervous about our increasing dependency on these complex systems, especially software.  I used to make a living writing software.  I have a little dent in my forehead from the many times when I had to go, uh, what a stupid mistake I made, and probably a lot of programmers have this programmers' dent.
We are very dependent, we as a population are dependent on the skill of software programmers and to make matters worse, not only are we dependent on their skills, but we are dependent on them to find and fix bugs and then how do the bug fixes actually get to where they need to go, how do we know where they came from, how do we know they haven't been altered on their route from the source to the destination computer or destination device that needs the updated software.
All of those considerations need to be part of the solution, if we are going to insist on using these very powerful tools, but also very complex tools in order to carry on our daily lives.  The pandemic has simply highlighted how dependent we are and increasingly so, because of the absence of our ability to be in proximity to each other.  It also has highlighted what I consider to be the inequities in response, because some people cannot work without being in proximity, and if they can't be in proximity, they can't work.  That has a big economic impact.
We have a huge range of issues to be addressed, as the panel has outlined.  On the good side, we have people on the panel and in this session and more generally at IGF who actually care about solving those problems, and are looking for the technical and the policy and the economic solutions that are needed.  That gives me some hope that discussions like this one will lead to real solutions to making the Internet affordable, sustainable and useful for the bulk of the world's population.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Vint.  Another great closure for the round.  We are going now to the third round, with a question, are there particular telecommunications business models in mobile broadband Internet services that have been shown to be particularly effective at expanding affordable access to the Internet, and what are the role of the other stakeholders in bringing about this interest, investment and affordable access.  We can start with Sonia, please.
>> SONIA JORGE:  So interesting to hear everyone.  I'll start by actually picking up on something that Vint mentioned about fixing bugs.  One of the things that we have to do, especially to welcome new business models, new innovation, not just in financing but specially in supporting complementary providers, and really new business, new ways of thinking about the business of providing access is by fixing a couple bugs in policy and regulatory frameworks, that in fact prevent all of this complementary providers from not being bugs but actually being welcome members of the ecosystem.
I would say that those kinds of business models and I'm sure Christian might come back to that again, are the kinds that support and that many different community networks are implementing.  In fact, I'm sure there is others on this session that have done some work in that area, and I think community networks have a really wonderful promise and provide a incredible promise and hope into how we can reach many communities that have not been reached, that remain unconnected, that not only remain unconnected but are not covered, are very far from ever being able to afford.  So it's important to think about not just community networks and rural operators, cooperatives, all sorts of different kinds of complementary providers, that can fill the gaps that currently exist in the sector, gaps that have remained because of these traditional way of thinking about policy and regulation that primarily benefits large operators, the M&Os which again are very important, but are not able on their own to not only connect everyone, but to provide access to everyone affordably and meaningfully.  Fixing some of the bugs in the policy and regulatory frameworks is absolutely critical.
One important bug in that there is many that we can talk about, in fact we do a lot of work in that area and I urge you to look at the work we have done, but a couple that I like to highlight, one is precisely related to the point that Moctar mentioned on power, is having a lot more collaboration between the power and Telecom sectors, and making sure that infrastructure is better planned, coordinated so there is a greater amount of infrastructure sharing, but most importantly, around infrastructure planning, so that we can reduce the overall costs of the industry, especially on the infrastructure side, and therefore, transfer those savings from really good infrastructure planning, including with a power sector, to lower costs to the users.  It is not about just saving and reducing the cost of the industry, but making sure that those savings are transferred to users and customers of the entire ecosystem.
But the another area in addition to infrastructure sharing issues that is really important and especially important for complementary providers, is new innovative ways of thinking about spectrum policy, where unlicensed spectrum should be by default a norm, and not a exception.  It shouldn't be that anyone in any country or region of the world should be begging regulators to have a slim of a band to provide either wi‑fi, public access, or any other kind of community based access.  That should be the default.  In fact, all regulators and policymakers should include in their policies provisions to ensure that percentages of the public good that spectrum is, is allocated to the public interest, to make sure that people have access to connectivity in that way.
I think you mentioned, Vint, earlier the issue around wi‑fi, that is exactly where it's come from.  We are fortunate to benefit from wi‑fi opportunities in many parts of the world and in others, there is very little, because of this.  So again, a lot of these bugs can be fixed.  It is easy to fix them.  We need the will, political will and the commitment from those involved to actually make it happen.
The last point in terms of investments and stakeholders, Roberto, that you asked, as many of you might know, we did work with ITU recently which under Doreen has made tremendous progress in how to think differently about digital development, and we are proud and pleased to work with the ITU team to develop what is called a connecting humanity report, connecting humanity by 2030 to universal access, this idea of universal access that is at a minimum 4G connectivity.  One of the things that we explored in that analysis and that report is precisely the important collaboration and cooperation amongst all of the stakeholders in the ecosystem to bring about really good partnerships, really good investments, so that we can achieve that estimate that we put out of $428 billion of investment that is required in the next decade, simply to bring the world to that level of connectivity that we have been discussing here today.
Stakeholders all have a role to play, and they have a role to play not just as investors, but they have a role to play to make sure that as we invest in the sector we don't forget the importance of investing in digital skills, in content, in updating and revising policy and regulatory frameworks in the way that we were just discussing, but most importantly, really embracing this challenge and believing that it's possible.  It is actually possible.  Without sounding too naive, and perhaps a bit provocative, I want to say something that I share with colleagues as we were preparing for these sessions today, 428 billion may sound like a lot to a lot of people.  It is not very much at all.  That's 42 billion a year over the next decade, okay, I'll tell you what.  The world spends about that 428 billion on soda on an annual basis.  Soda.  Something unnecessary, no one needs, that's what we spend annually in the world on soda.  If we think that meaningful affordable connectivity is more important than soda, I think we can collectively muster our skills, our collective mind to bring about 428 billion to bring people online.  That is my call to all of you, is to partner with us, with our partners, the entire ecosystem to make that happen.
We know what needs to be done.  We just need to make sure that those that have the resources do it right, and do it in a public interest, and not in the interest of the few, and of the elites.  That is not good enough, as I said before.  Thank you again, Roberto, wonderful to see the discussion.  I hope we can share more.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Sonia, it was a great beginning for this final round.  We move to Mongi.  You have the floor.
>> MONGI MARZOUG:  Thank you.  First I have to comment some on the first speech of Sonia.  In fact, when I reported some figures on coverage, and mobile network coverage, those figures were reported by ITU and those information provided by governments, and I have to say also, I was ICT Minister for Tunisia, I agree with you on reliability of the coverage.  But I want to say the coverage gap is an issue, but more important than that is affordability, affordability, skills, digital skills, is very important, but why?  Because we have more than 3 billion people lives in coverage may be good, not good, but 3G and higher coverage, but they don't use Internet.  However, we have maybe more, maybe one billion, 1.5, but less than 3 billion, so we can say one billion without coverage.  Here we remark this figure is close to the number of people living without power, without electricity, mainly in Sub‑Saharan.  As you said, I agree with you, as you said there are some link, very important link between power, electricity, green coverage and telecommunication coverage.  I agree with you that network coverage still is an issue, and when we say, when we cover for example, it's outside coverage, it's not indoor and it's not deep indoor, you know I work many years for telecommunication.  I would say this is why it's not reliable.  This is why the link is weak.  This is why we need to innovate.  We need to share spectrum.  We need better policy of spectrum.  We need to provide low band frequency with better coverage.  This is what I agree with you we have to address for coverage, to improve the quality, improve throughput, improve coverage, but you know the indoor coverage in, rural indoor coverage is not a easy issue but we have to work on that.
Second, we have to address the issue, it's very important, of skills.  Data protection, for engineer to manage how to protect our data is not so easy, each time you open a Web site, you have many questions, it's not so easy, so we have to work, to train, to coach, in order to improve digital skills in those country.  Also we have to as operator and also as Government to push for, when we speak about universal service, universal service is not only coverage, it is coverage also social offer for population.  Now this second element is very important.  We have to work on inclusive and we have to work with Government, with tech company, with suppliers on the price of smart phones, the cost of handsets.  So coverage, digital skills and local contents, how to have service from administration, so these four acts or those four items we have to focus on them together.
But what I said coverage is still an issue, but we have affordability, we have skills issue to address, and they become very important in inclusion issue.  Thank you.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you, Mongi.  We go with Moctar now, please.  Perhaps you can tell us about any particular experience that you remember in Africa, about one particular example that you may share with us regarding this nice actions that some operators could provide in order to get affordable services for their citizens.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY:  Thank you very much.  To be honest with you, there is not really a substantial example that I know of, to provide to you with regard to a good example in providing affordable access within the continent, specifically due to the fact that unfortunately in Africa the majority of operators are actually nonAfrican operators, most of them, most of the time have been guided by the return on investment, rather than looking at the ICTs as developing the continent.  It's fair, it's just very fair.  But allow me to comment first before going there to comment on that has been said by, first of all, Sonia said what I wanted to say with regard to that.  Thank you, Sonia, for saving me time.  But I want to comment on, there is no, the policy and regulation of the continent has been compiled into a tragedy, most South Africa country get in the trap of cycling the same, recycling the same regulatory environment and policy, and keeping that going.  When the bug starts somewhere, you add it to things and you get into tragedy.  Most of the regulatory framework that has been proposed to Africa did not take into consideration the example of the United States, good example of affording access, FCC products that are allowing the broadband access, the Obama programs affording broadband to everybody, that has not been taken into consideration by those development institutions that are coming to Africa by trying to say that we are bringing to you something that is good, push to privatization of sector, we provide you with mode of licensing that probably is not adequate to African continent because we didn't take into consideration the realities.  The fact that Africa has been provided with a model of licensing and model of managing their ICT sector coming from outside, did not take into consideration what is actually the realities of the country.  All that has not been taken into consideration at the beginning.  We created what we call the universal access agencies and from there those agencies become a way of getting funding what we call election or so on.  Unfortunately there is no, those operators want Africa first as tremendously resistant the issue of community network.  The community network for instance could have been something that could solve problems.  But those are nonAfrican operators, are tackling that at the ITU meetings, tackling it everywhere else, because they say this is our space, but at the same time they are doing that.  To respond to your question, there is a need specifically for Africa and developing countries to adapt to fix the bugs, by allowing nonclassical operators to get into areas where they cannot, where there is no connectivity.  And as Sonia said, it has to be well coordinated.  It is not only providing access to the ICT, but also providing roads, energy, this whole urban planning scene, universal planning should be seen together.  Once you see that together, you will see that there is no need for corporate responsibility or anything else.  Everything will fall down and everything will be fit very well.  Over to you.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Moctar.  Finally, we are closing this round with Christian.  You have the floor.
>> CHRISTIAN O'FLAHERTY:  Thank you, Roberto.  Before going to the questions, I would like to support what Moctar has said.  And also I'd like to provide examples on what Mongi and Sonia mentioned about spectrum, the need to adapt our rules, laws, our relations to access the spectrum.  We have been working with a company, I want to address that in a few minutes, but in places where there is no business case for companies to deploy networks, and we manage to get sustainable networks in places where the spectrum was completely clean, nobody was using what they were allocated, and nobody was able to use it, because it had an owner.
Nowadays, as mentioned before, there are many new technologies and there were improvements on technologies like the mobile technologies like 4G, which nowadays do have open source software for the network, and very unexpensive base station so it's not difficult for a local small company or community or comparative to provide their own network, even when it's not business for a company, so they could do it themselves if they were allowed to, but they can't, because somebody owns the spectrum that nobody uses.
  (audio breaking up).
We have to change some of the things, working so far and now we realize that they need some changes.  The question itself is about business models.  It's clear that the current business model is very effective and companies were successful on developing the Internet so far.  Other cases that need a update, that need a different approach.  One of the things that work very well as I mentioned before were the communities themselves are responsible on building their own network, and reach connected place.
It is obvious that it's not a competing solution, it's a complementary solution because they have to bridge an operator, they have to build the network to reach a connected place, so operators shouldn't consider that a competing solution, because for them, it's demonstrated that it wasn't worth investing in those places.  When the local community, the local small businesses or NGOs or whatever that organize, it's organized and let them build their own network, they will create a service that is affordable for them.  As I said, there are many options nowadays to deploy inexpensive Internet access network.  We have to let the communities create the service that they need, and identify and remove all the barriers that nowadays are preventing those networks to arise.
And for them to be sustainable and effective, that there is a big component on the community part, so we have to have a well organized group of people that are aligned and we need to solve their problem.  Then you have to train, as Vincent before, nowadays communities are complex, there are security risks when you deploy the networks, because there are a lot of software components, and we can't apply the standard business model, network for you, projects where somebody comes and installs equipment, configure servicing, because in those places first of all there is no way for those communities to pay for those services.  It's extremely expensive, if you follow the current procedures to deploy the standards that those companies are used for, in those places, that would make the network unviable.
So you have to train them to build the network on their own terms, but at the same time, you have to train them to make it secure, and they have to know what they are doing.  They have to know what they have configured, they have to know the risks.  So the second very important part is capacity‑building.  You have to make sure that it is strong community, that it knows what they are doing, that they know what they are configuring and installing, and of course, there is always a need for funds, but if you compare the efforts required to deploy standard Internet coverage by companies, in those places, compared to what could cost to train the people and provide the equipment, there are orders of magnitude of difference.
Those are the barriers I was referring to, we have to look for those partners that are aligned with this and willing to help, and we are very strong support of community structure and community networks.  There are many angles with it because oftentimes those communities can access a part of the infrastructure, the companies might not be able to access, might not be allowed, but as they own their own facilities and things, they can use themselves or the lands or whatever they want to deploy the power, they own the land because they are locals but there are many things that make things much more easier for them compared to companies.
That is a business model that is going to be sustainable.  We look forward to identify more partners and people and communities willing to work with us.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Christian.  We are actually reaching to the end of the session.  We only have five more minutes for your final remarks.  We will try to make it, make them, I know it's difficult to concentrate all the things that you may like to say.  But first, before to go to that final round of interventions, I will ask Karim if you could read some of the questions, and perhaps one of our panelists would like to answer some of them.  You can go, please.
>> Thank you.  We had a lot of questions and most of them are in the chat, covered section, but we have Moctar who would like to respond to one question, the first one, are there good example of Government policies and multilateral aid project that specifically support community networks in remote areas which could help define solutions for other national situations.  The second one, a dollar can't be spent twice, if spent on spectrum can't be spent on network deployment.  What would be the impact if spectrum spending would be devoted to network deployment.  The third one, access and cost are the major challenges facing rural communities in developing countries, for instance in Sierra Leone, what is the role of ITU to support these communities, where Internet is still very expensive.
>> MOCTAR YEDALY:  I don't work for ITU.  The African Union met in conference last year, 2019 and have supported, decided to support the community, in the continent, my team and I have been task to work on that and we are cooperating with some of the institution like Internet Society to see how we can come up with policy and we start already promoting the use of the community network.  We don't want it to be in controversial with them, we don't want it to be confrontation with the local operators, we are preserving, making sure operators are preserving the interest of those license operators, we are trying to fill the gap with policy and policy has been prepared from African Union.  Spectrum is not money.  It is not just used to enjoy the money of, we have to use it for something, spectrum development this is probably the best approach for policy.  Over to you.
>> Thank you, Moctar.  Before going to the last remarks of our panelists, there was one question that I'm not sure it was answered, but it's good, if a Government ask you sincerely what are the three things we should do in order to facilitate meaningful access to most of our people, what should be your answer?  Now we can go, anyone, we will start maybe Sylvia would like to start.
>> VINT CERF: Part of the answer is it depends on where you are, what the local conditions are, what the current availability is.  There is a variety of different parameters that need to be taken into account.  What the Government should be doing is figuring out how to facilitate investment in infrastructure, whether that is by direct subsidy, by providing facilities, that can be resold, for example, wholesale and retail, or adopting policies that encourage investment and competition.  There are a variety of things that Government can do in order to provide incentive for investment in infrastructure and operation of new facilities.
>> SYLVIA CADENA: We go back to the main point that I made before that is investing in people, if governments forget that this is all about the people that they are serving, the people that elected them, that put them into office to actually deliver, then it becomes a numbers game and it's easy to forget that you are actually talking about people.  If you are investing in capacity‑building, investing in access to devices, in sorting out public access like in the example that Igor mentioned on the chat or any other option or solution that is available that you find out that is appropriate and fit for purpose, always remember it is about people, and that should guide our decisions, and how we take action.  That is why I mentioned earlier on the chat also that it is hard to guide our decisions and our actions based on effective and real principles, and human rights, I encourage you to find those principles, to look at organizations that articulated them, principles for digital development, principles for effective innovation, principles for intermediate liability.  There are a bunch out there that people in different parts of the equation could look at those, you should stick to those, we will get there.  The problem is we tend to forget that it's about people and when we take actions that are actually hurting people, so just don't forget that, and we will get there eventually.  It took us 25 years to get half of the world connected.  It might take us another 25, so we will see what out comes.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you, Sylvia.  Now we go with Christian, please.
>> CHRISTIAN O'FLAHERTY:  Yes, I'll try to, not to repeat myself, but to provide some examples of how to identify those barriers and the incentives that are required.  Oftentimes when you go to a regulator asking for permissions to use certain equipment or to use certain part of the spectrum or to get rights to cross or use a bridge or things like that, you get negative response without explanation.  Oftentimes the reason for that is that there is a process or there is a something that it's not allowed, but it's not clear why, and the way to address those gray areas or those blocking barriers, it is to create an open space for discussion.
Whenever a proposal to do something that can help connect people, let's try to invite as many people as possible to the discussion, and solve the problems, they might be things that when we ask for those permissions, there might be reasonable answers, and we can address different ways to do that, but the way to identify those barriers are to transparently and openly discuss those decisions, and this is what, multistakeholder discussion, but it's really the culture of transparently work together in a cooperative and collaborative way.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Christian.  We go with Mongi now, final remarks.  Thank you.
>> MONGI MARZOUG:  Thank you.  First, I agree with Moctar regarding spectrum.  In fact, we need better regulation, better spectrum policy and even adapted spectrum policy for rural remote area.  We need to allow spectrum sharing, so if we allow spectrum sharing we allow network sharing, site sharing, and also sharing of power sharing mainly in many country where we have problem with power.  I were also Minister of Energy, electricity, in many country now we work off grid solution.  Many grid solution, microgrid solution, and solar kit, and now we have solar to provide power, and with cost reducing, cost decrease each year.  We have to provide by sharing also radio solution adapted in to rural and remote area in order to improve coverage for this area.
As I said in the beginning in the second speech that the aim is usage, to increase usage, the benefit of a population by having Internet to improve skills and to muster usage of Internet and application, and thank you.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Mongi, and finishing the closing remarks with Sonia, please.  You have the floor.
>> SONIA JORGE:  Thank you, Roberto.  I thought there were one more after me, but I have to say after what everybody said which of course was spot on, there is not much left.  But I will then say, mention something that I put on the chat, that we didn't have a chance to look at, and that is that we really have to think more seriously about all of these issues, and bring a very strong not just gender perspective to the concerns but also a perspective of rural communities.
I think that really begs for the need for very clear targets and clear goals by governments, clear universal access goals and objectives, and they need to be in such a way that we can measure, we can keep all of ourselves, all of us accountable and policymakers accountable when they have those universal access goals.  I urge all policymakers to have clear goals, targets, targets that are not just about aggregates of the country but targets that are specific for the entire population, for women and girl population, gender targets and clear targets to address the needs of rural communities.  Those two groups, there is many other marginalized communities, those two are by far the most not only marginalized, but frankly increasingly excluded from the digital opportunity.
In addition to everything that everybody said, I would say we need to be a lot more intentional as to how we think about our role, our responsibility for development of the sector everywhere in the world, and we also need to make sure that that intentionality is one that focuses on the abilities of women in rural communities to have access to meaningful connectivity.  Thank you so much.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Sonia.  Actually we would love to be here at least for an hour more, but actually we passed a little bit of our time.
I would love to thank you, all the panelists, Christian, Sonia, Mongi, Sylvia, Moctar, for the great interventions during the session.  We received a lot of your wisdom, and we know that most of your recommendations will be taken into account in all this dialogue that has been established for a couple of years now, and I think give us a very nice future.
We still need to maintain the dialogue between all the different stakeholders and hopefully to think about new and creative ways to overcome the situation about Internet affordability and finally really get this global and universal access that we all want, that of course meaningful.
I would like to thank Karim, my colleague and friend, and all the IGF Secretariat for all the support in this great session.  I think there are going to be other spaces in which we will get together again to continue the discussion.  Thank you very much.  Thank you of course to all the people that were following this fantastic session.  Thank you very much.  We will see you later.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws129-the-revolution-wont-be-televised-but-social-mediatised^^

>> SABRINA VORBAU: Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to this IGF workshoP titled, The Revolution Won't Be Televised but Social Mediatised.  Thank you for joining.  My name is Sabrina Vorbau, a Project Manager at European Schoolnet in Brussels.  European Schoolnet coordinates the Insafe Network of European Safe for Internet Centre, who is also the host of today's workshop.  I will be moderating today's session together with my colleague, Niels Van Paemel.  I hope we catched your attention with this very short video clip that we just played now and you surely have understood that the lyrics of this song are somehow connected with today's workshop title.  And I'm handing over to Niels now who will be setting the scene and telling us a bit more about today's theme and the connection between the video and today's discussion.  Over to you.
>> NIELS VAN PAEMEL: Hello.  Can you hear me well?  So good afternoon from Belgium.  The Revolution Will Not Be Televised, is a poem and a song made in 1969.  The song's title was originally a popular slogan among the 1960s Black Power Movement in the United States.  The poem offered a pointist critique of the relationship between the media and the reality of change and revolution taking place in the streets and on the campuses in America.
And I hear you think out loud, the 60s.  That's a long time ago.  Well, it actually still feels more than relevant today.  Consider the influence of television.  Even in digital age.  Just think about last week.  And consider the power that networks like FOX and CNN continue to read over the nebulous thing, called public opinion.  Even on social media, the same divide seems to be reflected in the same way.
Since televised media has almost everywhere been into the hands of the people in power and not necessarily of those who transfer.  The big question of today is, is it different now?  Did everything change with the rise of social media?  Or are people still living in bubbles, maybe even without knowing so?  With today's session we will discuss a very popular and timely issue, namely the power of social media.  We'll talk about the way individual users or groups use social media platforms to influence and shape the public opinion of users and their followers.
The session will offer an interesting discussion between different stakeholders and experts in the fields ranging from Facebook representatives to children's rights advocates.  Topical and interactive and revolutionary.  Over to you, Sabrina.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you for setting the scene and I'm very delighted to welcome a diverse Panel of experts with us today and I thank everybody for accepting our invitation to join this revolutionary discussion.  I welcome Jutta Croll, advocate for Children's Rights in the Digital World and Project Manager at the Digital Opportunities Foundations also the Chairwoman of the Board.  Jutta is also a member of several steering groups and advisory boards of the European and International level.  She works also in close elaboration with the Council of Europe, the European Commission, IGF MEK and UNESCO.  Welcome and thank you very much for joining us today.  I also welcome Magdelena Duszyñska, a psychologist and trainer by passion and profession.  She is President of a foundation in Poland and on a daily basis she runs her own training company and corporates closely with local authorities on projects related to cyberbullying and new technologies.  Thank you very much, Magdelena and welcome.  I also welcome Anastasiya Dzyakava who was appointed as Advisor on On‑line Safety at the Office of the Vice Prime Minister at the Ministry of Digital Transformation in the Ukraine.  She took a leading role in the development of the National Strategy on Child Protection in the Digital Environment 2020‑2026.  She also closely collaborates with relevant NGOs and industry Partners in the field at National and International levels.  Welcome Anastasiya.  Thank you very much for joining us.  
Also warm welcome to David Miles the Head of Safety at Facebook for Europe Middle East and Africa.  He has more than 20 years of executed management experience within technology, regulatory and charitable work including experiences at IBM, Compaq and the British Board of the Classification.  David is also former member of the Expert Panel for UNICEF Global Fund to End Violence Against Children and worked as part of the We Protect Global Alliance and the Child Dignity Alliance.  He is also a former member of the UK Council for Child Internet Safety.  Welcome, David.  
And last but surely not least, Ricardo Campos Director of Legal Grounds for Privacy Design in San Paulo, Brazil and Chair of Public Law, Legal Theory and Media at University of Frankfurt in Germany.  Welcome Ricardo.  Thank you to all of our experts for joining us today and we are very thrilled to have you with us.
Before we kick off today's discussion, I'm also very excited to welcome two of our Internet for Kids Youth Ambassadors, Kathrin from Germany and João from Portugal, extremely active within the Youth IGF.  I'm sure you have seen them in previous sessions already.
The next part of this workshop will be mod rated by Kathrin and João.  We have prepared some interactive opportunities for our audience today to join the Panel Discussions with our experts right from the beginning.  As is the tradition for the IGF.
As we are talking and we mentioned already about the role of social media today, it is important and the power to influence our opinion or possible our decision as we are in a revolution, we are also letting young people take the floor because we find it extremely important to involve children and young people into the discussion as they have been growing up with technology and unfortunately, also very often exposed to the technology.
In addition to these interactive opportunities that everyone will receive throughout the discussion, we also encourage our audience to post your comments and questions throughout the workshop in the chat.  Niels and myself will be monitoring and there will be time towards the end of the workshop to flag your comments and questions to the expert Panel.
Without adieu I'm handing over to Kathrin and Joao. 
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: So happy to be here.  Just a short introduction on how the next minutes will go.  So we want to show you some pictures because we decided that we want to talk with you in the language that young people are using, which is basically pictures and peoples and we want to show you some of them.  Also our Panelists haven't seen them in case you wondered.  And we prepared some questions as Sabrina said, for all of you and we would be really happy for you to participate and also we have some questions for our Panel.  We want some chart answers and I'm looking forward to it and I think we can get started with the presentation of the pictures.  And the first pop question.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: I'm from Portugal and will be co‑moderating with Kathrin.  As Kathrin said, we will try to change a little bit the paradigm of both how we discuss this topic but also a little bit influencing the way we are doing discussions and debates at the broader level.  So feel free to take some ideas from what we are doing.
I guess we'll start with the first picture.  And the first question.  We want to show you some briefly this example.  Sabrina, I don't know if you can bring it up? 
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: Yes, please put up the poll for the first picture.  But maybe we just wait a second until you can see the picture because only then the question is making sense, probably.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Can you see it?
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: Yes, we can.  Thank you.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: So basically on this first picture what we want to discuss here is the idea that nowadays we are seeing these movements and trying to stay in touch with these ideas through social media.  First question for you to think and look about it is just, order by ascending responsibility.  What you're seeing here.  So what you can see is, someone that was on the street and was just getting robbed and ended up in the death of a woman.  You also see on this building, the idea of people retweeting and reposting things about it but perhaps not doing what should be doing.  Briefly, you could vote for it and we would like to see the results.  The idea is to have a little bit of a conversation now and jump to the question.  We'll be specifically asking for input from Ricardo and Magdelena about what they saw.  So social media is definitely an amazing space for spreading the word and calling to action on society issues.  But how far are we from the connection between this virtual activism and, which is definitely enhanced by our comfort behind the screen, and always this changing our behavior.
The question is, to what extent can we support or say that Internet and social media is supporting or hindering actionism in the off‑line reality?
>> MAGDELENA DUSZYÑSKA: I'll start.  The first thing that popped in my mind when I was looking that the picture was a bystander effect.  And you used that bystander in the poll, right?  I don't know ‑‑ you all know what the bystander effect is, actually.  So I will just explain shortly.  So when there are a lot of people present and it's emergency situation and like then the more people are actually present at the scene, the less likely somebody will try to help.  So I can see all the bystanders in the windows and they actually are doing something, right?  They are posting, reposting, sharing, but actually doing nothing.  So when we connect the bystander effect with the social media, then we can see that there is really bad influence on the bystander effect.
I can remind myself a situation in Poland which happened recently.  Three or four girls had a really huge fight outside of the school and they weren't alone there.  There was quite a big crowd around them but no one helped them.  No one stopped the fight.  No one intervened.  And why it was happening?  Why no one did nothing?  So then the question maybe bystander affect explain.  But actually we need to think about young people are more posting something in the Internet and less likely doing something actual.  So I'm thinking about maybe need for approval, which can be hiding behind that not doing anything.  And when I talk with my kids on the lessons and the workshops I'm doing, they are talking about the click biting.  What is the most click biting thing?  I think it's violence, like sexual content, and something outrageous they are witnessing.  So probably it can be bad.
And the other thing I'm just thinking about, it's like actual events that are happening in Poland, because I'm from Poland, so I'm just saying that vividly.  I don't know if you all know that we have like women's strikes now in Poland, and we are like truly fighting for our right to choose about terminating pregnancy.  I'm not going to talk about the abortion right now but it's a really big issue now here in Poland.  It was a along for a long time ‑‑ it was allowed for a long time and now it was banned and so a lot of people went outside to the streets protesting.  And there was a that comes with it and it is #womenhell, written in Polish.  Last week there was like 70 million views on TikTok on that.  So it's a quite big amount.  The same thing happened on Facebook because all celebrities and all influencers were using the same hashtag.  And because of them, there was in the culminating moment about 100,000 people on the street in Warsaw, in the Capital City of Poland.  And we have a pandemic time, right?  So people are afraid of crowds and now they are on the streets and all because of the hashtag.
So I can see like two sides of it.  Like plus and minus.  I have another bad thing with the hashtags.  We have like this issue of celebrities and influencers who are using these hashtags but sending something outside of the idea, right?  Not only the idea of women hell and for the strikes but actually we have these people who are trying to promote themselves because of it.  So we have hashtags for calling for action, calling for movement, and now we are going further and we are sending something outside of the idea, doing something commercially.
So I don't know is it ethical for me or not?  Thank you.
>> RICARDO CAMPOS: Thank you.  So I'd like to thank to Sabrina and João Pedro Martins for the invitation to participate another year in the IGF with safer Internet.  It's a pleasure to me.
Just to make a remark, I'm not the Chair of EA Frankfurt of Public Law but I'm assistant, a kind of lecture in the English system, the educational system.
It was interesting in both in the first picture is about the change in roles of the communication in the society.  So we have maybe for 20 years ago the mass media in the middle of the communication in the society and now we have much more of the social media.  So taking this place of the mass communication media.
Nicholas, a famous sociologist from Germany wrote a book on the reality of the mass media, and the first phrase of this book, the ‑‑ the book was published at the beginning of the 90s, I think '93.  And the first phrase, he begins his book with this phrase, "All we know about the world and about the society we know through the mass media."
And we could, today, rewrite this sentence and say, all we know about the world and about the society we know through social media.  And that is about our Panel today.  When we talk about the revolution, we are not taking place anymore being filmed and communicated through the television as a mass media, but through social media.  We are talking about this changing roles in the society.
And I would like to say some sentences on the picture.  I think the picture shows both the limits of the on‑line communication.  I think that's the point.  So we have a kind of ‑‑ we are taught in last 10 years that off‑line world would be great to the on‑line world.  So all of our relationships, our bank, our education was degrading to the on‑line world and we talked about the off‑line and on‑line world not existing anymore.  And I think now, about all we talk about social movements, we are seeing that also the off‑line world is too important for bringing social movements into same.  I think the picture shows exactly the limits of thinking of the world as only an on‑line world.  That will be my point on the picture.
>> MAGDELENA DUSZYÑSKA: Can I add something?  Because the first sentence in the book you said, Ricardo, is actually relates to this situation here in Poland because like people are really recording the strikes and the protests and they are sharing that on the Internet, and actually Public Television isn't doing that.  So it is really all we know through social media and it's helping us.
I'm wondering if we are going to discuss about also babble on social media, right? All we see is the only truth.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Let's hope to have images for everyone.  Do you want to add something?  So that is going to be really quick so we can move to the next one.
>> JUTTA CROLL: I want to say I don't think it's social media as a replacement for activism but a compliment to activism.  So people act in social media and they complement their activism in real life with social media.  So if I come back to that image, I would say I'm pretty sure that some of the people would have left the house and gone out to help the person.  But also they would have taken a video and spread the message of what had happened in their street and what they have faced and so they would also plea for the people to also react to such a situation.  So it's complementary to each other.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Okay.  So next going further in our discussion, I'll share with you again my screen.  And we have another one.  Kathrin?
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: Just to be clear on what happened with the questions, it seems that you get all the questions at one time, which of course doesn't make so much sense because we want to answer the question which is with the picture.  So if we pull up the next question, please just answer the Question 2 and not the others so we can get your opinion.  And if this is working, okay, if not, we will kindly ask you to put all your opinions about that into the chat.
So what you see is a famous picture and maybe you haven't seen it from other famous people who are doing this action a year ago or something.  And we were thinking that maybe behind this there is a bigger or more serious problem because at first this is different on line personas.  But what comes with that is that we have the necessity or feel the necessity of maintaining different personas on different social media platforms and because we feel that necessity, we may be at best much, much time in our digital selves, which we want to promote.  And I would really like to have a comment on that from Anastasia and Magdelena.
>> Thank you very much for inviting me for this event.  It's a pleasure for me to take a part.  And coming back to this picture, I think it's really important to add TikTok to this picture because linked in is early for children to use and Facebook sometimes ‑‑ I'm sorry it's dated but not for children.  Mostly used by adults in Ukraine it's really popular as well.  For example, everybody should have dignity in Ukraine started from Facebook not from Twitter.  As in a lot of countries, Twitter is political but for Ukraine it's Facebook.  So coming back to this picture, I think you expect from my side comment according to children and I think it will be happy to join and discuss situation for the last 12 year I live in Ukraine but originally I'm from Belarus and in August, we hold really big initiative for Belarus watch to support protest in Belarus.  So it will be really interesting to discuss as well and telegram involvement in these issues.
But coming back to this picture, I think it's really interesting how different we look in different social networks and how children has to present themselves differently in different networks, for example in TikTok and Instagram as well, but for me, it's maybe even more not according to different social networks but difference in off‑line life and on‑line reality.  And we really talk with children how they appreciate and evaluate quantity of likes they receive from social networks and I just finished to write my first book for parents about the children on‑line safety and how the range of Internet is with children and I ask them, is it important for them to know how many likes they received?  And most of them told yes, it's real important.  And when I ask, okay, when do you feel okay?  What quantity of likes?  And some children told me when I receive 100 ‑‑ 150 likes, it's okay; but if less, I'm really upset.  So it was really interesting experiment that Facebook hold in Australia when they don't show quantity of likes and children and parents can only see other liked photos.  I think it's a good idea.
And one more point, adding fortress when children doesn't force the real photos so they add their face or clothes or anything around them.  And I always ask them, why do you do this?  They told because all of our friends do this first of all, and second because I know in what way my photos has to look like so I will receive more likes.
And one more point maybe the last one.  It's fear of missing out or our understanding that maybe some people have better lives than I have.  Then because children can see on social networks only the realities that other people would like to show.  And it's no question to social network, it's question to users what we show on social networks and maybe it's a question as well to adults and communication with children that usually it's like not maybe babble in a way we usually discuss but babble of the children see and sometimes after users in social networks, they really feel upset because they think all these people on essential networks really only have this kind of brilliant life.  But all of us, they have really bad days.  But usually people don't show this.
So this case is when bloggers shows their reality and tell them, okay, can you see this photo where I'm really smiling?  And now I show you what I really day had in this day.  So it's like showing like on line on my view and reality and identity and off‑line reality.  And show children that it's not like this life, it's only part of my life you see.  I think it's really important because it also influences children self‑esteem and their friendships.  So I think it's really valuable.  So thank you David and Facebook and Instagram for this experiment with these likes.  I think it's really brilliant idea and children really appreciate this.  Thank you.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Just a note from the youth.  The question we put up was tricky because on line personality disorder could be a thing when we have several profiles on the same network, which I know that by some Terms and Conditions it's not allowed but it's what we are seeing children doing just to filter what they share with the audience they have.  I don't know if that helps to the conversation but let's see.
>> MAGDELENA DUSZYÑSKA: Thank you.  So, I will start with the question, I think, because when we see like Oprah profiles, the first question comes my mind is like what is the need behind this profile?  This profile, these networks just they are on the Internet for a reason.  They were made up for a reason.  So when we are up loading our pictures on tinder, what is the need for it?  Maybe it's the need for love.  Maybe it's a need for closeness, and maybe it's a need for feeding our ego.  And the same thing with the Instagram.  Maybe the need for acceptance and for Facebook ,maybe the need for affiliation so there are different needs so maybe that's why we need different profiles for fulfilling our needs, probably.
But you were talking for children.  I think about the youth because with teenagers and I'm talking mostly, so they are doing a lot of comparisons and they compare themselves.  Probably, that is true, they compare themselves to reality world and what they can see in Instagram but actually when I think about myself, I compare to myself too when I was there.  I compare myself to schoolmates, I compared myself with my backyard and when on social media there are new backyards right now right?  Each social media is a new backyard and we have a lot of people to compare with.  And we compare a lot.
Let's think about it why we are comparing ourselves.  It's because what was said about the self‑esteem, probably.  So when you're in the adolescent age, your self‑esteem is a bit lower and you're like looking for yourself.  You are shaping yourself again.  So that's why you need to compare.  But look about that.  We compare ourselves like a whole bucket with all advantages and disadvantages and teenagers know better advantages not disadvantages.  This is a whole bucket of me and then I compare it with a tiny sharing reality from the person looking at the picture.  So it's always a losing game because here we have whole buckets of me and here I can see only just classes of the person I'm comparing with.  So, always a moving game, right?
And the second thing I'm thinking about is paradox of choice.  It's like a book was written of the same title.  So when we have a lot of choices, our capability of making decisions is dropping sharply.  So this is a problem for us because when we have a picture and we need to upflood somewhere and we have so many profiles, it's eating our cognitive resources, I think, because we have so many options to where to put these pictures and what to write down so I think we need our cognitive resources for more important decisions.  So let's be careful of that.  Thank you.
>> DAVID MILES: Thank you for your comments it's really interesting.  This is my fourth IGF.  Very first IGF I attended was in 2009 and then social media was barely discussed.  It's really interesting.  It was just a very periphery issue.  It was predominantly sex‑based.  News feed was a completely new idea.  So I think one of the things I would put out there is one of the reasons why Facebook in early stages gained ground was because it really harbored a sense of authentic profile.  If you go back to that era, you have my space and other products and you could have anonymity and false names and so on.  So, one of the core principles of connectedness within Facebook is authentic profile.  That's really important.  So that is where the origins come from.
The other thing to say, speaking to the title of this discussion and I'll come to the picture in a moment, social media is not a fixed phenomena.  It's not only a Facebook phenomena.  There are lots of types of social media extending into gaming and other areas.  But just look at how social media is morphed.  We are looking at four images of pictures.  Pictures are actually fairly 2015.  We now video, we are now streaming, we are now doing IGF in this format.  Ten years ago this would have almost been what we are doing now would have been almost inconceivable.
And the power and connectedness of Facebook is not about just the authentic individual but of groups, of video, of free expression.  And our challenge in terms of our community standards, which is about what we allow and don't allow on the platform, is to get the balance right between Freedom of Expression, privacy and safety.  And then how do you apply those things across multiple cultures?  Because that's the other thing about IGF.  It's a global phenomena and one of the things that is really interesting is, the image you put up there for many young people in Africa, they have feature phones that wouldn't allow them, that don't have the data access to view that kind of content.  So the youth demographic globally is not seeing it in the same way always as we think.  Accessibility and digital literacy is still a problem typically in the global South in these areas.
I think what social media does is drive connectedness, and that's really important.  I think the other thing I would say too is that as social media evolved in terms of functionality, so have the responsibilities on us as a business and technology companies.  And sometimes the decisions we make about community standards or about racial injustice or about the other movements, or issues, are decisions we need to make with other people or ask governments for guidance on.  So we had to form an independent oversight board with 40 members, which came into force.  First case is in October, to look at those borderline issues, those issues which we can't make a decision on as a business.
So I suppose what I'm trying to describe in terms of features and in terms of the evolution of social media is that in that decade I spoke about, how quickly that has evolved.  And if you look at our global user base, which is more than 3 billion people, that is disaggregated across three platforms.  That's Facebook, that's Instagram and WhatsApp.  Those are different communities.  Some are public spaces like Facebook and Instagram.  Some are private spaces like WhatsApp.  And in some countries in the world, if you want Freedom of Expression, the private spaces are probably the only spaces you can have those activities.
And then the final thing I will say in terms of global is that only 13% of our users are from North America.  So we are truly a global technology.  And as a consequence of that, our user community is very large and diverse and it's very complex following these issues.  And I think the final element too, is that young people particularly teens that are on our platform because we have a minimum age of 13, are huge drivers of innovation on the platform in terms of thinking and to look what they do on Instagram, their well‑being is very important.  We experimented with the idea of hiding likes and working those kind of things.  We have amazing resources, safety centers, and young people tell us a lot about how we need to evolve our product and they tell us what they want and how they need it and that's why this kind of discussion is important today because often young people are the biggest drivers in terms of innovation and technology.  That the is hugely exciting.  You're seeing that in all sorts of forms in terms of short‑form video, music, all those different creative areas and they just happen to come together on social media platforms like Facebook, which is very exciting.
And I just would say finally, those four images are really interesting but they also speak to something that has been happening for many years, young people want to disaggregate their profiles.  They have their profiles for their clubs and for their groups and they want ‑‑ if they are 14 or 15, they probably would consider Facebook more of an adult platform than Instagram.  They are making those choices.  The real important thing is we have to provide the tools to make sure that they can make the right choices both in terms of their privacy, their rights and their safety.  And we always have to work really hard on that because just like our business model, it's evolving constantly.  So those will be my observations about the picture and this discussion today.
>> JUTTA CROLL:  If I may step in with one comment before we go over to that; because I do think it's very important to bear in mind how much children's development can benefit from this somehow playing with different identities and different profiles.  And I do think we have never had before a situation where children could in such an environment try out their identity and even try out an identity with a different gender, for example.  And that is so important in times of their development.  So I do think that is really a sure ride for children in Article 6 of the U.N. Convention on the rights of the child that their right to develop should be given.
So I do think there are really good opportunities within social media for the tryout of identities.  Thank you for listening.
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: A really hard comment which was in the chat which was interesting.  We need to think about the question if we have different personas in the off‑line world and I think our behavior in different social groups, on line and off line, is something which is going well with our next picture as well.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Exactly.  And more than being a space to experiment, there is also the question of how safe or how private or who are we sharing, but the time we spend there.  And this is a very provocative view.  So don't take it too literal.  The idea here is that we are living experiences through this digital platforms and we have influencers, bloggers, very different profiles sharing experiences.  The majority of young people and perhaps the adults right now in this pandemic situation, literally living experiences of others right at their sofas.  And this is a tricky question given this current state that we should stay at home and we should perform social distancing.  But how does this affect us?  Is social life ‑‑ young people stop doing things from for themselves and are now just consuming amazing experiences just watching the bright and positive side of things.
I always give this example of taking, for instance, seeing fast forward Lego construction that took me 30 seconds on the video but this is a process of try ‑‑ trial and error that is often not showed on what we share.
The other point is of course how we are absorbing the things we are doing on social media and that comes to the norm media situation.  The concept of being behind these different posts, we see the differences between advertising posts and the ones that are organically shared and how can we again bringing up the point from filter bubbles presented before.  How could we envision this moving forward?
This question was a little bit pointed towards the views of David in Utah.  I know there were already very involved in the last picture.  So they can perhaps pick up from where they left because I know definitely there is certain things that can be brought up also to these questions.
>> JUTTA CROLL: I can be very brief on this, I would say.  So of course I don't agree with that.  I wouldn't say ‑‑ I would say that especially during the pandemic we have learned how social media are.  We are not living in a time of social distancing but in a time of physical distancing.  And social media have enabled all the social to keep the social context and of course that counts so for young people, even so they can't meet their friends in the playground or wherever or at school; but keeping their contact with people.
And I would also not agree with saying it's not media, because again, I would not say it's replacing classical, traditional media, but it's complementary to traditional media and in some ways it's more prominent.  I would not say also more relevant but more prominent for people on social media.  Some people only use that but other people only use traditional media and I personally prefer to have a mix of both and then I can best fill my own opinion.  Handing over to you David.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: I'm picking up on a comment.  It was totally provocative to hear that social distancing must be the biggest terminology mistake of the pandemic.  And I have to totally agree and perhaps link it to what everything just been said.  Just to poke a little bit more and obviously David will pick up a little from here.  The idea of the social perspective of having 1000 followers.  The idea of having friendship with a new concept, broader concept.  I don't know if that makes it even more provocative of a picture.
>> DAVID MILES: I suppose a few things.  First and foremost, inevitably as adults who are not what we are speaking about in large numbers, often talk about things like excessive screen time and screen addiction and so on.  And if you look at the research and there is amazing research done by David Boyd in the U.S. or a Professor Sonia Livington in the U.K.
All these very interesting experts.  What they say really is it's not the quantity of time, it's the quality of time on what they are doing.  And I think that is really key.  If you are to ask a 7‑year‑old what they were doing, they would be doing educational things, fun things and so on.  And there are some prominent literally experts that believe that screens are almost a new form of literacy in their own right and they are pointing to the fact that prior to substantial screen times, it was significant evidence, for example of gender‑based level that young males in particular, they grew older and used and wrote less and read less, and actually all of those trends in terms of declining literacy as you get older, have reversed because young men and women are on line conversing, typing, messaging.  They are communicating in a way they never thought was possible before.  So I think we need to look at screen use in a much more holistic way, I think.
I also think when I speak to young people and I speak to a lot of young people all over the world, is that we should give them more credit for what they are doing and trust them that they really do know what they are doing and also that they are realistic about what friendships are.  Their real friendships and so on.  They see it as very complementary to their peer structure and the way they work.  And I seen a number of examples of how young people use that connectedness, particularly under COVID, to remain close to the people that they love and the people that they are friends with and their schoolmates and their groups and their clubs, and in a COVID world as we are in now, that played a really vital role, particularly for young people's mental health in this kind of situation w that kind of relationship is really important for their development.  So I think the sort of judgment‑based approach to things like, likes and fear of missing out can be overplayed at times.
I often talk to young people who are far more relaxed about this.  And I think we just have to take a more balanced perspective and a more evidence‑based perspective about what young people want from technology.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Glad we have a picture for that.  I'll try to move it forward and then hand it to Kathrin while I share.
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: Yes, so we have a lot of different themes at today's session because we couldn't decide on what is the most important topic.  So maybe it isn't that of a hard card going to the theme of elections and political candidates.  So, of course this question maybe doesn't concern smaller children but of course young people who are allowed to vote and of course a lot of young people also very young people are political and they see stuff on their different websites what political candidates are sharing with them.
So the question for us kind of goes into two different directions.  The first one would be to Ricardo.  Do we have an obligation to prevent the political candidates are posting misinformation on line?  And also, maybe we should ask a question if media content may be know us better than we know ourselves and maybe they already know who we want to vote and how can we tackle that problem?  And the other side of that question would be to Dave, which is, what is Facebook doing to prevent misinformation by politicians, especially during election campaigns?  I mean, we of course we see Donald Trump as the biggest example, but there are a lot of local politicians in our countries sharing misinformation with the people, and of course they use social media to be close to the voters.  I think it's a great idea but also maybe this is having kind of like a bad side.  And what obligation do we have or maybe you have, to change that?  Or to ‑‑
>> RICARDO CAMPOS: Thank you.  That is a really interesting question because also in the political system, they are facing the same problem of this transition from the mass media communication to platform communication.  For example, just to give an example n Brazil, the election law, before the Internet used to regulate ‑‑ still today but for 20 years ago ‑‑ used to regulate if ‑‑ for example, if a certain candidate should appear two minutes or 5 minutes on the television, and for that, for gaining more time, the candidate needs to make collisions with another party and another and so on.  So if you have a great collision, you have more time on television.  If you don't have great coalitions you don't have time on television.
That was interesting because all this law was taught for the society of mass communication.  And now we have social media.  So you can not anymore control how a candidate appears on the public sphere.  So now the election law is facing a new challenge, how to regulate who appears and who will not appear and we have and now this is a question for David.  So we have the scandal for the Cambridge Analytica.  And it was on this problem.
Now we are having the election in another field, in another technological feud, and at that time, 2016, was the problem of ad targeting.  Now as I see, I think the problem is now faced by Facebook.  But that time was really the problems or the transformation of the communication in the society from a mass communication society to a platform communication society.
And this for elections it is really decisive for candidates and also for society.
>> DAVID MILES: Ricardo you make some good points.  I think the first thing to say is that there are elections all around the world.  In fact, there will be 20 in Africa in the next year and the U.S. election as important as it is, it is one of many and since 2016, no question Facebook has learned a lot about that.  But really interesting, if you look at this particular election, this year Facebook helped 4.4 million voters to register ahead of the election.  So actually n some sentences, we have turned the benefits of our technology to help people register to vote.  And in fact, we now have libraries, we label advertising, and we hold people to account based on our community standards.
So, that's an important process we had to go through and we learned a lot from that and conducted our activities well, I think, this time around.  But we see that connectedness is very important.  And people's desire to express their views around all the issues that are around elections, because elections surface a whole range of social issues.  The United States racial injustice and all that emerged from that has been challenging for everybody in the United States.
The groups have formed around that, the discussions that have happened, particularly under COVID where people can't meet, where people can't travel, is part of that process of having a free and fair election.  So, I think that is important and we, as Facebook, we are constantly evolving.  I'm much more on the safety side than I am on the intellectual integrity side.  But nevertheless, you make very interesting points and I just would make the point that I think it's an interesting election result and one that in our own way, threw voter Registration, we played an important role in.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: That's good.  And jumping to our last image to share with you, we have come up here to discuss with you a little bit what were your perspectives on this very broad topic and the idea was to try to link a little bit with the title for some in the chat debating on the pertinence of the title.
For me it makes sense as I'm seeing the world through the lenses of social media, perhaps through the lenses of tell vision.  Obviously with augmented impacts of dimension that social media have gone.  And there were some reflecting done by or among other youth and this is part of a bigger publication that was done from youth for digital sustainability, a group of youth experts involved in Internet Governance.  And I wanted to get a really brief comment and open this to all the participants a little bit.
Since youth is one out of the three active users of media content platforms, and perhaps David can pick up a little bit as well.
What is your view about the need to ensure there is youth representation in this internal Advisory Board is also ‑‑ do you have any other ideas that can contribute to improve the decisions that effect this age group?
>> DAVID MILES: I think you make some great points here.  So the project that we kicked off in 2019 was what we called an age‑appropriate design jam.  So we are co‑designing a youth guide, which we will publish at the Safe Internet Forum with young people.  And we have done a range of workshops with young people around the world to get their input into ideas of things like Terms of Service, the way products work, features and functions.  We found that whole exercise really amazing because young people are on this technology a lot.  And they got very strong views on different things.  So we absorbed that and brought that back inside to something called TTC labs, which is a expert.  And we have written a youth design guide with their input, which we'll publish in two week's time.  That is one indication of just where this is going to go.
I'm absolutely convinced young people can play a central role in the way products and services develop.  They are major consumers of media.  And so we see things like the age‑appropriate design jam as one of those ways getting young people's input.  I think the other thing I would say too is that their tastes and interests evolve dramatically.  And one of the things that came across certainly with our co‑design work with young people is not to treat young people as just one block.  There are lots of different demographics of young people but also there are lots of different age groups with different developmental needs.  So you have to design products and services for those age groups.  They think will be a trend going forward.  We have launched messenger kids, for pre‑teens based on research that we did with young people and pre‑teens, about products they want.  And that's been hugely successful outside of Europe.  And I think you'll see that emerging more and more on features that we develop on Instagram, and other products, because young people want those kinds of things depending on the age they are and what is developmentally appropriate.
So I do think that young people are part of that process and I think they will be increasingly so.  Those young people are tomorrow's adults and they will also, as adults, make a significant contribution to the way the Internet develops and I don't think that there will be the same generational gap there has been in the past around that.  So they'll skip forward, I think, much more to what the empowering capabilities are on the Internet that may be previous generations who struggle to get their head around the complexity and fast‑moving nature of those kinds of things.
And I think the final thing I would say, lots of other things need to change.  Education needs to change.  It needs to be much more responsive to the digital world young people are from.  In many schools in Europe, we keep children away from technology in schools.  In fact, that probably needs to be rethought.  So I think these barriers that we have placed based on old ways of working both in terms of education and other things, will probably need to change too.  And I think young people can be part of that.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: So I guess we will be asking for more questions.  Kathrin do you want to jump until a little bit?
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: I see that Anastasia wants to add something.  Please to the whole Panel, give us your thought about that.  Maybe if you also think that something like this is possible and maybe also if it's like a right for young people to participate in that process because like content platforms are working as kind of private legislators on the platforms.  So I think it's so important people who are using it are included in making the terms of it.
>> ANASTASIYA DZYAKAVA: I think it's really important for us to take apart and the develop such tools use and during development national strategy of children alliance safety, we worked closer with U.S. because Ukraine we have National Council of children who take apart in national solution and government position development.  And also I'm Founder of the First in Ukraine, educational project about women and extortion and sexting.  We work closely with this council.
When we developed a chat board for teens or some lessons, we really usually show them and receive their feedback or when we develop social advertisement and our main audience is teens, we usually consult with them because we understand that we don't know even these children will love.  So they have to consult with them and show them and ask them.
I really like example of U.K. organization child net when they teach children how to teach other children because ‑‑ about on‑line safety of course.  I really think that children, it's more interesting for them to be taught by children, not by adults who they sometimes think that they just don't know how to use WhatsApp or Skype even; especially before a COVID lockdown.  So I think it as well is a good trend to teach children how to teach other children because by this way, other children are more involved and teach children who teach other children and receive more knowledge.  And I think that as well involving children into taking this decisions, we show them that they have this voice and we really listen to them.  And I think businesses can be really useful because if invite children to take a part, first we can make it more safety but if maybe not good for children but it is easier to make how children will use it more.  So it's a question of screen time, of course, but ask children what you like to use.
So yes, I think it's really important and during my interview with children, I really often asked what would you change in social networks if you can do so?  And in Ukraine we have a little bit problem with Instagram.  When girls really, pre‑teens, girls, 9, 10, 11 girls ‑‑ sorry they usually come from Instagram.  But they told me if it would be possible, I would like to do my best for adult men from other countries not to be able to write to me.  So it's really big question in Ukraine with this and communicate a lot with maybe girls, with audience and I think sometimes social networks can do nothing with this.  But it is really important to raise awareness about these issues and talk to the children about communicating with strangers.
And one more point maybe last point about taking children to participate it's when parents overuse technology.  And sometimes children come to me after lessons and say if you can do anything in this on line world, can you please do something with my parents?  And I'm like what would you like me to do?  Could you please stop them from using smartphone as much because they don't spend time with me.  They spend all their time at home with smartphones.  So why the heck they don't spend time with me?  So sometimes it's a question not about children overusing consumption on line time but more parents as well, especially in this lockdown period.  Thank you.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: And quick to Magdelena.
>> MAGDELENA DUSZYÑSKA: Just speaking about the time of initiation of using technology when you're a child, because of the touch screens, we have like really six months of children who are actually seated in front of screen and like forced to watch something.  So the time of initiation is very early.  And because of the touch screen, the tablets and iPads.  And then thinking that we don't teach kids in the kindergartens.  We don't teach kids ‑‑ at least in Poland, like really preschoolers what is Internet?  How to do Internet, right?  But kids already know what Internet is because they look at their parents.  They see that their daddys and mummies are doing something, texting or whatever.  So I think that is the time to teach technology should be earlier.  And the second thing, I think that we should teach not only about technology, but about empathy and emotionally intelligence and this is the thing.  And also critical thinking.  Because the fake news they are going to read on the Internet when they older, so these are things we shouldn't forget about.  Thank you.
>> ANASTASIYA DZYAKAVA: Just one sentence about early childhood.  Last month with the fairytale for children about extortion where torture of animals, communicate on zoo book.  And one animal ask another one to send a photo of like animal clothes.  So I think for smaller children, we should be really creative and find some lessons and really creative solutions.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: Thank you.  I don't know if anyone else wants to briefly comment on the challenge we raised and offer any other solutions?  If not, I don't know, I haven't seen the signal.  If not, I just want to thank you for first of all taking the challenge to speak with us, to come up with an open mind and see the images for the first time and try to really engage on the big picture.  It was really a broad discussion.  So we did not try to focus much on one specific issue because as many of you said, this is a broader discussion.  This is a very pertinent and large debate.  So, of course I have to challenge David to take our challenge of having a seat on the Advisory Board, of course, but also reflect on the other ideas of bringing and where to focus in terms of education, in terms of the skills we want and the age we want them to be learned from youth and children.  From that end, I think that leaves my moderation role that was a little bit too interactive as well.  Kathrin, I don't know if you want to say thanks as well and I will leave it to you.
>> KATHRIN MORASCH: I want a short thank you to our Panelists and also to all of the people who are watching.  I can't see you but I saw a lot of comments in the chat and I think they were really interesting so far.  And if you still want to discuss with us, I don't know, I think we can have a discussion on the topics with the IGF 2020 or something.  We will see that and I'm happy to hear what your questions are in the Q&A are.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you very much Kathrin and Joao for preparing this interactive part, which we believe also supported inclusiveness and also gave our participants today the chance to join already the discussion from the beginning of the workshop and as you said, indeed a lot of conversation took place in the chat already.  We do have some time for questions now.  So reminder to everyone who would like to ask a question to our Panelists that you can do this in the Q&A section or you can also simply raise your hand and we will surely be able to unmute you.  I will just start.
One question addressed to David and this is linked to the picture we have seen concerning the elections.  So the question is, Facebook is encouraging people to vote.  Are they encouraging people from all sides of the political spectrum?  Because when you only doing this aimed at one particular side this may negatively effect the elections in order to make sure that this does not happen, isn't it better for Facebook to strictly act against election interference and besides that try to keep out of this debate as much as possible?
>> DAVID MILES: Great question.  Thank you very much.  And again, I must reiterate, I'm not from the electoral side of Facebook.  I do the child safety and other areas.  So all I will say is that the ability for people to register to vote, which is really important.  This year was the highest level of Registration ever in U.S. history.  So I think we played a role in that and that is done through the news feeds without any political alignments.  So I would say that from my perspective, that seemed to be a fairly objective way of ensuring people have the opportunity to have a free and fair vote in what is or was a very challenging election.  And that is probably the main thing I would say.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you very much, David.  There was another question in the Q&A section which is not addressed specifically to one Panelist directly so I'm just voicing into the group.  Which was about raising awareness because we have heard a lot of things that the different experts have been doing but people are asking as an individual adult, for example, what can I do to support this message?  What can I do to raise more awareness and help children to not only be safe on line but also to be aware to develop critical thinking skills and also empathy as we heard before?  Any tips or recommendations from the Panel?
>> DAVID MILES: I would make a comment.  Facebook a technology player, ultimately.  But we rely on the expertise and purpose of lots of amazing NGOs and some of the individuals here have been involved with amazing resources and guidance on line.  To give an indication, we have almost 400 partnerships globally just in this area.  People who specialize in peer‑to‑peer mentoring in the U.K., programs in Germany which we have seen through Click Safe and other programs.  So there is a wealth of resources out there for young people.  I think sometimes as a point was made earlier, I think some adults could benefit from the that guidance as well but I think on the whole, there is plenty out there and it's very exciting.  And I think within the IGF context, you see a lot of those NGOs here talking about the amazing resources they developed and the young people they work with.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Anyone else from the Panel?
>> JUTTA CROLL: I have already posted a link to the National Academy of Media and screens in the Netherlands.  And I do think they do a lot of work in this regard.  They have a huge programs also for teaching digital literacy in schools.  So I'm not sure what background to the question that she says there is barely any attention in education about it to literacy in the Netherlands.  So maybe she can explain a little bit more what against what backdrop she posed that question.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Maybe there is some opportunity we can unmute Daphne to join this conversation?
>> NIELS VAN PAEMEL: And maybe add to that there is always a possibility to contact your local safe centre.  In the Netherlands there is also one.  And they will always ask people who will lobby towards both issues to change things like for example, I live in Belgium.  So it's always good to know where you always have a local safe centre.
>> DAPHNE: Thank you.  Can you hear me?  First of all, thank you for very interesting discussion that has been going on.  It was very interesting.  I have a lot of things to think about.  Where may plan of where I came from is where I'm talking about children living on my street and with my nieces and nephews who go to primary school and started high school.  I just noticed they have such little awareness and when I ask them if they get taught on school about it, they always say, no.  And we just learn it ourselves and we just talk about it with friends and stuff.
But it might be that it is just very limited and it's only through the schools that those children go to that I talk with.  So, that's basically what my question was based on.  But still thank you for sharing the resource.  I'll definitely look into it.
>> JUTTA CROLL: I'm not from the Netherlands so I don't really know about the situation in your country but what I learned from a lot of research is that media literacy training, media literacy teaching takes a lot of different forms.  It's of course not only learning about how to use the technology.  It's also about critical thinking, about ethical thinking, and it comes in very different ways and I do think that all of the people who do digital literacy education do need to be really careful what messages they convey to the children, because many of the messages that we as adults have developed and decided for media literacy training, turned out in the end they are just not comprehensible for the children.  That they have a different way of thinking and sometimes when we think okay, that's very clear and obvious what they should do or shouldn't do, and we try to educate in that way, a lot of these things are missing their target, therefore I do really appreciate approaches where ‑‑ I have understood from Anastasia that she is planning for peer education.  I do also think that another way of doing it is let young people participate in the development of such training, of such educational resources, so that they are more addressed to the target group we want to reach.  Thank you.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you very much.  I'm checking with Niels if he has any additional questions as we are coming to the end of our workshop.
>> NIELS VAN PAEMEL: I was getting the chat and I think we have tackled everything.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Okay.  Very good.  As we are coming to the end of our workshop and we have about five minutes left, I would like to give the opportunity to our Panelists for our final closing question.  And also looking towards what is next, looking into the future, possibly future IGF discussions.
As we orangey have five minutes left, we have picked a yes and no question to answer.  I think we have understood, based on the discussion, and we also agree that by now the revolution that is started already, that is ongoing, is clearly social media ties but the question to our ‑‑ the final question to our Panelists would be if it's also already democratized.  And starting with Anastasia.  The evolution of social media ties but democratized in your opinion?
>> ANASTASIYA DZYAKAVA: I would like to believe so and especially the example of Ukranian relation in dignity and revolutions that happen now in Belarus that all of them started through social network in the Ukraine from Facebook and Belarus and telegram and also actions that we have organized at the support Belarus in August through Facebook thanks to Facebook, we were able to contact people all around the world more than 30 cities all around the world to support this initiative.  So I think that social networks really allow us to involve power of people to send for their rise.  Because no T.V. channels in Belarus show reality what happens here.  And telegram and social networks only opportunity to receive this information.  And according to telegram, in Belarus, you can receive for fire or throw them in jail, if on your phone you have telegram.  So it's forbidden channel.  I think social networks and social like communication messengers the only opportunity for revolution in some countries to stand for their rights and to at least have a chance to bid Democratic.  Of course Belarus is not Democratic country for last 5‑6 years.  So I think it's opportunity to become Democratic country thanks to social interests.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you.  Magdelena?
>> MAGDELENA DUSZYÑSKA: I was listening to Anastasia and I agree.  And I'm thinking about Poland right now.  We have some cases when students are actually ‑‑ they are forbidden to join the sacrament of confirmation because they use hashtags, or teachers it's like they are investigated because of they are having like layouts on the picture of profiles on Facebook with the lightning sign, which is a symbol of women's strikes now.  So I'm totally agree with Anastasia.  I see that in Poland and I really believe it will be democratized also.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you.  Ricardo?  Is the revolution democratized?
>> RICARDO CAMPOS: So I think the question is much more complex than one way answer.  And of course, we have had democratization of the communication of social media but we have another problem with that.  Also discussing that is the problem of misinformation.  And that will be the negative effect of this complete democratization of this information because you can not trust anymore an organization.  Because Facebook do not produce a content now.  And in Brazil I'm still working on content moderation, the transferences obligations for the platforms and so on.  And I ‑‑ it's really important to focus in this two pair.  So you have Democratization of information and other side we have also another problem that we need to face, otherwise we don't have a public sphere, we don't have discussion, we don't have people informed because democracy pre suppose good information.  Without good information cannot vote.
And now we have new intermediaries and now we are talking about what is the obligations of the new intermediaries.
And I would put focus on this new ways so we don't only one way democracy is democratizing but we also have another path on that that we need to discuss much more than only say democracy for information.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you, Ricardo.  Jutta.
>> JUTTA CROLL: I would say yes but there is still room for improvement and that's all.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you.  And it was great and last but not least, David?
>> DAVID MILES: I think Facebook is about building communities and bringing the world closer together.  I think social media has been revolutionary in that process globally and there are huge responsibilities that we absolutely understand but as I said earlier on, our technology will evolve to meet those challenges.  It's in our interests to make sure that people see information that is accurate and reflects the decisions they make and give us Freedom of Expression and gives them right to activism and has them and connects them to the ones they love and run businesses and do all the things they need to do.  In other words to be a mirror of the real world we are in.  And I don't doubt the channels of that but given that is only happened in the last decade, we have come a huge distance and I think things like the oversight board and many of the other things we do are indication of the fact that we take those responsibilities very seriously.  And I believe the benefits far outweigh the challenges we sometimes face but we are up to those challenges and we believe that more long term with social media as it sort of evolves and people really embrace it as they do around the world.  It can only be a force for good.
>> SABRINA VORBAU: Thank you very much, David.  And to all the other Panelists, I believe this gives us some food for thought and surely it was not just a simple yes or no question.  And I believe has opened a Pandora box of future discussions that we definitely hope to continue at this IGF but also at future IGFs because we do believe that today's workshop also touched up on very important key pillars of the IGF.  We talked about trust.  We talked about inclusion, privacy, identity and last but not least, surely also youth participation.  So big thanks also again for joining us today and to all the key Panelists for taking the time out of your busy agendas and to the audience and we do hope that today's workshop was interesting and fruitful and you also felt like you were able to participate in a similar way as we would all be together face‑to‑face in the same room.  Please everyone, stay safe and healthy and we do wish you good continuation of this workshop IGF and very good evening from Brussels and I do hope to see many of you in person very soon.  Thank you very much.  And good evening.  Thank you, everyone.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws132-inclusion-challenges-and-solutions-for-fair-online-education^^

>> YANG LIU: I'm a speaker for this session.  Welcome to everybody for joining us in the early morning, also all of the different places.
We start with a very brief introduction of ourselves.
I'm a professor located in Shanghai, China.  We're ‑‑ we're the unique University, we're close to Disneyland.  We probably are the closest University for Disneyland in Shanghai.  If you're planning to go to China, you're very welcome with us in Shanghai.
That's me.
Mikhail Komarov, can you introduce yourself?
>> MIKHAIL KOMAROV: Thank you.  Yes.  Thank you very much for the invitation and for the participation in this session.
My name is Mikhail Komarov, I'm professor in the Department of Business, a national research school located in Moscow, Russia.  I'm also an academic supervisor of the Master's programs and an advisor to different foundations supporting young people with their innovative developments.  It is a pleasure for me to be here.  Thank you, once more.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you very much.
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: Nice to meet you, good morning, good afternoon, good evening, depending on the time zone.  My name is Elsa Estevez.  I'm UNESCO Chair at national University of the South in academia and also an independent researcher at the national research council for scientific and technological research and full professor at the national University here.  I'm a specialist in digital government for the last 16 years and I have a PhD in computer science.  It is a pleasurer to be here.
Thank you for the invitation.
>> YANG LIU: Xiang Zhou.
>> XIANG ZHOU: It is nice to meet you.  I'm from the University of Science and Technology of China.  Our University is located in Wuhan, and I'm a full professor of the ICT department and I'm a leader of the Joint Research Center of Green Computer Networking and I'm excited to share some ideas on the online education here.
Thank you very much.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
We start now with the presentation.
I will share my slides, my screen.  Let me see.
Everyone see the slides.
Thank you, everyone, for attending this workshop, Inclusion Challenges and Solutions for Fair Online Education.  We're particularly interested in the challenges facing during this period of time when most of the education courses are online.  I'll share with you some experience and cases in China in dealing with this problem.
This is a picture obtained in UNESCO, it is about the problem facing school closures forced by COVID‑19 during this period.  You see the number of numbers and students affected during the last few months.  It has become a very challenging global problem.  Also, just last month, The Wallstreet Journal and the New York sometimes had two articles talking about the evolution in education after this period, especially you have unequal internet access because the lack of internet access in different place, especially the remote area, in the mountains, causing problems for learners.  You also have unequal learning terminal, some were families that may have insufficient mobile phone, tablets to access the internet.  That causes a problem as well.
The Article published by Wallstreet Journal just two weeks ago talking about interference with online courses such as the process for children.
So this is the background for world internet users, and you see the penetration rate in different place and countries are quite different.  The work total number is only 62%.  There's a lot of spaces and places and the earth cannot be covered by a very efficient internet access causing a big problem for fair, online education.  According to the UN Children's Fund, 1.2 billion school children remain affected by school closures and are grappling with the realities of remote learning in the midst of COVID‑19 pandemic.  The inherent inequalities are threatening to deepen the global learning crisis.  That's becoming a more and more challenging problem, not only for developed countries but also for Developing, Underdeveloping Countries.  
For example, in China we see news in February about the very ‑‑ about a lot of challenges facing students being in remote areas, in the villages.  You see several pictures here.  Children studying on the ground, in the mountains, just to get a better signal through mobile phones and also they can get a better quality of online education program.  Also I have heard of stories of a local family in Shanghai, two boys share only one mobile phone, so the school actually bought a new mobile phone for the family so both boys could access their online education simultaneously.
In the case and challenges for online education in the U.S.  according to different sources, one in ten of the poorest children in the U.S. has little or no access for technology.  About 12% of respondents from the households earn less than $25,000 a year and said a digital device was rarely or never available for a child to use for learning, and only 9.8% said the same of the internet.  Even for the richest countries like U.S. and China, still a lot of families cannot afford to internet access to enjoy online education.  In change hey, during the period of the COVID‑19 pandemic outbreak, the secondary school faced a lot of problems in Shanghai, about 1.6 million students need to access different sources for online education starting from grade 1 until the last year in high school.  You have 12 years of students needing online education.  The local government has a very strong organization, they accumulated resources and provided SMILE service to everybody, it is a platform, Shanghai massive intelligent learning, it will support several students in studying course, they use internet, stations and other ways to support the SMILE program to provide sufficient educational resources for the primary school and secondary school students.  1.6 million in the last few months.  It is a great achievement.
They promote one source that's SMILE, it means that every student has two online teachers, one teacher for unified online teaching and another for individual tutoring to support the requirements from all students.  They also provide multiple channels to avoid access in the quality in different places.  For example, it is used primary for schools, TV, the primary school students, they can be focused for this learning process.  Also they support multiple devices, multiple terminals and you can use any terminal to access the resource from anywhere in the Shanghai local area. 
In this case, they have built an open, shared educational resource service platform and they provide multiple levels of educational services through the two teacher approach.  Also as I mentioned, they use different channels to broadcast and to support internet access to the same online education resources to promote personalize the online education based on different kinds of devices.
In the last few months, the statistics, more than 1.6 million users of this service, because of the password, many students from other provinces in China, they also enjoy this SMILE service developed for the Shanghai local students and there is over 20 million views that have about 110 million views for the recorded videos so you can replay the program as you like.
This is the premise of the case for the secondary school.  The next case, it is about online education for the University, this is the case for Shanghai tech University, my own University, we did something like Zoom, students, they're located in different places in China, they can enjoy the same platform and interact with their own teachers.  This is a picture for online summer school and summer courses from this platform.  This is the procedures.
Before online course at the Shanghai tech University, they had the bandwidth to guarantee the performance, starting in the end of January, teachers started to record the videos and we had a schedule so plan in advance and then we had multiple rounds of performance tests to ensure the formal opening of the online course in March 2nd.  That means we spent about a month to prepare everything.  The online courses have a total of 12 weeks, 330 lessons, 40 courses and 8 teaching sites and 33 people were dedicated to this platform so that received very good feedback from our students.
In this case, we have some experience to share.  This, we need to have a very solid COVID‑19 prevention and monitoring platform, making sure everything is low risk on campus.
You need a strong online education management system to report every day activities.
You also need a very strong administrative service.
You need collaborative professors to record these processes or providing realtime interactions with courses.
Also you're dealing with a lot of students, so you can solve the students' connection problems in advance.  We provided additional bandwidth for rural area students so that they can access the internet with our support.
In the future we think maybe from the technical side we need to consider a more intelligent network structure because through this period, we have found that our network, it is not adaptive and not very flexible.  That's why we have traffic and a lot of problems.  We think in the future we need to support various access messages in virtual networks and we need to look at the inequalities to provide adaptive networks.  This is a problem, the solution from the technical side.
In the previous, current system, to solve a problem, it is about more than one hour, 76 minutes.  If we have AI or more intelligent decision‑making based network structure we can make this decision making process more autonomies so that we can reduce the time to solve the troubles in the network and in the process of providing services.
That's all of my talk.  We can interact with all of the viewers from the discussion room.  I will answer questions from that platform.
Thank you very much.
The next speaker, Xiang Zhou, grab the screen and start your presentation.
>> XIANG ZHOU: Okay.
I think you can see my screen.  I will start my talk.
Hello, everyone.  Thank you for your participation in this.  My name is Xiang Zhou and I come from the University of science and technology of China.  I'm happy to be here to talk   the online educations in Developing Countries today.  The main tong of my talk is the fairness, professional and culture protection of online educations in Developing Countries.  This is the outline of my talk.  First, I will talk about the fairness of online education for Developing Countries.
One question, does online education improve fairness?  From the aspect of education opportunity, the fairness does improve in online education, for example, MIT courses that used to be inaccessible far away, on the other side of the Pacific, now it can be easily accessed through only one internet connection.  Now, no matter where we are, we can enjoy the courses online and have the opportunity to receive an education.
Meanwhile, the online education, how to solve the problem in poor areas, therefore, the gap between the rich and the poor in educational opportunities will be reduced.
However, the empirical evidence in some surveys suggest that online education may have widened the gap between students.  The figures in the slide shows the effect of taking online courses for students with different GPAs and the figure has below medium, the online classes, it reduced it by .5 points or more.  For students with a prior GPA in the top three deciles, the effect is not statistically different from zero.  The conclusion is choosing online will result in .33 drop in GPA for this. 
Still, online education is the best direction for improving fairness especially the field of education opportunities.  A few months ago I read news from a newspaper due to the pandemic of COVID‑19 and most primary classes are taken online.  You take online class on a chalkboard, and this news impressed me on the difference of the conditions of online education.  If you want improve fairness, there is a number of directions that we can work out.  We can narrow the gap in poor and rich areas in Developing Countries.  It is a very important in Developing Countries.
Second, we could make online courses easier to access so that whatever the experience is, whether in the rural place, the Developing Countries, we can access the sources of online education.  Third, we can upload more courses from the famous teachers, contact with the famous teachers around the world so that they can gain famous courses so that everybody can have access to them.
Next, I want to talk about the professional of online education for Developing Countries.  The quality of online education is a main factor that should be taken into consideration.  There are a few challenges for the quality management of online education and the first is the imitation where the government departments and the internet companies, they have updated the servers and the bandwidth and developed online teaching tools and platforms.  These resources, they're being concentrated in cities and the gap in the rural areas is widening.  In addition, many families, they have the problem of using phones for online classes, not to mention the computers, if they don't have the equipment, there will not be a network.  
The second, the quality of teachers, more teachers are professional.  
The third, it is a class management.  A big difference between the innovation education and the traditional one, it is that it is very hard to restrain students with the poor self‑control.  You don't know what they're doing at home.  You can improve by improving the interactions with the live broadcast, the teacher can teach the content according to the students' attitude, on the other hand, new technologies can be used to implement the collaborative learning among students.  The second, it is the peer assessment, the teachers could urge students to study and study more about other students.
Next I'll talk about the ways to improve the quality of online teaching.  We could develop effect wall supervision of the content and the qualities.  There are many contents and many kinds of Classes online, we have to develop approaches to supervise these contents.
Second, we have to standardize the management of teachers.  The teachers, it is similar as the content, there are many kinds of teachers and some, you have to have the verification and the standardization of the teachers.  The second, you have to look at the teachers through a mutual observation mechanism.  The teacher can rate students and the students can rate the teacher.  You can choose a teacher with a higher grade so they don't have a good quality of education.
Third, they should research and develop teaching methods, traditionally we have developed a number of teaching methods for the classes.  For example the innovation teaching, we should develop new methods so that the learning experience online could learn more about the classes.  The next, talking about a cultural protection for online education for Developing Countries.
First I'll talk about the necessity of the cultural protection and the thinking of the people in different countries, it is very different.  For example, the difference in culture and the idea zests among the Asian countries, for example, China, Japan, Korea so on, not to mention the difference of thinking between the east and the west countries.
Second, the policies of different countries are different.  We should meet the different domestic, the foreign policies.  Number one example, the public teachers are prohibited from earning extra income from other platforms.  So the teachers, they could go to online classes.  This is the main difference from the foreign countries and the domestic countries.
Another example, it is the privacy protection between different countries.  I think in the west countries people are emphasizing the privacy of the teachers.  They like to build the unified communication platforms to protect the teachers privacy but in the east, China, things are different.  Teachers use public tools like we chat for one‑on‑one communication, they don't care about the privacy of themselves.
We'll talk about the multiculturalism effect.  I think we should respect cultural diversity and the equality and we should emphasize the integration and interaction of different cultures.  The pursuit of fairness and justice is one of the goals of our online educations and we should allocate personalized education and different areas have different cultures and we should look at different educations.
So evaluating for the cultural protection, this should be integrated with humanistic care which will respect different culture and respect the cultural diversity and the cultural equality.  Finally, we should adopt permeable teaching methods to inherent local culture and will promote the curriculum of science, technology and the social integration and we should integrate different aspects into the curriculum and we should promote that teaching.
The third, we reform the content of online education and carry out the cultural general education to bring the different cultures to the general curriculum.  The second is to reform the curriculum setting and integrate the local cultures.
That's my talk.  Thank you for listening.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you very much.
Our next speaker is Mikhail Komarov.  Can you share your screen, please?
>> MIKHAIL KOMAROV: Thank you very much.
Here we go.  I hope you can see it.
Once more, thank you for the invitation to this owning very up to date, very important session during the current year I would say.  Actually when I tried to introduce the topic, it was I think several months ago.  We had different situations in Moscow.  Just for you to update, you know, what's happening now in Moscow, not just in Russia, Moscow in particular, for Monday, all of the universities and colleges are going on distance studies.  Our University, you know, switched partly different types of studies, blended learning, online, offline, so on.  That's why the current topic probably is not about dealing offline yet but still continuing with online but actually, anyway, we started our semester offline in September and we got some feedback from students, so on.  I would like to share some of my experiences, my Master's students and teaching.
Several things:  What we had this year in Russia, in Moscow, from the middle of March, end of June, most of the teaching organizations in Russia moved to studies with distant technologies.  It was not called online studies because we are talking about using different technologies and so not only massive open innovation courses or anything, and the situation ‑‑ it was actually different regions, Russia, because it was connected to the regional government.  It was their decision which types of studies that they would like to support in the region.
Second, application process to enroll the universities this year, it was moved fully to online format.  I can share some of my feedback on that in a few minutes.
Third, international students were locked in their home countries due to the border closure in the countries.  I think a lens on the academic mobility programs on numbers, experiences that students got.  Some of them were not able to move become to their home countries, so they stayed, you know, in the country, in Russia, for instance, for additional time.  Some students were not able to come because of the closures of the borders.  Some actually, some programs were postponed, universities in different countries, they said, for instance until spring of 2021 they will not be ‑‑ they will now be offline for mobility academic programs.  Online depending on the collaboration between particular universities because the online experience is slightly different, right, especially when we consider international, academic mobility programs for students and we also want cultural experiences, not only education but cultural experiences.
What was done at the universities?  First of all, HSE I think is one of the top universities in Russia with a number of courses allocating different open platforms and we're also a member of the Russian innovation platform.  That's why for us I think we were ready and we'll move at once as universities probably, and that's why we had really strong support from our IT department, our online department at the universities and we had a special methodology center organized to support online teaching with our School of Business.  We had different teaching platforms, right, we had a difference of our systems because you can imagine agencies, comprehensive multidisciplinary University, they have the faculty of physics, engineering department, computer science, other departments and during the study process, the teaching process, right, they actually use different software and it was also I think a challenge for IT departments to arrange the use of this software, proper utilization when students were not in the computer classes, right on site, and when they were collaborating, working remotely.
Some organizational issues related to the documents, so on, but again, you know, electronic significant, the digital significant helped a lot and some other, you know, approaches which were introduced at the University, they just supported the process of transformation.  Scheduling, the thing is, we also had to include different information in schedule and teaching process, educational process for different students in different areas because some of the students moved to their home cities.  I would like to mention that HSE has several campuses, not only in Moscow but other others, four campus, we had students coming from all over Russia to different campuses and they moved back to their home city, you know, for let's say distant studies, it was completely their decision.  Anyway, we had to support, you know, them this their home cities anyway.
Documentation, so supporting staff members, supporting students with their proper recommendation on how to deal, how to take exams, right.  So what about appeals, what about the process itself, so on?  I would like to say that lectures and all teaching staff, so they ‑‑ they moved to online studies with opportunities for themselves to choose different types of formats that they would like to support.
So probably the realtime formats, the prerecording lectures and then sharing a link in YouTube, different services and platforms, and more probably to select online courses for the subject they were teaching.  They would have a subject, right, they were in the middle of the process of teaching a subject, and then actually all the studies were moved online.  You have to choose if they have an opportunity to report something, because we shouldn't have any delays, right, for students, otherwise time periods so for the study process, right, it will be changed, which is impossible and it is not accepted.
Then the examination procedures were changed, so we have special documentation, regulations actually about examination and when we had the distant form of studies so the procedures, they moved to the online format, it is proctoring, actually both, external, so using external companies, right, organizations supporting the process and internal with the use of let's say volunteer, like we call them digital volunteers and with just how ‑‑ just University staff members.  I would like to mention that lectures were recorded, even if they were in synchronizes format, they were recorded in order to provide access to the content for those who were not able to participate due to some personal reasons.  Right.  We have to provide an opportunity.
Mobility was either postponed or moved online.  We provided a line of subjects that we offered to our partner universities.
What happened in general, what I noticed myself, first of all, I would like to mention that application process, which was moved to online, the examination process entrance, the process enrollment process, the online procedures, any case was good experience.  You know, applicants were less stressed, they had more time to submit all of the documents and so on.  In terms of the processes at the University, I think what I experienced myself, the attendance online presence increased.  More students tried to show their participation, they tried to participate in the education process.
Second, we got very nice opportunity, we tried to use this COVID‑19 pandemic situation in order to provide more activities for students so because we had lockdown, we had also employees and different countries in a lot of the homes so I myself was able to widen the guest speakers in a form of a webinar to students which was widely used and I would say it was a great experience.
Third, final online examinations, it was really appreciated for both bodies, for external and internal Committee members for examinations and for students.  Students were in their home, they were less stressed, examination Committee members, they had opportunity, you know, to let's say give more time instead of traveling somewhere and so son and I think overall, you know, it was a great experience.
In terms of lectures and teaching staff, they tried a new teaching format and actually not all of them were ready to teach online because, you know, there may be some classes when you need interaction when you need to divide the group in small teams, when you have to guide them somehow and so on and through this online process there was lack of interaction of this kind.  They tried to move themselves into some new formats.  Tried to get some interesting teaching materials to prepare teaching materials for students.
We from the IT part, we had the technological standards and requirements, we introduce that had for the students to study at our University so internet speed, software usage which we're able to provide, right, how we were able to provide it, so on, so on. 
Then we also had those online international students, they were connected together with the local students to the same classes and we tried to use this opportunity for the mobility right for them.
We got many of the recorded materials as a result.
There were open questions and challenges.
To be honest, not all of the lecturers wanted to have them be reported even though we consider the opportunity for those students who were not able to participate, for instance, online lectures, but, you know, lectures of ‑‑ the authorship, how they actually distributed content, right, how they present the content and they didn't want to have it being reported.  This is an issue ‑‑ this is actually not an issue for our University probably, this is an issue for universities, departments, case by case.  Then there were some personal requirements in terms of what's been recorded, what's basely been reported, some direction with students, some teamwork, so on, because they said for the future, the point of view is that it would be less interesting for future students, for instance.  Technological sources, we had a challenge with technological resources, hardware, software, right.  Both for staff and lecturers.  The universities supplied staff members with laptops and students depending on the availability of the campus.  Right.  In general, after we introduced those special requirements for students, you know, they have to think of how they'll deal with the studies as well.  They have to consider that..
There were some areas where relatives and other families living and sharing space.
Even for the examination process, we cannot require students to find isolated place to take exam and then switch on the camera.
You know, it might be impossible for them.
Another question, when students are online, when all of the studies are online, lecturers may not be ‑‑ from the local University, but from the global environment, right from different countries, so on, and then there is a question of quality, of local resources so I mean, we cannot ‑‑ I mean, we should have staff member, lecturer, and then you have the question of balance, who we should connect, why and what for.
As far as there is a question in the format, it is important in that format, it is ‑‑ it is who and why and then if you consider it as an important format, prerecorded studies, then you have the open line courses, existing courses, how we should deal with that.
I think there are plenty of open questions which showed us some challenges and, of course, opportunities that were told in previous presentations, it was during this session but I would like to say that I prefer to consider, you know, the situation from the perspective of opportunities to study in different formats.
I would like to say that it is so connected to mobility.  Mobility, it is a resource which should be utilized, even for education, because we have got to use with the mobility from the perspective of online business, using mobile phone, so on, but traditional universities, schools, colleges, they also should be focused on mobility and also should be focused on this kind of transformation and the current year showed, you know, they should be more focused on that approach.  I would say that ways of delivering content has changed and I really appreciated that it was very nice for me to hear that TV is also considered a platform.  This is extremely interesting and it would be helpful to give the idea to our University, to some schools, because this is really great in terms of the hardware factor of the platform.
I think from my side, you know, that's it.
Thank you very much.
I will be happy to any your questions.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you very much.  It is a very interesting talk.
We always keep the best for last, Elsa Estevez, it is your turn.  The floor is yours.  Thank you. 
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: This is my own observations of what's happening here in my region.  I will start talking about the challenges and lessons learnt that we have from this pandemic, some opportunities for distant teaching and learning and finally I would like to reflect or to discuss with you what are the threats of continuing this kind of education.
I'm using the same source as you, prove certificate Yang, and here we see the state is currently about education around the world.  We consider the different situations in different regions, but mostly in our region, in America, in Latin America, we have partially open or open, and I will go into details.
In Argentina, we're partially open, this week particularly the government allowed to start opening in most of the provinces so we're in the processes of reopening school.  I would like to say that in Argentina we have the academic year starting in March and we're ending in November, the first weeks of December.
At the time that we were starting the academic year in March we started with the quarantine.  Most of the academic year, the whole academic year we have been at home with schools closed in Chile, Colombia, Paraguay, they're partially open and in Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama, Venezuela, they're closed.
I would like to start about talking about the readiness we have in the region for this education.  For instance, if we talk about home was computer in South America, it is 46.3, that means that less than 50%, we have homes that do have a computer at home while in Europe, the percentage is 78%, in the whole world, homes with computer, it is 71.5, we're below in our populations.  The percentage of populations to have healthy WiMAX, it is 71 and we're below the world average and we're very below compared to Europe.  If we talk about the percentage of households with internet access, in South America we have 45.4% and in Europe, it is 80%.  Here you can start seeing about the differences.  Yes.  We're talking about the houses that don't have internet access.  If we are talking about from the international internet bandwidth, how much percentage corresponds to one person in South America or in Europe, in South America, it is 59.3 and when in Europe, it is 117.5.  This means that the whole world communication, how we can access the internet, it is much more below than the people in Europe and you know that internet access is completely related with GDP, here in this situation, on the readiness that we have in the region.  
Some observations on my side, if I'm talking about the teaching side, yes, what we did we didn't have experience in online education.  Any University, for instance, we have ‑‑ although we have systems for online, but we didn't have courses or educational programs delivered online f one day to another, we tried to implement online teaching and learning so I would say that what we did, it was trying to digitalize our lectures to provide references to online materials to select some materials to give to our students but there was not really innovation, it was not really adoption of online education because I believe that for online education, there is a shift in parallel.  When we're dealing with education face‑to‑face, the lecturer, it is the source of knowledge, and what we're doing with online education, the source, the actor in the middle of the process, it is the student.  The teacher, the educator becomes a guide forgiving the materials to the student.  The student is the one consuming all of this content and who is learning and is the one who is driving the process.  We were not able to do that.  We just utilized ICT to deliver education somehow.  It was grit and a good tool but we have to move forward from this techniques that we have adopted now.  We tried to replicate in the digital world all of the techniques we were using in the classroom also for evaluation.  We know colleagues that we're just asking the students to try to examine a paper, to take photo, send the email, we were using evaluation methods used in the classroom for online education and online education is completely different.
I would say that the results were diverse depending on the fields because it is completely different, the online education in mathematics, medical sciences and social sciences and it all depends on the results, it mainly depends on the application, the personal commitment, the lectures.  From the learnings, from the learning side, from the student side, we see that they're completely very impressive digital inequalities, there are all levels, geographical distribution, in educational level, also in age and in gender.  What some of the results that we have observed in the region, it is that mostly students who are belonging to the poorer families, the only device they have for accessing is the mobile phone.  We know that there is limited capacity in terms of exercises of type of work that students can do with a mobile phone, they can consume materials, they can't have access, grit, but what kind of activities they can do with this in order to learn the materials that we're deploying or delivering.
Based on this, let me look at some opportunities.
If we're trying to do a need assessment, I can say that we need to design new approaches for teaching and learning and to really adopt online education, we cannot apply in distance education the same models used in the classroom, not even the assessment model, there is a need for defining institutional support and policy, we heard from China, and it was very good in terms of that they provided the infrastructure, they provided the training for the academics, and in our case, it was depending on the institution and depending on the timeliness, sometimes the government did their efforts but of course they didn't come on time in March because we were not prepared for this.
At the institutional level, each institution needs to provide infrastructure support, this is a challenge, tools and training for the educators, because we need to send the academics, the educator, the teachers to school, to learn these tools, most of them, they were not prepared.
Each academic unit, we need to define policy, guidelines, the type of activity assessments that are more appropriate to the type of courses that we're teaching.  I'm talking here about University, yes, but in terms of primary school, also the type of activities, the type of lessons that are delivered for mathematics, it will not be the same as those for language for instance or social subjects.
We also need to provide human resources for fulfilling the role of tutors for the distance learning.  We didn't have tutors.  The type of tutor in doing distance learning, that's totally different than the teacher.  The tutor, they mentor the person, seeing how the student is engaged, what are the problems of the students in order to motivate the girl, the boy to continue with this type of education.
We need to implement also monitoring system for measuring outcomes.
However, in terms of opportunities, we have some online resources that were very valuable.  In terms of UNESCO, there are components for integrated response in Latin America and provided by UNESCO regional office in and we have a global education coalition that's providing solutions and we have the coronavirus watch and we have examples from responses at the local level.  At the national level, for instance, in Argentina, the government developed the Ministry of Education, they developed the national plan which is a virtual environment providing neutral spaces for teachers to deliver content and also provided a lot of free online materials, online educational materials that teachers from primary, secondary education can use and a lot of tutorial, videos, documents, it explained had you to use Moodle, how to use the tools that have available for distance education.
At the city level, local initiative, we have a good initiative, it is provided by students that were studying at the University, subjects related with infographics, a mother of a student was a teacher and the sued saw how the mom was facing issues while delivering online lectures and he decided he would try to help her.  Based on this idea, he helped his mother and the mother told the colleagues that his son was providing some help and then they asked for the help of the person and this person assembled a team of friends and they're providing through social media some tools and help for teachers to deliver the lectures. 
Some observations from my side, emerging technologies and COVID opened new scenarios for new behavior, we have and we tried to do new ways of teaching and learning, new ways of doing commerce because we are staying at home, we need to change some habits.  New approaches that are introduced by new technologies, for instance, these, we need to prepare the professionals that we work with, with robots, with environments that we need to interact with humans but also with robots, new ways of interacting with government, avoiding face‑to‑face and trying to digitalize the interactions.  New ways of interacting with people, we're not so able to meet with friends, with family member, and also new trends in the labor area.  We're doing teleworking, we're having new jobs and some jobs are completely disappearing.
We need to prepare the current, the future generations for this future.  In terms of we need to equip them with new are comparisons to teal with the uncertainty, to manage the change, to solve more complex problems and to seek innovative solutions.
Mainly, we need to design solutions based on multidisciplinary and multistakeholder approaches.
Some opportunities I see for higher educational institutions, we have to rethink the curricula and the models that we're applying, distance learning proved to be very useful and it was completely introduced abruptly at least in our region.  We need to see how we're going to adjust what we did this year to leverage on the opportunities.  Also on the needs that we have.  Yes.  For building different types of capacities.  Using the existing technologies.  For instance, we need to adopt new technological resources.  Broadcast video, new communication channels.  We need to adopt a new model of teaching based on project‑solving problem, based on problems also based models, promoting full discussions and other activity, encouraging peer to peer learning, considering new learning processes based on simulation, on serious games, on other models facilitated by technologies and we have to think of how we're going to develop soft skills in terms of communication, teamwork, in terms of leadership, in terms of building consensus.  Otherwise we are not developing the competencies that is needed in the future and to develop capacity.
Let me briefly reflect on some threats.  Some of the threats that I see, it is readiness of society, not only within the country but also within countries to benefit from the distance learning, how to ensure the engagement of ‑‑ we have people with disability, we have migrants, we have refugee, we have ethnic minorities and in particular, they are living in conditions, in areas where they have limited access to technologies.  Some groups also live in remote areas and we have difficult to access the internet or information.  We have to look at how we resolve those issues.
In Latin American region, we have a human capital deficit that's a major challenge in this sense.  There are not enough qualified workers.  Look at the statistics.  I look at statistics in 2012 about the number of engineering ‑‑ engineers that were graduating, yes, I looked at the 2012, they're working for eight years and they're supposedly the active professionals now.  In 2012 there were 145,000 engineers that graduated from institutions in Latin America.  In the same time, in the U.S., they graduated 293,000.  It is almost double.  The population in U.S., it is less than half.  So we have really adapted there.
The question is, can we develop the needed human capacity that we need to develop our countries in the future, applying the distance learning, will the approach be beneficial or will we create more barriers?
There is also another threat that's how we're going to cope with a possible gender gap.  There is a gap now in education because only 3% of engineering of students entering the ICT courses worldwide are women, 5% are enrolled in math or statistic courses and 8% in engineer, manufacture, construction and now the issue is how at this time in primary, secondary education that we're going on distance education, how the girls are able to use the devices that are available at home, how it works at home, how it is divided between the family members so that girls are allowed to use the device that they have.  In many cases, we have homes that have just one device.  How this device is shared among family members, and how we'll handle the gaps between countries ‑‑ it is not only within the country ‑‑ if we're having ‑‑ if we're increasing the gaps in education between countries, this will be a problem for the world, for our global community.
Some conclusions, distance education is a huge opportunity for development, fully agreed.  There is a need to invest in capacity in terms of infrastructure for connectivity, for devices, but also for human resources, teachers need to be trained.  We need to develop more digital literacy in the society.  We need to have more policy, guide line, support for applying these kinds of education.  There is a need to adapt new technological models and to develop new curricula and of course, COVID forced many rapid changes and as I said before, we just approach it like digitalizing our current teaching methods and this is not enough.  It is quite different.  We need this shift.  We need to leverage on what we have achieved so far due to the circumstances and we need to be aware and to manage the threats aiming at very inclusive educations and how we'll reach the more marginalized part of our society and how we're going to reach all of the gaps ‑‑ bridge all of the gaps we currently have.
I don't think there is one answer for all of the context, learning from each other, learning about good practices over the world and promoting international collaboration, it is the way and a possible approach to solve some of the issues.
Thank you very much.
I think we can open the discussion with panelists. 
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
We see several questions from the chat room. 
We have already answered the question about the problem in the poor area, not with the devices online, they're not present in every household.  We have answered that in the chat room.
Another question, it is about the interaction, how to deal with these problems, especially like experiment, lab experiments, a lab course.  What kind of actions to take to ensure this kind of inclusive, equitable learning.
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: I believe one of the approaches, it is about we need to apply different technique, we have to apply different kinds of tools and we need to be prepared for this, it is not about digitalizing content, it is more than this.  We need from the national governments infrastructures all our governments, local or national governments, we also need some policy, guidelines, frameworks in order for us to prepare and to ensure this inclusiveness.  There is a lot of investment that governments need to do in terms of infrastructure, ensuring, you know, the access of ICT at home as mentioned in the presentation. 
>> MIKHAIL KOMAROV: I think what I already shared, it is not ‑‑ we can't compare it to a full exchange.  That's important to understand, our University, when we tried to go online, students started to complain, okay, so we came to University to have offline studies we don't want online studies.  The University, they got some of the subjects officially introduced as online subjects for different campuses to have different students connected to the same class.
I would say, current year, just focused us a bit on live studies from different perspectives, from the perspective of regulations, I don't know about other universities but in our University, we had to change some regulations due to the online examinations and processes which are moved online which we had not thought about before.  Some infrastructure problems and then I saw the question with those with disability, right, with people who are some ‑‑ who needs special treatment, who need special approach of presenting content, the material, so on.  I don't want to say that online will exchange offline at all.  No.  Some people, they need special treatment, right, they need special approach in terms of giving, sharing, you know, content, different types of materials, so on.  I'm sure this is not about online studies, this is just about the whole framework of dealing with those people, helping them, right, to study, to learn, and there are tools online that can help, great, then we can introduce, we can integrate those tools, but if there are not tools could help, no, then we should continue with the traditional forms, with, you know, face‑to‑face, with one to one approach and so on. 
>> YANG LIU: Yes. 
Any further comments?
>> XIANG ZHOU: I think our major in engineering, it involves a lot of experiments.  We needed to use a single generator or scopes, so on, but now we're doing it remotely, we have been doing the experiments and we ‑‑ we have sent things to students so that they can use the tools to do their own experiments at home.  They do not need to go to the laboratory to do the experiments.  To have to teach the classes, it remembers ‑‑ this is my answer to part of that question.  Thank you. 
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: You know, replying to that, yes.  I believe that it is up to the expert of each time in order to design and resolve this problem.  What I mean in one of the slides at the academic level, what should be done.  For instance, I was interacting with one colleague from the physics department and explained she was having the students do some experiments in lab adapted at home.  What about medical sciences?  What about biology that students need to deal, to learn with a microscope, yes.  Each field has its own challenges.  I believe that there are experts in the fields who are most appropriate to say how they can resolve the challenges.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
I have just one more case to share.  How are universities now working with American students to help students in physics, in chemistry experiments, so students, they'll go online to get ‑‑ to learn courses in the American students, but then they're doing experiments in our universities.  This is actually a global collaboration.  We move the devices, the laboratories closer to the students, just like Michael and Elsa had mentioned.  We need to make some changes to our current education system.
I think this challenge also gives us a kind of opportunity to work closer with the global challenge.  In my University, I think we have some American universities had that are helping with the experimental elements in the teaching program.
We move on to the next question.  It is about how to provide fair online occasion for disabled students.  Anyone want to start this?  Those students are particularly struggling with their personal difficulty, innovation education makes this process more challenging.  Anyone have any experience solving this problem?
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: We, UNESCO has some guidelines dealing with accessible occasion for Persons with Disabilities, it is a huge issue and it requires a multistakeholder governance approach because first of all we recollects need to identify those children, those people, we need to learn, we need to have a more personalized approach to them and it is only not only about ‑‑ for instance, we have to talk about the accessible technology, what type of technologies are we using and for each particular disability, there is a range of the needs of approaches in order to solve these problems.  Definitely it requires multistakeholder approach, it requires the commitment from NGOs, educational assistance, systems, educator, and we need to use available technologies to make sure that we reach all of these people.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you. 
>> MIKHAIL KOMAROV: I think ‑‑ I couldn't be better than UNESCO so!
>> YANG LIU: No one can.
>> MIKHAIL KOMAROV: I would say, you know, the requirements in order to provide some special equipment so I think universities can mail those special equipment to those students.  Right.  It is possible because I know some cases where we have mailed some laboratory equipment required for some works, so on, some practical works, you know, mailing it to the students.  Same approach could be applied here if required.  In terms of other things, I'm sure I couldn't be better than UNESCO, it is better to follow those frameworks, depending, of course, on the opportunities.  I just ‑‑ in the countries.  Right.  I would like to mention a very good point, we can think if we have similar situation with the pandemic, for instance, 15, 20 years, how different situation it would be compared to what we have now.  When we have higher internet speed, right.  When we have more coverage of the internet, when we have smartphones, some other devices available, software, so on.
You can see what's different 15, 20 years ago.  I think in current case we just shouldn't forget the current situation, it may repeat.  Right.  We should be ready in terms of some additional new services, probably some new frameworks supporting that and actually users.  I'm not talking about teachers, students, I'm talking about users being able to use those services and tools.  Even if you have, you know, the tools, right, users should know how to use them properly.  For people with a special treatment, right, for people with a special approach, you know, which we should provide in terms of teaching them, we should be focused on this part more than for others.
This is really, you know, an issue to teach them how to use those tools and software and hardware properly.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
Xiang Zhou, do you have any experience of solving this challenge with disabled students?
>> XIANG ZHOU: I think for different types of disabled students, we can certainly set up distance online learning courses for them.
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: I just shared on the chat paper, the open access from research studies that we did on policy monitoring on accessibility for inclusive education.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: There are some examples.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.  Yeah.
I agree with every speak, we need to create more content for different groups of people so that they may speak different language, they live in different areas, they have different time zone, they have different challenges in accessing the internet.  For example, Elsa mentioned how to share the device among multiple kids in the family, how to share time between the parents, the students between working and learning here.  I think this is very interactive.  One more thing ‑‑
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: You know, I think there is an issue that we just mentioned and we didn't go into too deep.  We should mention, it is more deal ‑‑ most of the content in the internet, available on the internet, online resources, education, other sources, it is available in English mostly, but we have to develop content in the language of our minorities communities.  In order to talk about inclusive education, we need to reach them in their own language and there is not always content available in those languages.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.  Yes.  Thank you.
Time flies.  We have reached the last part of our session.  Before we close the session, I would like to invite final remarks to close the session.  Thank you, Xiang Zhou. 
>> XIANG ZHOU: Thank you.
I think after the discussion, from the aspect of occasion opportunity we all agree that this does improve by the online education, however, as it exists, some service, some online education, the education, it is still the best direction to improve this balance in terms of the field of education opportunities.  In the future, we could promote the culture of different areas and providing different contents, for example, there are different disabled persons and we can provide passage for them.  I think that we have a long way to go for online occasion.
Thank you.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you very much.
Thank you, everyone, for participating in this session.  I would also like to thank our speakers and I hope everyone enjoyed this session.  I believe more awareness, also more solutions need to be studied to make everyone aware of this change in education.  Thank you, everyone.  Enjoy your day! 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws132-inclusion-challenges-and-solutions-for-fair-online-education-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> YANG LIU: I'm a speaker for this session.  Welcome to everybody for joining us in the early morning, also all of the different places.
We start with a very brief introduction of ourselves.
I'm a professor located in Shanghai, China.  We're ‑‑ we're the unique University, we're close to disneyland.  We probably are the closest University for disneyland in Shanghai.  If you're planning to go to China, you're very welcome with us in Shanghai.
That's me.
Mikhail Komarov, can you introduce yourself?
>> MIKHAIL KOMAROV: Thank you.  Yes.  Thank you very much for the invitation and for the participation in this session.
My name is Mikhail Komarov, I'm professor in the Department of Business, a national research school located in Moscow, Russia.  I'm also an academic supervisor of the master programs and an advisor to different foundations supporting young people with their innovative developments.  It is a pleasure for me to be here.  Thank you, once more.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you very much.
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: Nice to meet you, good morning, good afternoon, good evening, depending on the time zone.  My name is Elsa Estevez.  I'm UNESCO Chair at national University of the South in academia and also an independent researcher at the national research council for scientific and technological research and full professor at the national University here.  I'm a specialist in digital government for the last 16 years and I have a PhD in computer science.  It is a pleasurer to be here.
Thank you for the invitation.
>> YANG LIU: Xiang Zhou.
>> XIANG ZHOU: It is nice to meet you, I'm from the University of science and technology of China.  Our University is located in Waohan and I'm a full professor of the ICT department and I'm a leader of the joint research center of green computer networking and I'm excited to share some ideas on the online education here.
Thank you very much.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
We start now with the presentation.
I will share my slides, my screen.  Let me see.
Everyone see the slides.
Thank you, everyone, for attending this workshop, Inclusion Challenges and Solutions for Fair Online Education.  We're particularly interested in the challenges facing during this period of time when most of the education courses are online.  I'll share with you some experience and cases in China in dealing with this problem.
This is a picture obtained in UNESCO, it is about the problem facing school closures forced by COVID‑19 during this period.  You see the number of numbers and students affected during the last few months.  It has become a very challenging global problem.  Also, just last month, the Wallstreet journal and the New York sometimes had two Articles talking about the evolution in education after this period, especially you have unequal internet access because the lack of internet access in different place, especially the remote area, in the mountains, causing problems for learners.  You also have unequal learning terminal, some were families that may have insufficient mobile phone, tablets to access the internet.  That causes a problem as well.
The Article published by Wallstreet journal just two weeks ago talking about interference with online courses such as the process for children.
So this is the background for world internet users, and you see the penetration rate in different place and countries are quite different.  The work total number is only 62%.  There's a lot of spaces and places and the earth cannot be covered by a very efficient internet access causing a big problem for fair, online education.  According to the UN children's fund, 1.2 billion school children remain affected by school closures and are grappling with the realities of remote learning in the midst of COVID‑19 pandemic.  The inherent inequalities are threatening to deepen the global learning crisis.  That's becoming a more and more challenging problem, not only for developed countries but also for developing, under Developing Countries.  
For example, in China we see news in February about the very ‑‑ about a lot of challenges facing students being in remote areas, in the villages.  You see several pictures here.  Children studying on the ground, in the mountains, just to get a better signal through mobile phones and also they can get a better quality of online education program.  Also I have heard of stories of a local family in Shanghai, two boys share only one mobile phone, so the school actually bought a new mobile phone for the family so both boys could access their online education simultaneously.
This the case and challenges for online education in the U.S.  According to different sources, one in ten of the poorest children in the U.S. has little or no access for technology.  About 12% of respondents from the households earn less than $25,000 a year and said a digital device was rarely or never available for a child to use for learning and only 9.8% said the same of the internet.  Even for the richest countries like U.S. and China, still a lot of families cannot afford to internet access to enjoy online education.  In change hey, during the period of the COVID‑19 pandemic outbreak, the secondary school faced a lot of problems in Shanghai, about 1.6 million students need to access different sources for online education starting from grade 1 until the last year in high school.  You have 12 years of students needing online education.  The local government has a very strong organization, they accumulated resources and provided SMILE service to everybody, it is a platform, Shanghai massive intelligent learning, it will support several students in studying course, they use internet, stations and other ways to support the SMILE program to provide sufficient educational resources for the primary school and secondary school students.  1.6 million in the last few months.  It is a great achievement.
They promote one source that's SMILE, it means that every student has two online teachers, one teacher for unified online teaching and another for individual tutoring to support the requirements from all students.  They also provide multiple channels to avoid access in the quality in different places.  For example, it is used primary for schools, TV, the primary school students, they can be focused for this learning process.  Also they support multiple devices, multiple terminals and you can use any terminal to access the resource frommy wherein the Shanghai local area ‑‑ from anywhere in the Shanghai local area.
In this case, they have built an open, shared educational resource service platform and they provide multiple levels of educational services through the two teacher approach.  Also as I mentioned, they use different channels to broadcast and to support internet access to the same online education resources to promote personalize the online education based on different kinds of devices.
In the last few months, the statistics, more than 1.6 million users of this service, because of the password, many students from other provinces in China, they also enjoy this SMILE service developed for the Shanghai local students and there is over 20 million views that have about 110 million views for the recorded videos so you can replay the program as you like.
This is the premise of the case for the secondary school.  The next case, it is about online education for the University, this is the case for Shanghai tech University, my own University, we did something like Zoom, students, they're located in different places in China, they can enjoy the same platform and interact with their own teachers.  This is a picture for online summer school and summer courses from this platform.  This is the procedures.
Before online course at the Shanghai tech University, they had the bandwidth to guarantee the performance, starting in the end of January, teachers started to record the videos and we had a schedule so plan in advance and then we had multiple rounds of performance tests to ensure the formal opening of the online course in March 2nd.  That means we spent about a month to prepare everything.  The online courses have a total of 12 weeks, 330 lessons, 40 courses and 8 teaching sites and 33 people were dedicated to this platform so that received very good feedback from our students.
In this case, we have some experience to share.  This, we need to have a very solid COVID‑19 prevention and monitoring platform, making sure everything is low risk on campus.
You need a strong online education management system to report every day activities.
You also need a very strong administrative service.
You need collaborative professors to record these processes or providing realtime interactions with courses.
Also you're dealing with a lot of students, so you can solve the students' connection problems in advance.  We provided additional bandwidth for rural area students so that they can access the internet with our support.
In the future we think maybe from the technical side we need to consider a more intelligent network structure because through this period, we have found that our network, it is not adaptive and not very flexible.  That's why we have traffic and a lot of problems.  We think in the future we need to support various access messages in virtual networks and we need to look at the inequalities to provide adaptive networks.  This is a problem, the solution from the technical side.
In the previous, current system, to solve a problem, it is about more than one hour, 76 minutes.  If we have AI or more intelligent decision‑making based network structure we can make this decision making process more autonomies so that we can reduce the time to solve the troubles in the network and in the process of providing services.
That's all of my talk.  We can interact with all of the viewers from the discussion room.  I will answer questions from that platform.
Thank you very much.
The next speaker, Xiang Zhou, grab the screen and start your presentation.
>> XIANG ZHOU: Okay.
I think you can see my screen.  I will start my talk.
Hello, everyone.  Thank you for your participation in this.  My name is Xiang Zhou and I come from the University of science and technology of China.  I'm happy to be here to talk   the online educations in Developing Countries today.  The main tong of my talk is the fairness, professional and culture protection of online educations in Developing Countries.  This is the outline of my talk.  First, I will talk about the fairness of online education for Developing Countries.
One question, does online education improve fairness?  From the aspect of education opportunity, the fairness does improve in online education, for example, MIT courses that used to be unaccessible far away, on the other side of the Pacific, now it can be easily accessed through only one internet connection.  Now, no mat where where we are, we can enjoy the courses online and have the opportunity to receive an education.
Meanwhile, the online education, how to solve the problem in poor areas, therefore, the gap between the rich and the poor in educational opportunities will be reduced.
However, the empirical evidence in some surveys suggest that online education may have widened the gap between students.  The figures in the slide shows the effect of taking online courses for students with different GPAs and the figure has below medium, the online classes, it reduced it by .5 points or more.  For students with a prior GPA in the top three deciles, the effect is not statistically different from zero yo.  The conclusion is choosing online will result in .33 drop in GPA for this..
Stiill, online education is the best direction for improving fairness especially the field of education opportunities.  A few months ago I read news from a newspaper due to the pandemic of COVID‑19 and most primary classes are taken online.  You take online class on a chalk board and this news impressed me on the difference of the conditions of online education.  If you want improve fairness, there is a number of directions that we can work out.  We can narrow the gap in poor and rich areas in Developing Countries.  It is a very important in Developing Countries.
Second, we could make online courses easier to access so that whatever the experience is, whether in the rural place, the Developing Countries, we can access the sources of online education.  Third, we can upload more courses from the famous teachers, contact with the famous teachers around the world so that they can gain famous courses so that everybody can have access to them.
Next, I want to talk about the professional of online education for Developing Countries.  The quality of online education is a main factor that should be taken into consideration.  There are a few challenges for the quality management of online education and the first is the imitation where the government departments and the internet companies, they have updated the servers and the bandwidth and developed online teaching tools and platforms.  These resources, they're being concentrated in cities and the gap in the rural areas is widening.  In addition, many families, they have the problem of using phones for online classes, not to mention the computers, if they don't have the equipment, there will not be a network.  The second, the quality of teachers, more teachers are professional.  The third, it is a class management, a   big difference between the innovation education and the traditional one, it is that it is very hard to restrain students with the poor self‑control.  You don't know what they're doing at home..  You can improve by improving the interactions with the live broadcast, the teacher can teach the content according to the students' attitude, on the other hand, new technologies can be used to implement the collaborative learning among students.  The second, it is the peer assessment, the teachers could urge students to study and study more about other students.
Next I'll talk about the ways to improve the quality of online teaching.  We could develop effect wall supervision of the content and the qualities.  There are many contents and many kinds of Classes online, we have to develop approaches to supervise these contents.
Second, we have to standardize the management of teachers.  The teachers, it is similar as the content, there are many kinds of teachers and some, you have to have the verification and the standardization of the teachers.  The second, you have to look at the teachers through a mutual observation mechanism.  The teacher can rate students and the students can rate the teacher.  You can choose a teacher with a higher grade so they don't have a good quality of education.
Third, they should research and develop teaching methods, traditionally we have developed a number of teaching methods for the classes.  For example the innovation teaching, we should develop new methods so that the learning experience online could learn more about the classes.  The next, talking about a cultural protection for online education for Developing Countries.
First I'll talk about the necessity of the cultural protection and the thinking of the people in different countries, it is very different.  For example, the difference in culture and the idea zests among the Asian countries, for example, China, Japan, Korea so on, not to mention the difference of thinking between the east and the west countries.
Second, the policies of different countries are different.  We should meet the different domestic, the foreign policies.  Number one example, the public teachers are prohibited from earning extra income from other platforms.  So the teachers, they could go to online classes.  This is the main difference from the foreign countries and the domestic countries.
Another example, it is the privacy protection between different countries.  I think in the west countries people are emphasizing the privacy of the teachers.  They like to build the unified communication platforms to protect the teachers privacy but in the east, China, things are different.  Teachers use public tools like we chat for one on one communication, they don't care about the privacy of themselves..
We'll talk about the multiculturalism effect.  I think we should respect cultural diversity and the equality and we should emphasize the integration and interaction of different cultures.  The pursuit of fairness and justice is one of the goals of our online educations and we should allocate personalized education and different areas have different cultures and we should look at different educations.
So evaluating for the cultural protection, this should be integrated with humanistic care which will respect different culture and respect the cultural diversity and the cultural equality.  Finally, we should adopt permeable teaching methods to inherent local culture and will promote the curriculum of science, technology and the social integration and we should integrate different aspects into the curriculum and we should promote that teaching.
The third, we reform the content of online education and carry out the cultural general education to bring the different cultures to the general curriculum.  The second is to reform the curriculum setting and integrate the local cultures.
That's my talk.  Thank you for listening.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you very much.
Our next speaker is Mikhail Komarov.  Can you share your screen, please?
>> MIKHAIL KOMAROV: Thank you very much.
Here we go.  I hope you can see it.
Once more, thank you for the invitation to this owning very up to date, very important session during the current year I would say.  Actually when I tried to introduce the topic, it was I think several months ago.  We had different situations in Moscow.  Just for you to update, you know, what's happening now in Moscow, not just in Russia, Moscow in particular, for Monday, all of the universities and colleges are going on distance studies.  Our University, you know, switched partly different types of studies, blended learning, online, offline, so on.  That's why the current topic probably is not about dealing offline yet but still continuing with online but actually, anyway, we started our semester offline in September and we got some feedback from students, so on.  I would like to share some of my experiences, my Master's students and teaching.
Several things:  What we had this year in Russia, in in miscould you, from the middle of March, end of June, most of the teaching organizations in Russia moved to studies with distant technologies, it was not called online studies because we are talking about using different technologies and so not only massive open innovation courses or anything, and the situation, it was actually different, different regions, Russia, because it was connected to the regional government.  It was their decision which types of studies that they would like to support in the region.
Second, application process to enroll the universities this year, it was moved fully to online format.  I can share some of my feedback on that in a few minutes.
Third, international students were locked in their home countries due to the border closure in the countries.  I think a lens on the academic mobility program programs on numbers, experiences that students got.  Some of them were not able to move become to their home countries, so they stayed, you know, in the country, in Russia, for instance, for additional time.  Some students were not able to come because of the closures of the borders.  Some actually, some programs were postponed, universities in different countries, they said, for instance until spring of 2021 they will not be ‑‑ they will now be offline for mobility academic programs.  Online depending on the collaboration between particular universities because the online experience is slightly different, right, especially when we consider international, academic mobility programs for students and we also want cultural experiences, not only education but cultural experiences.
What was done at the universities?  First of all, HSE I think is one of the top universities in Russia with a number of courses allocating different open platforms and we're also a member of the Russian innovation platform.  That's why for us I think we were ready and we'll move at once as universities probably, and that's why we had really strong support from our IT department, our online department at the universities and we had a special methodology center organized to support online teaching with our School of Business.  We had different teaching platforms, right, we had a difference of our systems because you can imagine agencies, comprehensive multidisciplinary University, they have the faculty of physics, engineering department, computer science, other departments and during the study process, the teaching process, right, they actually use different software and it was also I think a challenge for IT departments to arrange the use of this software, proper utilization when students were not in the computer classes, right, on site and when they were collaborating, working remotely.
Some organizational issues related to the documents, so on, but again, you know, electronic significant, the digital significant helped a lot and some other, you know, approaches which were introduced at the University, they just supported the process of transformation.  Scheduling, the thing is, we also had to include different information in schedule and teaching process, educational process for different students in different areas because some of the students moved to their home cities.  I would like to mention that HSE has several campuses, not only in Moscow but other others, four campus, we had students coming from all over Russia to different campuses and they moved back to their home city, you know, for let's say distant studies, it was completely their decision.  Anyway, we had to support, you know, them this their home cities anyway.
Documentation, so supporting staff members, supporting students with their proper recommendation on how to deal, how to take exams, right.  So what about appeals, what about the process itself, so on?  I would like to say that lectures and all teaching staff, so they ‑‑ they moved to online studies with opportunities for themselves to choose different types of formats that they would like to support.
So probably the realtime formats, the prerecording lectures and then sharing a link in YouTube, different services and platforms, and more probably to select online courses for the subject they were teaching.  They would have a subject, right, they were in the middle of the process of teaching a subject, and then actually all the studies were moved online.  Heave to choose if they have an opportunity to report something, because we shouldn't have any delays, right, for students, otherwise time periods so for the study process, right, it will be changed, which is impossible and it is not accepted.
Then the examination procedures were changed, so we have special documentation, regulations actually about examination and when we had the distant form of studies so the procedures, they moved to the online format, it is proctoring, actually both, external, so using external companies, right, organizations supporting the process and internal with the use of let's say volunteer, like we call them digital volunteers and with just how ‑‑ just University staff members.  I would like to mention that lectures were recorded, even if they were in synchronizes format, they were recorded in order to provide access to the content for those who were not able to participate due to some personal reasons.  Right.  We have to provide an opportunity.
Mobility was either postponed or moved online.  We provided a line of subjects that we offered to our partner universities.
What happened in general, what I noticed myself, first of all, I would like to mention that application process, which was moved to online, the examination process entrance, the process enrollment process, the online procedures, any case was good experience.  You know, applicants were less stressed, they had more time to submit all of the documents and so on.  In terms of the processes at the University, I think what I experienced myself, the attendance online presence increased.  More students tried to show their participation, they tried to participate in the education process.
Second, we got very nice opportunity, we tried to use this COVID‑19 pandemic situation in order to provide more activities for students so because we had lockdown, we had also employees and different countries in a lot of the homes so I myself was able to widen the guest speakers in a form of a webinar to students which was widely used and I would say it was a great experience.
Third, final online examinations, it was really appreciated for both bodies, for external and internal Committee members for examinations and for students.  Students were in their home, they were less stressed, examination Committee members, they had opportunity, you know, to let's say give more time instead of traveling somewhere and so son and I think overall, you know, it was a great experience.
In terms of lectures and teaching staff, they tried a new teaching format and actually not all of them were ready to teach online because, you know, there may be some classes when you need interaction when you need to divide the group in small teams, when you have to guide them somehow and so on and through this online process there was lack of interaction of this kind.  They tried to move themselves into some new formats.  Tried to get some interesting teaching materials to prepare teaching materials for students.
We from the IT part, we had the technological standards and requirements, we introduce that had for the students to study at our University so internet speed, software usage which we're able to provide, right, how we were able to provide it, so on, so on. 
Then we also had those online international students, they were connected together with the local students to the same classes and we tried to use this opportunity for the mobility right for them.
We got many of the recorded materials as a result.
There were open questions and challenges.
To be honest, not all of the lecturers wanted to have them be reported even though we consider the opportunity for those students who were not able to participate, for instance, online lectures, but, you know, lectures of ‑‑ the authorship, how they actually distributed content, right, how they present the content and they didn't want to have it being reported.  This is an issue ‑‑ this is actually not an issue for our University probably, this is an issue for universities, departments, case by case.  Then there were some personal requirements in terms of what's been recorded, what's basely been reported, some direction with students, some teamwork, so on, because they said for the future, the point of view is that it would be less interesting for future students, for instance.  Technology calory sources, we had a challenge with technological resources, hardware, software, right.  Both for staff and lecturers.  The universities supplied staff members with laptops and students depending on the availability of the campus.  Right.  In general, after we introduced those special requirements for students, you know, they have to think of how they'll deal with the studies as well.  They have to consider that..
There were some areas where relatives and other families living and sharing space.
Even for the examination process, we cannot require students to find isolated place to take exam and then switch on the camera.
You know, it might be impossible for them.
Another question, when students are online, when all of the studies are online, lecturers may not be ‑‑ from the local University, but from the global environment, right from different countries, so on, and then there is a question of quality, of local resources so I mean, we cannot ‑‑ I mean, we should have staff member, lecturer, and then you have the question of balance, who we should connect, why and what for.
As far as there is a question in the format, it is important in that format, it is ‑‑ it is who and why and then if you consider it as an important format, prerecorded studies, then you have the open line courses, existing courses, how we should deal with that.
I think there are plenty of open questions which showed us some challenges and, of course, opportunities that were told in previous presentations, it was during this session but I would like to say that I prefer to consider, you know, the situation from the perspective of opportunities to study in different formats.
I would like to say that it is so connected to mobility.  Mobility, it is a resource which should be utilized, even for education, because we have got to use with the mobility from the perspective of online business, using mobile phone, so on, but traditional universities, schools, colleges, they also should be focused on mobility and also should be focused on this kind of transformation and the current year showed, you know, they should be more focused on that approach.  I would say that ways of delivering content has changed and I really appreciated that it was very nice for me to hear that TV is also considered a platform.  This is extremely interesting and it would be helpful to give the idea to our University, to some schools, because this is really great in terms of the hardware factor of the platform.
I think from my side, you know, that's it.
Thank you very much.
I will be happy to any your questions.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you very much.  It is a very interesting talk.
We always keep the best for last, Elsa Estevez, it is your turn.  The floor is yours.  Thank you. 
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: This is my own observations of what's happening here in my region.  I will start talking about the challenges and lessons learnt that we have from this pandemic, some opportunities for distant teaching and learning and finally I would like to reflect or to discuss with you what are the threats of continuing this kind of education.
I'm using the same source as you, prove certificate Yang, and here we see the state is currently about education around the world.  We consider the different situations in different regions, but mostly in our region, in America, in Latin America, we have partially open or open, and I will go into details.
In Argentina, we're partially open, this week particularly the government allowed to start opening in most of the provinces so we're in the processes of reopening school.  I would like to say that in Argentina we have the academic year starting in March and we're ending in November, the first weeks of December.
At the time that we were starting the academic year in March we started with the quarantine.  Most of the academic year, the whole academic year we have been at home with schools closed n Chile, Colombia, Paraguay, they're partially open and in Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama, Venezuela, they're closed.
I would like to start about talking about the readiness we have in the region for this education.  For instance, if we talk about home was computer in South America, it is 46.3, that means that less than 50%, we have homes that do have a computer at home while in Europe, the percentage is 78%, in the whole world, homes with computer, it is 71.5, we're below in our populations.  The percentage of populations to have healthy WiMAX, it is 71 and we're below the world average and we're very below compared to Europe.  If we talk about the percentage of households with internet access, in South America we have 45.4% and in Europe, it is 80%.  Here you can start seeing about the differences.  Yes.  We're talking about the houses that don't have internet access.  If we are talking about from the international internet bandwidth, how much percentage corresponds to one person in South America or in Europe, in South America, it is 59.3 and when in Europe, it is 117.5.  This means that the whole world communication, how we can access the internet, it is much more below than the people in Europe and you know that internet access is completely related with GDP, here in this situation, on the readiness that we have in the region.  
Some observations on my side, if I'm talking about the teaching side, yes, what we did we didn't have experience in online education.  Any University, for instance, we have ‑‑ although we have systems for online, but we didn't have courses or educational programs delivered online f one day to another, we tried to implement online teaching and learning so I would say that what we did, it was trying to digitalize our lectures to provide references to online materials to select some materials to give to our students but there was not really innovation, it was not really adoption of online education because I believe that for online education, there is a shift in parallel.  When we're dealing with education face‑to‑face, the lecturer, it is the source of knowledge, and what we're doing with online education, the source, the actor in the middle of the process, it is the student.  The teacher, the educator becomes a guide forgiving the materials to the student.  The student is the one consuming all of this content and who is learning and is the one who is driving the process.  We were not able to do that.  We just utilized ICT to deliver education somehow.  It was grit and a good tool but we have to move forward from this techniques that we have adopted now.  We tried to replicate in the digital world all of the techniques we were using in the classroom also for evaluation.  We know colleagues that we're just asking the students to try to examine a paper, to take photo, send the email, we were using evaluation methods used in the classroom for online education and online education is completely different.
I would say that the results were diverse depending on the fields because it is completely different, the online education in mathematics, medical sciences and social sciences and it all depends on the results, it mainly depends on the application, the personal commitment, the lectures.  From the learnings, from the learning side, from the student side, we see that they're completely very impressive digital inequalities, there are all levels, geographical distribution, in educational level, also in age and in gender.  What some of the results that we have observed in the region, it is that mostly students who are belonging to the poorer families, the only device they have for accessing is the mobile phone.  We know that there is limited capacity in terms of exercises of type of work that students can do with a mobile phone, they can consume materials, they can't have access, grit, but what kind of activities they can do with this in order to learn the materials that we're deploying or delivering.
Based on this, let me look at some opportunities.
If we're trying to do a need assessment, I can say that we need to design new approaches for teaching and learning and to really adopt online education, we cannot apply in distance education the same models used in the classroom, not even the assessment model, they of there is a need for defining institutional support and policy, we heard from China, and it was very good in terms of that they provided the infrastructure, they provided the training for the academics, and in our case, it was it was depending on the institution and depending on the timeliness, sometimes the government did their efforts but of course they didn't come on time in March because we were not prepared for this.
At the institutional level, each institution needs to provide infrastructure support, this is a challenge, tools and training for the educators, because we need to send the academics, the educator, the teachers to school, to learn these tools, most of them, they were not prepared.
Each academic unit, we need to define policy, guidelines, the type of activity assessments that are more appropriate to the type of courses that we're teaching.  I'm talking here about University, yes, but in terms of primary school, also the type of activities, the type of lessons that are delivered for mathematics, it will not be the same as those for language for instance or social subjects.
We also need to provide human resources for fulfilling the role of tutors for the distance learning.  We didn't have tutors.  The type of tutor in doing distance learning, that's totally different than the teacher.  The tutor, they mentor the person, seeing how the student is engaged, what are the problems of the students in order to motivate the girl, the boy to continue with this type of education.
We need to implement also monitoring system for measuring outcomes.
However, in terms of opportunities, we have some online resources that were very valuable.  In terms of UNESCO, there are components for integrated response in Latin America and provided by UNESCO regional office in and we have a global education coalition that's providing solutions and we have the coronavirus watch and we have examples from responses at the local level.  At the national level, for instance, in Argentina, the government developed the Ministry of Education, they developed the national plan which is a virtual environment providing neutral spaces for teachers to deliver content and also provided a lot of free online materials, online educational materials that teachers from primary, secondary education can use and a lot of tutorial, videos, documents, it explained had you to use Moodle, how to use the tools that have available for distance education.
At the city level, local initiative, we have a good initiative, it is provided by students that were studying at the University, subjects related with infogratics, a mother a a student was a teacher and the sued saw how the mom was facing issues while delivering online lectures and he decided he would try to help her.  Based on this idea, he helped his mother and the mother told the colleague colleagues that his son was providing some help and then they asked for the help of the person and this person assembled a team of friends and they're providing through social media some tools and help for teachers to deliver the lectures. 
Some observations from my side, emerging technologies and COVID opened new scenarios for new behavior, we have and we tried to do new ways of teaching and learning, new ways of doing commerce because we are staying at home, we need to change some habits.  New approaches that are introduced by new technologies, for instance, these, we need to prepare the professionals that we work with, with robots, with environments that we need to interact with humans but also with robots, new ways of interacting with government, avoiding face‑to‑face and trying to digitalize the interactions.  New ways of interacting with people, we're not so able to meet with friends, with family member, and also new trends in the labor area.  We're doing teleworking, we're having new jobs and some jobs are completely disappearing.
We need to prepare the current, the future generations for this future.  In terms of we need to equip them with new are comparisons to teal with the uncertainty, to manage the change, to solve more complex problems and to seek innovative solutions.
Mainly, we need to design solutions based on multidisciplinary and multistakeholder approaches.
Some opportunities I see for higher educational institutions, we have to rethink the curricula and the models that we're applying, distance learning proved to be very useful and it was completely introduced abruptly at least in our region.  We need to see how we're going to adjust what we did this year to leverage on the opportunities.  Also on the needs that we have.  Yes.  For building different types of capacities.  Using the existing technologies.  For instance, we need to adopt new technological resources.  Broadcast video, new communication channels.  We need to adopt a new model of teaching based on project‑solving problem, based on problems also based models, promoting full discussions and other activity, encouraging peer to peer learning, considering new learning processes based on simulation, on serious games, on other models facilitated by technologies and we have to think of how we're going to develop soft skills in terms of communication, teamwork, in terms of leadership, in terms of building consensus.  Otherwise we are not developing the competencies that is needed in the future and to develop capacity.
Let me briefly reflect on some threats.  Some of the threats that I see, it is readiness of society, not only within the country but also within countries to benefit from the distance learning, how to ensure the engagement of ‑‑ we have people with disability, we have migrants, we have refugee, we have ethnic minorities and in particular, they are living in conditions, in areas where they have limited access to technologies.  Some groups also live in remote areas and we have difficult to access the internet or information.  We have to look at how we resolve those issues.
In Latin American region, we have a human capital deficit that's a major challenge in this sense.  There are not enough qualified workers.  Look at the statistics.  I look at statistics in 2012 about the number of engineering ‑‑ engineers that were graduating, yes, I looked at the 2012, they're working for eight years and they're supposedly the active professionals now.  In 2012 there were 145,000 engineers that graduated from institutions in Latin America.  In the same time, in the U.S., they graduated 293,000.  It is almost double.  The population in U.S., it is less than half.  So we have really adapted there.
The question is, can we develop the needed human capacity that we need to develop our countries in the future, applying the distance learning, will the approach be beneficial or will we create more barriers?
There is also another threat that's how we're going to cope with a possible gender gap.  There is a gap now in education because only 3% of engineering of students entering the ICT courses worldwide are women, 5% are enrolled in math or statistic courses and 8% in engineer, manufacture, construction and now the issue is how at this time in primary, secondary education that we're going on distance education, how the girls are able to use the devices that are available at home, how it works at home, how it is divided between the family members so that girls are allowed to use the device that they have.  In many cases, we have homes that have just one device.  How this device is shared among family members, and how we'll handle the gaps between countries.  It is not only within the country.  If we're having ‑‑ if we're increasing the gaps in education between countries, this will be a problem for the world, for our global community.
Some conclusions, distance education is a huge opportunity for development, fully agreed.  There is a need to invest in capacity in terms of infrastructure for connectivity, for devices, but also for human resources, teachers need to be trained.  We need to develop more digital literacy in the society.  We need to have more policy, guide line, support for applying these kinds of education.  There is a need to adapt new technological models and to develop new curricula and of course, COVID forced many rapid changes and as I said before, we just approach it like digitalizings our current teaching methods and this is not enough.  It is quite different.  We need this shift.  Need to leverage on what we have achieved so far due to the circumstances and we need to be aware and to manage the threats aiming at very inclusive educations and how we'll reach the more marginalized part of our society and how we're going to reach all of the gaps ‑‑ bridge all of the gaps we currently have.
I don't think there is one answer for all of the context, learning from each other, learning about good practices over the world and promoting international collaboration, it is the way and a possible approach to solve some of the issues.
Thank you very much.
I think we can open the discussion with panelists. 
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
We see several questions from the chat room. 
We have already answered the question about the problem in the poor area, not with the devices online, they're not present in every household.  We have answered that in the chat room.
Another question, it is about the interaction, how to deal with these problems, especially like experiment, lab experiments, a lab course.  What kind of actions to take to ensure this kind of inclusive, equitable learning.
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: I believe one of the approaches, it is about we need to apply different technique, we have to apply different kinds of tools and we need to be prepared for this, it is not about digitalizing content, it is more than this.  We need from the national governments infrastructures all our governments, local or national governments, we also need some policy, guidelines, frameworks in order for us to prepare and to ensure this inclusiveness.  There is a lot of investment that governments need to do in terms of infrastructure, ensuring, you know, the access of ICT at home as mentioned in the presentation. 
>> MIKHAIL KOMAROV: I think what I already shared, it is not ‑‑ we can't compare it to a full exchange.  That's important to understand, our University, when we tried to go online, students started to complain, okay, so we came to University to have offline studies we don't want online studies.  The University, they got some of the subjects officially introduced as online subjects for different campuses to have different students connected to the same class.
I would say, current year, just focused us a bit on live studies from different perspectives, from the perspective of regulations, I don't know about other universities but in our University, we had to change some regulations due to the online examinations and processes which are moved online which we had not thought about before.  Some infrastructure problems and then I saw the question with those with disability, right, with people who are some ‑‑ who needs special treatment, who need special approach of presenting content, the material, so on.  I don't want to say that online will exchange offline at all.  No.  Some people, they need special treatment, right, they need special approach in terms of giving, sharing, you know, content, different types of materials, so on.  I'm sure this is not about online studies, this is just about the whole framework of dealing with those people, helping them, right, to study, to learn, and there are tools online that can help, great, then we can introduce, we can integrate those tools, but if there are not tools could help, no, then we should continue with the traditional forms, with, you know, face‑to‑face, with one to one approach and so on. 
>> YANG LIU: Yes. 
Any further comments?
>> XIANG ZHOU: I think our major in engineering, it involves a lot of experiments.  We needed to use a single generator or scopes, so on, but now we're doing it remotely, we have been doing the experiments and we ‑‑ we have sent things to students so that they can use the tools to do their own experiments at home.  They do not need to go to the laboratory to do the experiments.  To have to teach the classes, it remembers ‑‑ this is my answer to part of that question.  Thank you. 
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: You know, replying to that, yes.  I believe that it is up to the expert of each time in order to design and resolve this problem.  What I mean in one of the slides at the academic level, what should be done.  For instance, I was interacting with one colleague from the physics department and explained she was having the students do some experiments in lab adapted at home.  What about medical sciences?  What about biology that students need to deal, to learn with a microscope, yes.  Each field has it own challenges.  I believe that there are experts in the fields who are most appropriate to say how they can resolve the challenges.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
I have just one more case to share.  How are universities now working with American students to help students in physics, in kem tri experiments, so students, they'll go online to get ‑‑ to learn courses in the American students, but then they're doing experiments in our universities.  This is actually a global collaboration.  We move the devices, the laboratories closer to the students, just like Michael and Elsa had mentioned.  We need to make some changes to our current education system.
I think this challenge also gives us a kind of opportunity to work closer with the global challenge.  In my University, I think we have some American universities had that are helping with the experimental elements in the teaching program.
We move on to the next question.  It is about how to provide fair online occasion for disabled students.  Anyone want to start this?  Those students are particularly struggling with their personal difficulty, innovation education makes this process more challenging.  Anyone have any experience solving this problem?
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: We, UNESCO has some guidelines dealing with accessible occasion for Persons with Disabilities, it is a huge issue and it requires a multistakeholder governance approach because first of all we recollects need to identify those children, those people, we need to learn, we need to have a more personalized approach to them and it is only not not only about ‑‑ for instance, we have to talk about the accessible technology, what type of technologies are we using and for each particular disability, there is a range of the needs of approaches in order to solve these problems.  Definitely it requires multistakeholder approach, it requirers the commitment from NGOs, educational assistance, systems, educator, and we need to use available technologies to make sure that we reach all of these people.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you. 
>> MIKHAIL KOMAROV: I think ‑‑ I couldn't be better than UNESCO so!
>> YANG LIU: No one can.
>> MIKHAIL KOMAROV: I would say, you know, the requirements in order to provide some special equipment so I think universities can mail those special equipment to those students.  Right.  It is possible because I know some cases where we have mailed some laboratory equipment required for some works, so on, some practical works, you know, mailing it to the students.  Same approach could be applied here if required.  In terms of other things, I'm sure I couldn't be better than UNESCO, it is better to follow those frameworks, depending, of course, on the opportunities.  I just ‑‑ in the countries.  Right.  I would like to mention a very good point, we can think if we have similar situation with the pandemic, for instance, 15, 20 years, how different situation it would be compared to what we have now.  When we have higher internet speed, right.  When we have more coverage of the internet, when we have smartphones, some other devices available, software, so on.
You can see what's different 15, 20 years ago.  I think in current case we just shouldn't forget the current situation, it may repeat.  Right.  We should be ready in terms of some additional new services, probably some new frameworks supporting that and actually users.  I'm not talking about teachers, students, I'm talking about users being able to use those services and tools.  Even if you have, you know, the tools, right, users should know how to use them properly.  For people with a special treatment, right, for people with a special approach, you know, which we should provide in terms of teaching them, we should be focused on this part more than for others.
This is really, you know, an issue to teach them how to use those tools and software and hardware properly.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
Xiang Zhou, do you have any experience of solving this challenge with disabled students?
>> XIANG ZHOU: I think for different types of disabled students, we can certainly set up distance online learning courses for them.
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: I just shared on the chat paper, the open access from research studies that we did on policy monitoring on accessibility for inclusive education.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: There are some examples.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.  Yeah.
I agree with every speak, we need to create more content for different groups of people so that they may speak different language, they live in different areas, they have different time zone, they have different challenges in accessing the internet.  For example, Elsa mentioned how to share the device among multiple kids in the family, how to share time between the parents, the students between working and learning here.  I think this is very interactive.  One more thing ‑‑
>> ELSA ESTEVEZ: You know, I think there is an issue that we just mentioned and we didn't go into too deep.  We should mention, it is more deal ‑‑ most of the content in the internet, available on the internet, online resources, education, other sources, it is available in English mostly, but we have to develop content in the language of our minorities communities.  In order to talk about inclusive education, we need to reach them in their own language and there is not always content available in those languages.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you.  Yes.  Thank you.
Time flies.  We have reached the last part of our session.  Before we close the session, I would like to invite final remarks to close the session.  Thank you, Xiang Zhou. 
>> XIANG ZHOU: Thank you.
I think after the discussion, from the aspect of occasion opportunity we all agree that this does improve by the online education, however, as it exists, some service, some online education, the education, it is still the best direction to improve this balance in terms of the field of education opportunities.  In the future, we could promote the culture of different areas and providing different contents, for example, there are different disabled persons and we can provide passage for them.  I think that we have a long way to go for online occasion.
Thank you.
>> YANG LIU: Thank you very much.
Thank you, everyone, for participating in this session.  I would also like to thank our speakers and I hope everyone enjoyed this session.  I believe more awareness, also more solutions need to be studied to make everyone aware of this change in education.  Thank you, everyone.  Enjoy your day! 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws139-copyleft-or-right-mediating-interests-in-academic-databases^^

 
          >> This is where the SDG9 and 4 meet. 
Yes, the pandemic, COVID‑19 situation is happening worldwide. But the education hasn't stopped. 
So how do we achieve sustainability and quality in this situation? We need to address the distance that is separating people. Infrastructures should also be informed in these new digital contexts. 
This is a situation that affects not only academic students in universities, but also civil society. 
[ Please stand by ]
This also came with illegal utilization of protected work. It harnessed the potential of the internet to provide access to knowledge for regions and groups that historically did not have public policy requires to be developed in a way that does not demotivate creators and researchers while allowing works to impact as many people as possible. A multi stakeholder approach is needed promoting dialogue between database owners, publishers, university, and civil society with government intermediation. From the perspective of the youth and students and young academics, the COVID‑19 has shown, has made it for accurate, more intention, more acute, sorry, why this discussion is important. For students the use of online sources was not possible during this time. They struggle because of high prices or the intellectual property rights of companies. Open access is not only a topic that's important to academic students to society. 
Cognitive justice, I want to coin the definition by the open and collaborative signs in developing the network called OCDS net. 
[ Please stand by ]
 
Situated openness is a concept that assumes knowledge is situated within a particular historical, political, and sociocultural relations. 
Autonomy and socially, this is a quote from Sylvia Federici. 
Wrapping up, the sustainable development nine aims to build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable innovation. Civic signs fosters innovation and the participation of civic society as actors in the knowledge production and the sustainable development of their communities. With this I want to clarify they are coming from the eco‑system of academy and also civic sides. 
Yes, the pandemic has reignited discussions on public policies of open access of public funded research and the lack of financial support to access databases is a serious problem for graduates, undergraduates and civic signs initiatives. 
So that's pretty much the context of our session. Please allow me to read the questions in this role play. There are five questions. I just would read them to you. Question number one is how to ensure an open and affordable use of academic databases for scientific innovation without infringing monopolistic and corporate copyright. 
The second question, how effective are the policies implemented by private and civic society organizations to make free access to academic work such as creative comments. 
The third question, can forceful policies by governments or public‑private partnerships solve the dilemma between copy left and copy right? 
Number four, to what extent do interests of young users that use academic databases, for example, students, influence the policy‑making process. 
The last question, number five, in the light of the lessons learned from COVID‑19 pandemic can the cases of global emergency be a ground for opening databases? 
So these are our four or five questions and each actor in this role play will introduce their interests, answering the policy questions and I want to invite our first speaker that represents the private sector. 
Let me introduce you to Mr. Kopia Thierry. I hope I pronounced that well. 
>> It's fine. Yes. 
>> He is the founder of the E‑commerce company and digital solutions development agency. Also is the founder of Digi clap, marshmallow project ‑‑ that's a nice name ‑‑ which is a project incubator. 
And a little bit more about Digiclink which has trained more than 2,000 young people in digital entrepreneurship. The Marshmallow Project which is a digital project incubator continues to work for a better inclusion of the digital technology for development of this community in working. 
Also he has been proactive and has brought ‑‑ has started to mobilize people from the youth IGF in his country. Thank you, everyone. Let's welcome Nathaniel Kopia Thierry to share with us his points and his interest. 
>> Okay. Thank you very much. You can hear me? 
>> Yes. 
>> It's okay? 
>> Yes. 
>> The first one is what policies the private sector implements to answer open access to academic database. And do I think that they are successful. 
So it started to be carried out by the European commission that announced just under 40% of company engaged in the process of sharing data with other companies. The possibility of developing new products or services is the first motivation mentioned by 74% of respondents. 
The possibility of forming partnerships with new players have motivation and we are 40% mentioning that additional income thanks to the monetization of data. 
So it is interested in making more money. In order to be able to set up a data sharing policy, it would be necessary to have a beneficial arrangement. In the event this does not work it is always possible to encourage the private sector to open up this data to exploitation in return for exemption on certain taxes. Also there are ‑‑ that allow the private sector. There are other traditional policies, but these are the most common. That is the first point for the first question. 
The second question is about can forceful policies for public‑private partnerships ‑‑ between copy left or copy right and can it put a burden on private companies? I will answer and say that sharing data between public and private actors has been done especially to the digital transformation which has already created the partnership link between the public sector and private sector. 
It will be understood that data sharing ‑‑ and more than governance to copy left and copy right. Technology can influence the decision between actors both by incentive mechanisms. 
Example, we have exemption established by the government on certain taxes run by the private sector. There are also formulas of cooperation following exchange of data to motivate the private sector to make its data fully accessible. 
So the last question, can the private sector open the database in case of pandemic? Okay. In the pandemic, everyone is concerned. Even if can be a springboard for some private companies to make more money it would be wiser to facilitate the exit of this crisis. 
Public and private consultation framework put in place to promote. In the response ‑‑ in response to the unprecedented and rapidly changing circumstances related to the novel coronavirus outbreak, academic textbooks, E‑books and school apps have temporarily opened access to the copy right and other materials. 
We don't know whether it will offer ‑‑ will end, but we know that the free access will not be permanent. So as an example, we can see open resources and COVID created ‑‑ for taking up that information about the novel COVID‑19. 
As an example for open source in support of coursework and online teaching, we have Cameroon university textbooks where we can find more than 700 textbooks. We are engaged in the school experience and back to the COVID‑19. In this platform we can find more than 14,000 E‑books. So we have the university even open access. We have open source access to give freely for exploitation. 
Other companies will give full access during this pandemic. So that's an example of the companies, private sector companies with full access to the database. So I think that it's the end of the ‑‑ that we can speak about it. 
>> Thank you very much. If you want, you still have two minutes. If you want to add something else. 
>> Okay. I will wait for questions. 
>> Working on policy oriented research on internet law and society. She holds a Ph.D. in sociology of law from University of Sao Paulo and has research experience at LMAU, University of Munich, Yale Law School and UC Berkeley School of Law. Welcome, Mariana Valente. 
>> Thank you so much for this very organized session and for all the attention given to us up to now. I would like to address some of the points that were addressed to me, but I would address them as a whole talking about why civil society should advocate for the opening of academic databases always but especially in the cases of pandemics. 
I would also like to speak on the copy right side of it. Because there is a discussion going on about copy left and open licenses when we are talking about academic databases which I think is really important for us to database from a civil society perspective. 
I'm speaking with my coordinator in Brazil. I think it is important to first address free and open licenses, and it is important to stress that there are tools which were created for legally sharing material which is under copyright. There is a thing going on here, I hope it doesn't bother you too much in listening to me. 
The creation of these open licenses is related to a longer historical development of free software licenses which are le related to specific values around knowledge and creation. When we are speaking of open licenses, creative licenses are the most well-known when we are speaking of knowledge and culture. Their creation was based on the experience of the free software movement but then thinking specifically of the environments and markets which are related to culture and knowledge. They are based on copyright. They differ from traditional licenses which a copyright holder can rent to someone in the sense that they are public. 
Their development was related to the development of digital technologies in the sense that digital technologies created the technical infrastructure for sharing, but even if we have a technical infrastructure for sharing, that doesn't mean that we have a legal infrastructure for sharing. The open and free licenses are there to provide that part of the sharing eco‑system. 
So to publish work under creative licenses, rights must be cleared so it is extremely important that organizations and whoever is a stakeholder working in the learn about licensing and have the basic legal tools that enable them to use those licenses and place something in the comments through these legal tools. It is important they have their own eco‑system. When we are talking about creative licenses they apply for all these different eco‑systems. Sometimes music and film. Sometimes speaking of education or academic research materials, sometimes databases themselves. Sometimes we are speaking of collections of heritage institutions and we know that when we are speaking of academic knowledge we are speaking of specific stakeholders that work in a certain way. Have specific roles. 
It is an area of academic knowledge in which because of the incentives and how research is funded, why dissemination is in the best interest not only of the author but also of the public. I want to go more into detail in that. 
Why is that? That's because the author in this case of academic knowledge is also the public. Because researchers and scientists deeply need to use academic research in their production. So open licensing is not only legal but it is in their interest. Whoever is producing research needs to necessarily have access to prior research. There is a question if authors are ready to open up. I would say definitely in the open access movement that looks into how knowledge is shared in academia, that's pretty much consensus. 
Because authors themselves, researchers don't profit from research in monetary terms. Their work is in general paid by the universities or research institutes where they work. They profit much from visibility. That's part of the research in the academic ethos. 
Also the separation between authorship and being a user is not so strict when we are speaking of academic knowledge. It is an infrastructure placed on top of copyright. You use copyright to disseminate and give access through legal tools. It is also in the interest of authors. Another thing I wanted to highlight is while licensing is there and it is available and creative licenses have become the pattern for sharing in different eco‑systems. The community has long learned two important lessons. You have the licenses and they can be used for disseminating. 
When it comes to copyright, you can't go too far without first ensuring limitations and exceptions to copyright. That means uses that are free regardless of open licenses. Also second man dates. What does that mean? That means you have to create incentives and structures within the eco‑system so that licenses can be used. It is very important that universities and research institutions have established their own policies regarding how members of those institutions are people who are funded by them publish their work under open licenses. That's important because there is a whole eco‑system of incentives for publishing. You need to look an incentives to make it so authors publish open license. If all the incentives are for authors to publish under copyright for example if all the high rated journals that are going to give them high rankings in their careers are under copyright and not open licenses, it's very possible that they are going to prefer publishing under copyright and not how the incentive license works even if it would be in their interest to publish and have visibility and have their work widely shared because they might need rankings that come from journals they publish in. 
So those mandates are really important for creating incentives and changing the eco‑system. So these are two areas, limitations and exceptions, that are free uses and mandates and institutions such as universities and also independent research centers in civil society that cares about access to knowledge should be looking at. 
In this conversation as has been highlighted here we are often speaking of authors and researchers and thinking of universities or think tanks. When we are speaking of access to science and knowledge those are not the only stakeholders. We are frequently speaking of people who are outside the realm of academy. So civic science, independent researchers. For that open license is even more important and if we are speaking of the global south because of conditions of access to those databases. Open licensing is really important. Besides thinking of mandates we have to think of a sustainable infrastructure. We know knowledge is a public good and the pandemic has shown us that more than ever, but it doesn't come by itself that knowledge will. So we need to create the legal, institutional and infrastructural conditions for that to be the case. That's it for now. I'm looking forward to the discussion. 
>> Thank you very much, Mariana. Thank you for this contribution. Now we are moving to a third speaker. No, excuse me. We have now a Q&A session of five minutes. We have a Q&A session of five minutes regarding these first talks. Private sector and civil society. 
Can somebody please address the questions? I don't know where I find them in the chat. 
>> There is a comment in the chat that maybe both our speakers can talk a little bit more. It's not exactly a question. 
>> It's not exactly a question, yes. It's like a comment. 
>> But it is interesting points to be commented. 
>> Okay. 
>> Should I read it? 
>> Thank you. 
>> It says in case of South Korea, there are big companies have almost carry out the academic database. They sell them extremely expensive to the library such as university library. Because of that, lots of libraries insisted that's unfair. However their power is too strong to change. So the civic society argues that at least specific research, if expensed by public money such as taxation, should be open source. This is an intervention by Mi Ru Lee, I guess from South Korea. 
Do Nathaniel or Mariana want to comment on this? 
>> I would definitely. If Thierry also wants to speak. 
Yeah. I think this is exactly the situation that I was referring to. Different countries have different experiences with their local production of academic knowledge. I'm based in Brazil. We have a very specific situation that that we have that is open source. I will write that in the chat. 
Most of the national academic production is open licensed because it is indexed in Scielo which is an experiment for a few decades. We still have the issue of access for very high prices from libraries, universities, when we are speaking of production from abroad. I think you are bringing up very important experience and the specifics of the situation, of course, I don't know. It addresses the issue I was speaking of about mandates, something being argued by civil society worldwide. That when we have research that's funded by taxpayers at the end of the day. It is important that the research in the public also to be used and to be built upon. We are speaking of knowledge that can be viewed upon and it is the case to highlight that when speaking of publicly funded research. I don't know if Thierry wants to add and address that, too. 
>> Okay. In this case, I think that the civil society must go with the government in order to find a compromise in order to access data of this company. I believe government can find a way to take the data of this company to be accessible. They can have it less expensive. That's my point of view. There are many ways to find a compromise. Many ways, as I told in my speech. 
>> Thank you very much. We are done with the five minutes of Q&A. We can go later to also ask, I guess during the breakout discussion people will be able to talk. No, sorry. I have a question. I actually have a question to Nathaniel. Could you please tell us about ‑‑ more about these subsidized and coexploitations as a formula from the private sector? 
>> Can you come again? I didn't understand. 
>> Could you share more about the subsidies and the coexploitation from the private sector? 
>> I will take an example. Private sectors are always looking for a new services or new technologies to increase. They already have a database and more data with them that is to give this data to all persons want to make like academics area. Give them the data freely. To find a new technology or a new process way. And after the results of this data, the person comes back to the private sector company to exploit them to develop the new technology. So that's the ‑‑ if there is interest to the company, they can give the data to these persons and exploit data together. 
>> Understood, thank you very much. 
>> I wanted to add something. In Africa they have to make topics, so they can go to see a private sector company to have other data. When it is over they can use it to increase activity. 
>> Okay. So that's like data mining. 
>> Thank you so much for answering that question. Let's move to our third speaker. Our third speaker is Mr. Elnur Karimov from Istanbul University. 
He's the winner of the honorary presidential scholarship in 2012 and also prizes in 2016 and 2018 for academic excellence. And now is the winner of a renowned Japanese scholarship for research and is doing research in nontraditional trademarks. Welcome. 
>> Thank you very much for the kind introduction and thank you very much to the organizing team and all the speakers for your valuable comments. I will try to keep my part short. In my part, I will address two questions actually. The first is to what extent youth are the users of the academic database online and are involved in the policy making process. What I mean is actually the university students young researchers and academician. 
And I will talk about the economic databases open to free and affordable access. As you may agree the youth are an underestimated but a growing force with information communication technologies. If we look to the general figures the youth are actively using the internet. However on the other side they are not participating in the policy‑making process. 
If we compare with the international and regional levels thanks to the international internet governance forum the youth are advocating for their rights through various platforms. However, on the other side they are really remaining passive at the national level. The national youth councils in countries or student unions at the universities are just consultative organizations and they do not influence the universities or their governance. 
I would like to report called young people as agents and advocates of development published in 2016 which states that the single most common group of activities is young people educating their peers and community members. The peer‑to‑peer education has been quite widely accepted among the young people with the internet and communication technologies. I'm part of an organization called the society youth special interest group where we are designing some trainings to educate the use and advocate them through different platforms. 
If you look at the figures of the OECD2013, it is a report called education at a glance. Today 40% of young adults are expected to create a university‑level education over their lifetimes. Only 1.6% of young people today are expected to complete advanced research programs. This has just increased to the year 2000. 
On the other hand, the increasing number of young people in academia, the need for academic databases is also another trend. If you look at a case study in turkey, I can add that later. The academic databases are the second priority among the youth when they are doing ‑‑ when students are fulfilling their term projects or the research, dissertations or the thesis. The university level of education can be deteriorated. If we take into account the academic databases that offer E‑books are really unaffordable for youth, even those who receive scholarships from their government. To access these databases, especially during the COVID‑19 pandemic has been a great trouble. I would like to differentiate the trouble. The first is when the youth have access to the academic databases through their universities, however they cannot access through home. 
In turkey they had free access to students to some of the academic databases. However you cannot access from home. You can only use the library at the premises of the university which means that in terms of lockdown like the pandemic, the situation is even harder because you cannot only use the printed materials at the library but are deprived of academic databases because you cannot visit the library that the universities have been totally closed.
The second part of the problem of course is even if you have some access to academic databases, the content of these databases can be not reached and if you want to reach more content you need to pay more. The third part is the literacy level of youth isn't enough to use academic databases. They do not know how to access, how to ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
Thank you very much. This was my presentation. We will discuss more probably during the next minutes. 
>> Thank you very much, Elnur. You gave us three extra minutes for Q&A. Let's see questions in the chat. 
>> I think before we should go to the doctor to speak. 
>> Yes. Thank you for addressing this. Our next speaker, Dr. Moya represents the government stakeholder. She is from the Philippines, a director of innovation and technology support office, intellectual property office of the Philippines. She has a major in technology management, a Ph.D.. lots of experience. She managed the innovation technology support office, a franchise of intellectual property office of the Philippines. 
And the technology business incubator TBI of the university. Welcome. 
>> Thank you, everyone. Thank you to Kamalanetra. 
It is honor to be here as part of the IGF. I'm assigned to three questions. I represent the government. 
So the first question is how the government should build a balance between the open and affordable use of academic databases and individual rights and offers. The first is policies and the copy right and copy left. Number three should the case of pandemic be grounds for opening academic databases for free and affordable access? 
So today technological advances have impacted the ways data are shared and processed. With modern technology propelling the information age using a computer or a smartphone with a connection acquiring information is accessible now through online academic databases. This has affected the way technology is shared. 
The importance on the internet has never been more crucial than when COVID struck. 
We shifted from face to face to remote and online learning. Students, academics and others are forced to work in the online environment. Aside from the lack of technological resources, as most nations do, many are concerned about the accessibility of academic databases that are needed for quality education. These databases have information for solving problems like climate change, poverty and many more. The question arises however as to what extent to copyright protect academic databases and how can government help make this academic databases affordable to researchers and students alike. The basic principle of copyright is the oldest and most influential international agreement in the field of copyright. The Berne convention and other copyrights can be found in article 2 of the WIPO copyright of 1996. In article six of the agreement in 1994 which said copyright should extend to expression and not the ideas, methods of operation or mathematical concepts. It could be stated also that the copyright holder decides who can use it, who can change it and share. According to 2011 copyright laws were aimed to protect the creativity of the author offering commercial value for their wares. This is to protect by creativity and profit. This is the dualism of the copyright law which is actually to advance creativity and at the same time commercial value. So in Europe, for example, including Japan and South Korea academic databases are protected under the so‑called generous database right aimed at the protection of investment. 
Through article 7 of the database directive as implemented in the legislation of the member states the maker of a database showing a substantial investment in either the obtaining or verification or presentation of its content is exclusive right to prevent extraction or utilization of the whole or a substantial part that is evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively the contents of the database. 
Like copyright protection this database right arises automatically without any formal requirements at the time of the completion. 
In other parts of the world protection of database to doctrines. The sweat of the brow, a principle that copyrights are to reward efforts of an author and the copyright doesn't require that an expression be original or in novel form. The other doctrine is the modicum of creativity. A principle which held the minimum level of creativity is required for it to be protected by copyright. This doctrine further shows they are not copyrightable but compilation of facts are because the expression by way of the arrangement possesses the least minimum level of creativity. 
So academic databases can follow this principle. 
Moreover proponents of strong database protection under copyright law argue that it costs a great deal of money to compile, maintain and service databases. Because of this private enterprises would foot the bill for the upkeep of the databases. 
Further they argue that increases really encourage investment in database development and licenses for the public and stronger law ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
So this is the reason academic databases may not be available to researchers and students. 
On the other hand, there is a growing school of thought that holds intellectual creation should be used to distribute as they see fit. And take legal steps to ensure others have the right to do so. 
This is known as copy left. It is not the opposite of copyright. It is describing a more liberal copyright. People want their work to be available to the public without restrictions even though the copyright law applies to their work. It grants everyone a license to use and share a work without requiring permission or payment. Only attribution or sometimes the derivative works are to be shared under the same terms as the original. 
We have discussed originality and protection. This would be literary works or academic databases. Further, copy left or open access is online ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
Might undermine scientific peer review. It was claimed the increase in the posting of manuscripts in open access repositories would lead to a wide scale subscription putting traditional publishers both commercial and society and in the long result area in scholarly publishing 
However, a study conducted in 2012 shows that open access journals indexed in the web of signs are approaching the same scientific impact as subscription journals and that open access journals founded in the last ten years are receiving about as many citations as subscription journals launched during the same period. 
Although they are restricting access to database limit, data sharing and ability of researchers to build previous research and further the knowledge the same protection provides incentives for research to be carried out where the investment of database is protected. 
Take note, we are in the new normal where everything is changing. So restricting access to database they'll be effective. Of course I will leave that question to you. What is important is the government and other stakeholders, civil society, publishers, creators, policy makers and even research networks should work hand in hand to develop a more organized, efficient and systemic database sharing system or policy whereby scientific data is shared more effectively including at the international level. National research networks can help make this possible. They are composed of think tanks and experts that can provide linkages, inspire and help improve policy processes.
There's been considerable studies proving that this national research networks can help in addressing this change. The government can encourage publishers and other repository of information to hear the call and step up to provide free or affordable access or academic resources. Even at least for the COVID‑19 outbreak. The government can provide support in terms of grants, funding, tax exemptions or financial schemes that can help our authors who are also affected by this pandemic. The government can ensure every citizen is accorded with rights 
[ Audio disruption ]
Between the right of the copyright holders and the users. The government can also help researchers and scholars provide information to academic databases that are now free and accessible to students, teachers and librarians and access affordable databases through our students and researchers 
So that would be all. Thank you. 
>> Thank you, Dr. Moya. I'm asking to everyone in the public, is there any questions to the intervention of Dr. Moya representing government or to Elnur representing the student/youth sector? If there is, please post it. I see at the moment comments, not specific questions. 
There is one question from Juan for Mariana. Hi, Mariana, what do you think could be a solution for independent investigators in order to get more access? Sometimes that paper that you need especially in humanities is restricted. It happens. He's asking Mariana, what do you think of a solution? 
>> I was trying to also engage in the conversation in the chat. I was trying to say it's difficult to find a solution that doesn't touch upon the whole eco‑system. Because the way it is, individual researchers who are not connected to a university or a university that is already paying for the fees of the licenses for academic databases, they basically don't have any means to have access. So we should think both technologically and legally. I agree with what Vivian was saying before on the roles that governments could play in that. I was also addressing again the mandates and how it has to be thought of in terms of institutional and national policies in my opinion. 
>> Okay. Thank you so much. Now we have to go to breakout discussions. There are two rooms.
Please go to your breakout rooms. You can also have coffee during your breakout discussions. There is one group for private sector and civic society and another for youth and government. Please, co‑hosts, could you facilitate these? We need to split into these groups. You have ten minutes. 
>> Just to jump in, hi, everyone. This is Pedro. The rooms will be for the speakers to talk among themselves and reach common points about the economic database and open access and other topics. 
But while they are having their discussion we are also opening to participation here in the live session so people can talk about their experience in their own countries. For example, someone talked about the situation in South Korea. It would be nice for us to hear about how things work relating to academic database in other countries or other regions or even local initiatives. 
Please, if you want to talk just write in the chat or raise your hand. There is a tool for that. We can open the microphone so you can speak. If you prefer you can also write in the chat and I will read it for you. 
 
>> Just to break the ice to start the conversation we have an initiative of research that was made in public universities which are usually the most important ones in Brazil. They have to do it on open access. It is a way to contribute to society. They also have to give back to the society in the format of this open source, open access journals and even open access to thesis, et cetera, et cetera. 
Aileen raised her hand.
Can you unmute her? 
>> Thank you very much, Pedro. I have a question. I'm looking at the last comments in the chat. One of the suggestions is making these publications public for free. So if we can imagine a scenario that's all the publications would be free. So what would happen if that public database of publications, it's under the domain of the government and the government is saying, okay, I don't want this specific publication to be shared because it doesn't share the same values or the things they don't want to share. 
What do you think would happen in that situation? We could have all the publications can be free and accessible or it will be too extreme? I hope it's understandable, my question. 
 
>> I'm sorry. I think my internet connection failed for a bit. Could you just repeat the question? I got the first part of what you said. Just didn't get the last section. 
>> Okay. That wasn't prepared. I'm trying to gather my thoughts again. I was thinking about an imaginary scenario that all the publications are under a public fund for free. What could happen with a database or publication under the domain of government and the government says, okay, I don't want this specific publication to be accessed to the people. In that case we should think of a public database totally or do you think maybe another approach? That's my query. 
>> This is a great question. I think that the best way to develop this public database is not through direct control by the political aspect of the government. I mean, there is an active branch. But the education parts may be universities mainly that have a little more ‑‑ a bit more independence than the political interests that are natural in the common part of government action. Even if the public databases are under direct or indirect control of the government such as a government that can give orders to universities, even in that case, at least in Brazil we have some constitutional rights or even civil rights that guarantee this aspect of not censoring manifestations, mainly academic manifestations. So one could use them, could go to the courts to guarantee their publications, opinions such as freedom of speech and freedom of information in some countries. 
I think, of course, it is not something that we can be totally sure that will happen. But it is a constant struggle to keep up the freedom of speech and information as it is in all other aspects of copyright. I think they are coming back in just a few minutes. We can get their common points and finish this session. 
>> There are two groups in private rooms. Private sector with civic society and youth and government. Let's keep them about five minutes more, I would say. Then when they send me the comments, I will try to communicate with you the output. 
>> Some interesting points were raised in the chat. I will read them so they are registered in our video. 
>> Yes, please, go ahead. 
>> Gergana sent us the guidelines to the rules on open access to scientific publications and open access to research in 2020. It shows the European position on this question talking such as the example I gave about availability or research that was partially or fully funded by public resources. 
And the articles that were published in RFCs around the public domain feel available. There is the important of open source for more visibility to authors and content. 
>> It was mentioned one of the solutions to add open source academic database on the networks that try to connect university networks to academic resources. Veronica mentioned that some universities provide VPN access even from home to get assessed to academic database. And some institutions do not have infrastructure to set up VPN or use a proxy which results in some problems to their students and also to libraries that cannot provide remote access to resources. 
>> Hello, Pedro, and everyone. 
>> Hello. Do you think we will have time to present? 
>> Yes, please, go. Start. If you want to start. 
>> Okay. So we have discussed in the private sector. 
[ Audio disruption ]
Agreement. The first point is that databases can offer access to researchers and society ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
 
>> The second point was that instead of the university administration student unions can be an intermediary between the students and database publishers in the negotiations for open or affordable access. So we agreed that the university administration can push bureaucracy in negotiations and maybe the student unions can better represent their interests of students in the negotiations and they can be a third party to get an access. 
Third point, last point being noted was that as soon as ‑‑ this is related to the exchange of data and we agree if the universities can create their own databases like online academic databases, the database publishers can exchange the resources with them and they can actually enrich the academic databases of each other. In this collaboration actually the people who will benefit will be the students because they will have the rich academic databases from their universities and from the database publishers.
That's it from our side. Let's hear maybe from the other side. 
>> Hi. 
>> Thank you so much for sharing. Now, Mariana, that was Elnur sharing the information of the student breakout. And now Mariana will present the discussion of society and civil government. Please. 
>> Okay. Vivian, can you hear me? She froze ‑‑ no, she's there. Would you like to start? Maybe I can complete. 
>> I think the connection is ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
 
>> Okay. We had agreed on that, but I don't think she can hear us well. So government and civil society, right? We were in agreement most of the time, but it was not as easy to find what the solutions would be. How the academic eco‑system works in different places. What we agreed on is that publicly funded research should be open and free. It should be made available to whomever wants access to it in different countries. Vivian was sharing that that research will not be peer reviewed so we were for some time discussing that we would also have to think of solutions for having peer reviewed research published and what could be in place for that. We were discussing some organizations had the capacity to do that because it's in their mandates, in their missions. It can be also the government can fund initiatives and journals that are peer reviewed and also published open license. But we didn't reach more conclusions than that. I don't know if Vivian can add. 
>> I agree with ‑‑ I think the solution was to really come up with this paper should be peer reviewed, even if it is an open license ‑‑ open access license. The difference, the subscription‑based licenses are preferred because they are claiming that it is more credible because they are peer reviewed. But if there is open access also peer reviewed that would mean open access licenses are also credible for ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
‑‑ policy we can do ‑‑ we cannot do that alone, of course. The civil societies or as a government. We should work hand in hand together with other organizations or other ‑‑ supporting these policies. 
>> Thank you so much. We have just a few minutes to summarize the main output. So SDG4 and 9 we are having a problem with access and also infrastructure. 
Regarding that, there have been points in the two groups. The first was a discussion of the youth together with the corporate. There were three main things ‑‑ database publishers can offer open access to smaller research group of the society and can also benefit. Number two, student unions can be an intermediary between the students and database publishers in the organizations for open and affordable access. 
Rather than contact with the university administration, number three, as soon as the universities create their own databases, we are talking about new infrastructure, creating their own databases with the collections of available books, the database publisher can exchange the resources or provide open access to each other from which the students will benefit. 
So that's the main output from this discussion. The discussion between Mariana and Dr. Moya which was civil society and government is that the conclusion that they agree was that publicly funded research must be free. That was the main conclusion. 
So, yes, we are in a time of Corona. The status quo is leaving many underprivileged people behind like students and people from civil society, especially in rural areas. Humanity in these times of pandemic like COVID must be united, you know? And we are in the same boat and people are vulnerable. But these kind of situations show solidarity for people to find solutions. 
There has been in common points in resolution agreements that these four points that I mentioned and we will share this in a document together, the organizers of the session about this output. 
So I think I want to thank you to all the speakers for your presentations and the invitation to this session. Please do not forget who you are serving and do not stop sharing and do not stop serving your communities. 
I want to welcome you all to continue investing your energy and your love into this. Thank you very much. 
If anyone wants to add something, you please get the microphone. You are welcome. 
>> Thank you very much, everyone. Stay safe. 
>> Thank you. Have a nice day or a nice night depending on where you are. 
>> Thank you, everyone. Just remember that all of us will be requested to give feedback after the session. Please give us feedback. We really appreciate that. Thank you so much. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws184%E2%80%8Echildren%E2%80%99s%E2%80%8Erights-and-participation-in-data-governance^^

[ Session in progress ]
‑‑ affiliate of the Internet society and studies the governance of data collected by digital platforms and CTs.  Varunram Ganesh is a research engineer and working at the MIT Currency Initiative.  Background is in technology research and data privacy.  I am a visiting fellow from School of Economics and Political Science and founder of a start‑up which aims to visualize educational data and empower students to learning about their data.  And according to my youngest kid, I'm a person holding a cooking pan.  I just put that on purpose just to highlight and emphasize the importance to see what children see, what they understand, what they experience and what they think, which is the whole point to our presentation to our workshop today.  
Today we had the opportunity and have the opportunity to be together all of us and to talk about the emerging problems from highly digitized educational environments.  I put a glossary of a couple of terms that I think about in invite everybody to think about in terms of the kind of normative assumptions and normative sequences that may follow as a result of words that we use on a daily basis like EdTech, what do we actually understand of EdTech?  What do we think about when we talk about applications?  Can we make distinction between one application and/or a platform ‑‑ we are going to involve them in the discussions so we can hear their voice and see their perspectives.
So the pandemic propelled global education towards two extremes as it seems.  On the one hand, it exacerbates an equality and on the other it forced radical Digital Transformation by those groups perhaps we can argue to seek directly profit from these transformations, from instruction to assessment to practice on a daily basis, to increase the EdTech.
This generates immense amount of data.  And to understand what kind of data, I look to primary and secondary education a little bit in Europe and in the United States and here is an example just to visualize what I mean by that.  I hope it works.
Imagine a 10‑year‑old Avery who is from a primary school from a typical education whose data about ethnicity and race, data for parental employment, transcripts from grades collected by peers and education, which is a media company but they also are software developer among many other things.  Pearson Education collects data about Avery from on line communications like her e‑mails, from behavior data and conducts and her responses on services questionnaires.  And there are hundreds of others companies EdTech companies that tap into Avery's data.
While some legal frameworks such as the general data protection regulations within the European context exists and offer data privacy and data ownership on an individual level, the recent research by for example the national Digital Accountability Council revealed that EdTech ‑‑ these were the most commonly used EdTech companies during the first lockdown of the COVID‑19 pandemic used by parents and schools.  These companies still manage to tap or circumvent data privacy, share location, expose personal data to third parties and so on.
Now the obvious thing is that EdTech provides us to collect data, they need data to fine‑tune credited and drive profits.  I have two questions that I want to pose today and first one is thinking about agencies.  Can children and youth be empowered through data literacy?  It should be a collective effort to push industry to let educational institutions to lean towards this collective learning.  And it's not just about the students and children to learn about the data but it's also collective.  So teachers, educational leaders, school leaders and collectively as a society.
Now research shows that people have a better understanding once more abstract policies like data processing are visualized, people have a better understanding.  And that is part of this collective data learning and data literacy I'm talking about.  However, research is also pointing that even if jurisdictions provide framework for data ownership and measurements for data literacy, the majority of individuals still don't know much about it or there is lack of clarity with regards to the processing of personal data, or simply people don't care.  But I want to hold on to that kind of word, don't care, when we don't care about our personal data.  Who is collecting it?
And link it to my second question, so what drives EdTech in schools?  The total ‑‑ spending false on governments and families so in the current crisis we are talking about these expenditures being put a strain on the financial strain.  EdTech providers rush to offer saving solutions as we see with the global education coalition and you can see some of the names part of that coalition.  And they offer saving solutions and improvements.  While acknowledging the inequality and lack of connected activity especially in this current situation, I want to look at the evidence of what really improves education.
Back in 2009, a really great book was written and argued injecting aid money in Africa isn't working.  Similarly, research shows that injecting EdTech hasn't produced any substantial impact on learning.  Since education is a national responsibility falls on governments and families, they should collectively find other means to aid development.  Educational development is not about merely scaling and mixing up existing EdTech.  And our children voice in this anyway.  Could we in the pursuit for better means collectively learn to care about our personal data?  I'll stop here and I want to give voice to my colleagues first.  Nick?
>> NICK COULDRY: I want to approach freedom.  Freedom brings together all the tracks of this conference, environment, inclusion, trust and data.  Freedom is a fundamental value that we want to apply to all of our dealings in the technological environment and obviously trust is essential to it.  So we know that education today at all levels is being transformed by commercial platforms.  And we also know that the pandemic is intensifying the practical and social pressures to use commercial educational platforms.  As a result, the spaces and the times of the educational process are being transformed.  And I want us to focus on that point for a moment.
Now we know that space and time are the dimensions in which everyone, including children, acts out their freedom.  So what are the implications for the space and time of education when, for example, education is now being conducted on platforms with their massive capacity to extract data and to archive data for the future?
More broadly, we have for a century at least, maybe many centuries, thought about education as a preparation for adult freedom and as a space of free development for children themselves.  So what are the implications of educational platforms for children's freedom right now and their future freedom when they grow into adults at a time when no doubt, data from their childhood education on platforms may still be stored?
And if there are issues here that educational technologies raise for the fundamental value of freedom, are we currently giving children themselves opportunities to contribute to discussions on those very issues?  And if not, why not?  I'll pass over to Doaa.
>> DOAA ABU‑ELYOUNES: Hi, everyone.  Building on what my colleague said before, we are going to go back to this points and discuss them more later.  The point I wanted to focus on in my brief presentation is the law.  And in particular, the General Data Protection Regulation, which is European regulation turned in 2016 and applies to everyone who reside in Europe as well as European citizens who reside outside of Europe.
It has special implications regarding children so I thought it would be interesting to address.  Threat to the GDPR states that children requires special protection with regards to their personal data as they might not be aware of the risks, consequences and safeguards.  So, the specific protection should apply to particularly to the use of a personal data in marketing and profiling and basically in any digital services provided to children.
And the rationale behind that is that children might not understand that sharing their e‑mail address or their hobbies would lead to marketing, for example.  And if they are unable to assess critically the content that might be encouraged or assumed that ads they are receiving from the specific subscriber they subscribe to like that they have to buy certain products or encouraged to adopt unhealthy lifestyle, for example.
So the special protection should be part of the design.  For example, the privacy statements has to be adopted and to be understandable for people at any age.  And by default, it can be limited by age, so for example, you can apply to people who are less than 14 will have certain privacy settings that are different from others.
Now, consent ‑‑ according to the GDPR, you need a reason to process the data.  You need a basis for the processing.  And if the processing is done based on consent, the competence of the child should be assessed in their ability to understand the implication of the collection and processing of data.  In this regard, GDPR clearly states an age of 16, so under that consent cannot be given.  Under that consent of a parent has to be given.
It can be lowered but no less than 13 for sure.  There is an exception of course, that if services are provided by an intermediary like school, or when I said would not apply that much because it will not be considered a services provided directly to children.  However, in general, GDPR treats children similarly to adults in regard of processing the following rights: So the rights to object to the processing of the data and some exceptions, also children should be able to give a copy of their data if they ask for it, the right to ask for their data to be deleted, especially if they consented to give it when they were adult and they asked later on ‑‑ when they were kids and ask as adults.  So the company cannot say you consented.  It doesn't work.  And lastly, data portability.  So data they can ask for data to be taken to another platform and they can ask not to be subjected to any other processing.  Thank you.  Beatrice or Gretchen?
>> GRETCHEN GREENE: I'm not sure either.  I heard it both ways.  I'll tell you some of the ways that AI is being used in education today and also talk about where I think the promise is where AI is strongest and what we might want from it for education.
So, first let me tell you a number of ways it's being used.  Some are not about the learning process itself but about the infrastructure of schools.  So it can be used for threat detection so face recognition has been used in some schools for identifying whether someone has permission to be in the hall on campus add at a school event.  It can be used for another threat detection which is, is someone likely to fail out of school?  Are they likely to drop out of school?  And by identifying who you think is likely to drop out, then can you make an intervention?
It's used for adaptive and personalized learning.  And also for learning engineering, which is can we learn more about how we on average learn things?  And can we learn more about how individuals are learning things and then change lessons to improve our teaching things?
So as an example for that, how often, if you're learning a new language, do you need to be reminded and tested on a certain vocabulary word?  What is the optimal repetition time on average and for you as an individual?  So there is research around that and then applying that to, I need to hear it every so often until I really have got it nailed down.  If you wait ‑‑ if you ask me all the time, you're wasting my time and if you wait too long, I don't remember the word.
Being used for identification proctoring for remote exams; you can for instance do data detection and try to identify where someone is looking if you want to enforce that they are looking at the screen and not at something else that is off camera.  Some colleges are using it to track how early and how often are people engaging with that collegiate website and in what ways because it affects your U.S. News & World Report rankings if you offer to people and they don't accept you.  So there is some interesting questions there.  That's not about somebody learning really, but affecting the whole system.
Chat bot tutors.  So automated tutors to try to answer questions for a student to kind of scale the teacher up because there are a lot more students than teachers and if you can take that instructor's time and free it up, they can spend it on other things.  Also then students, if this is their homework buddy, can ask questions at 2:00 in the morning when the teacher just doesn't want to be available.
Emotion and affect detection both on line and in some classrooms in China.  Looking for joy and engagement based on student's facial expressions or their voice.  You can imagine different ways that can be used.  It could be, is this student paying attention?  Should we intervene with this student?  Or is this teacher compelling attention from their students?  Are they causing them to be engaged?  And should we use that to evaluate teachers?  Algorithms are also being used.  There are U.S. court cases about them evaluating teachers using various factors, how should we decide; which we do anyway.  We evaluate teachers and children but some of it is getting automated now with algorithms and AI in way it is wasn't.
Automatic grading.  So as an instructor when you're grading, I don't know that I have ever met a colleague who loved grading.  I definitely don't.  And so, if you can automate that, which multiple choice exams are great for that.  The low‑tech way to do that.  And then there are ways to run those through machines.  But now also there is AI being used to try to automate essays and try to give feedback on essays.  So you could use it either for evaluation or for the feedback for someone improving, which isn't quite the same use.
There is also on the infrastructure, even things like predicting maintenance needs and failures for the bus fleet for the district.  So now you have got some ideas of all the what is happening right now.  It has not yet reached its promise of relieving teachers of all grading and evaluation they would not like to do so they could either have more time for things they did want to do at work or do things they wanted to do at home instead of grading all night.  But what have we gotten really good at?  Let's look at education more broadly.  Let's talk about libraries.
Let's talk about your laptop or your phone, your connection to the Internet and Google.  Where do you go now when you want to find something?  What is the first thing that you do?  You use AI on a search engine.  You use AI on recommendation systems to get information.  So the already achieved ability of AI to create access and to control access and to drive us to certain things for information, is enormous.
Scaling education is one of the biggest hopes for AI in education that you could remove barriers of geography but you can do a lot more than that.  You can remove barriers of that you got a certain grade in a certain class that you went to a certain school, that you had a certain amount of money; because a lot of barriers are set up because we have a system where we only want a certain number of people to qualify for certain things.  We have got these funnels of only a certain number can come to this school.  They are artificial in a way.  Some of them are real in terms of if you have not mastered competency at a certain level of a subject, you can not then master the next level.  But some of them aren't.
AI scales cheaply.  Once you have set something up you can then send it broadly.  So adaptive and personalized learning, AI is good at pattern recognition.  Natural Language Processing.  We had enormous advances.  So the automatic translation of languages is huge for being able to create broad access to informational resources of all kinds.
So engagement.  One of the problems with ‑‑ back when it was by correspondence by U.S. mail and then it was turned into mooks (sp) at some point .  I don't know how many of signed up for mook class, if you have and you finished it, I'm impressed.  I think I finished one but I dropped out of a lot of them.  However, there is enormous amounts of the best and brightest computer engineers in the U.S. and beyond working on engagement.  How many times can they get you to click a thing?  If that same kind of energy was used on how we keep students engaged, that would be the thing that it would take to really scale education with AI and really create not just access, but to help people be really excited in a way that a really great teacher does.
All right.  Thank you.  I think Beatrice?
>> VELISLAVA HILLMAN: Thank you.  Beatrice?
>> BEATRIZ BOTERO ARCILA:  Thank you.  It's nice to be with you here today.  I want to bring up a little bit of the U.S. context on data regulation and education and one of the key challenges is privacy laws in the U.S. are sector‑based.  Education has been already regulatory recognized as where data is sensitive and there are additional protections for students.  The thing is, however, that when technology companies start write education services they are not really covered by the sectorial regulation privacy protections that apply to schools, universities and so on and so forth.
So I think in those scenarios in which AI and data analytics can be used to ask Gretchen ‑‑ as Gretchen was describing, keeping track of students who might be at risk of dropping out or who might not be learning entirely or to help Professors and teachers grade and so on, that the privacy risk there is that these companies are not covered by those regulations and extra protections and thus, there is a risk to improve on one maybe the type of consequences for liberty and freedom that Nick was talking about, materializing in a way, because there is already controls to what happened to information downstream.  So I think some of the key things that we should be thinking about in a space like this is about expanding the protection that is exist a little bit along the lines, to companies that aren't necessarily educational institutions but are increasingly embedded in the educational ecosystem and that for example, might be happening right now with soon many schools and universities are going online.  But even web service providers like Google and so forth, I think there is an important need to try to think how we engage this actors of the education world in the protection and privacy that are important for students.  That was what I wanted to say.
>> VARUNRAM GANESH: Thank you.  I'd like to touch upon one issue and data privacy.  There is probably a very important to understand the intervention in most cases is better than a solution after data privacy violation or breach.  You can see in the slides here that trusted and really big companies, very popular toy makers, YouTube and children's hospitals, these trusted companies and institutions which we generally don't assume to have these kind of hacks, are being involved in these hacks, which begs the question, can we prevent such events from happening before they happen?  Because the implications of such data privacy and breaches are huge, and especially in children because there are a lot of bad people who might do things and be really ‑‑ we really want to protect our children.  The real goal is to bridge the gap between awareness and action because a lot of people are aware about privacy breaches.  We read about them in the news all the time.  Cambridge Analytica or hacks at the Pentagon or different governments.  But we don't really know how to report them.  And scaling it back into the school level, if is there a data privacy breach for example, in the attendance record, who do I report it to?  Do I report it to the teacher?  To the principal?  To the authorities?  And I think it's really important to bridge this gap so students and parents can understand how to take this process forward.
And parents are concerned about student privacy because as Beatrice was saying, Zoom and all these on‑line applications, known knows what is going on and there is a very famous article about Zoom earlier this year which pointed out that Zoom had very critical security flaws but if these capitalized companies have these problems, we are trusting our children's education on some lesser use, we need to shift our focus to try to understand what they do with the prospect of privacy.
And another important thing probably Nick touched on, was that we need to balance utility and privacy and the reason COVID‑19 pandemic we have seen the advent of contact tracing Apps and while they are created with extremely good intent, we have also seen instances where the records are open to the public or they had security flaws.  And the small notion of that can be seen in these different snippets from across the world where things are seemingly created in very good intent but the implications are huge as you can see a teacher creating a national database or tools being developed to track the pandemic.  It's really important to track what is really going on behind‑the‑scenes so we can try to prevent an event of a future privacy breach.
And I think as I'd like to close our presentations, our goal as Gretchen pointed out, is to utilize technology.  Because technology has so much potential and has improved our learning systems a whole lot and we don't want to leave the benefits of technology but at the same time, we don't want to have a big brother watching over us and who can track whatever we have done in our past lives.  And I think the goal is to have safer classrooms without fear of big brothered while still utilizing benefits of technology.  Back to you.
>> VELISLAVA HILLMAN: Let's open the floor for discussions and we have some really great youth representatives from Youth IGF.  Nick, my colleague, will moderate the discussion.  There are questions already coming in.  Nick to you.
>> NICK COULDRY: We have two questions so far from Jose, Antonio.  And first we want to give a opportunity to Joao and, Manuel to give us any brief comments you have as representatives of Youth IGF.  Whichever of you wants to go first.
>> JOÃO PEDRO MARTINS: I'm speaking to you from Portugal.  I have been part of, like you said, a youth initiative that was running in parallel to the Local IGF and gathered many youth from all around the world and we produced some specific messages on topics of interest of youth.  This is a very nice session because it links directly to some of the topics that were raised.
On what has been said, I guess from a youth perspective, usually youth has the opportunity to really choose or opt‑in or opt‑out on the softer and the platforms that are being used for their education.  They take for granted the good judgment of teachers, of the principal of the institution of national education agendas, and it's debatable up to a point how they can influence these decisions if they come up from that high.
A point I would like to share with you, is a specific situation where AI data can be a little bit damaging to youth.  And I speak on a personal capacity.  I have done exams through ‑‑ in this new era, in this on‑line virtual reality, and there is a software called, proctoring.  It's basically a software that you run on your computer while you take the exam.  It shares the teacher that you're not consulting Google or navigating on your PDFs with notes and trying to get the solution without being from your mind.  I then saw a very interesting article that got me thinking and I shared already.  And it basically raises the question, how is this not basically enforcing surveillance from an early age to young people?  How is it the trust between society goal or valued principle of education and undermining the relationship between young students and the teachers themselves?
A solution is then proposed, perhaps we should be rethinking the questions that are being asked to the students rather than trying to over watch everything they are doing, capturing their webcam, sound, on a deeper level the processes that are run on our own machines.  And I guess that would be my greatest input for this debate.  What are the things that we should change in educational level that would allow us for more transparent use of this technologies without undermining for instance the trust that should exist between these different stakeholders is in the education process?  Thank you.
>> NICK COULDRY: Thank you very much.  You raised a fundamental point and we must try to get that very soon.  First I want to give Emanuel, the other representative from IGF Youth, the chance to speak if you want.  Emanuel?
>> EMANUEL: Thank you.  Good evening from Nigeria.  Just a few points I would like to raise in relation to the subject we are currently discussing.  At this point, relates to the conceptualization across three panels of thought.  We have a growing mistrust towards the behaviors of AI like we have seen in recently.  And then the black box operations that characterize the operations of AI accordance in many applications which are most times oftentimes showed by intellectual properties and laws in many countries and then the reality subject to data and statistics that some of the schools and many of the students that actually subscribe to this education and technology platforms may not understand the ways in which AI uses the data of learners on this education platforms as well as possible ramifications in the short and long term.  So in reality, there are legitimate fears pertaining to how the things that AI learns about students and academic performance.  Might be able to influence their job prospectives positively or negatively, fairly or unfairly.  And then it is a concern that raises the question of possibility and occurrence in regards to is it possible that this can happen?  Well, antis dense gives us points to answer this question in the affirmative.  Is it going on now?  Well, that would make an interesting research question, which I think Gretchen would be one to talk about later.
And more importantly, how are youth voices involved in the choosing and opposing of these learning ‑‑ tech platforms in many areas?  In Europe and America, yes, there are regulations that could help to govern how AI behaves in these settings and protect the interest of the learners to a large extent but then when we come into the global South, in Africa and Asia and other countries of the Middle East and other regions, how would this play out?  With the same ramifications that they are playing in Europe and America?  Recently, it also has been seen in research that sometimes the privacy policies, the privacy regimens that are applied across this various platforms vary across jurisdictions so we have a different regimen of operations in Europe, a different regimen of operations in America, and Africa.
This is subject to the data governance and whatever regimes apply in those jurisdictions.  How are the larger interests of the learners and various participants on these platforms protected?  And just a few points that come off my mind and I would like to share with the rest of the discussion.  Thank you.
>> NICK COULDRY: Thank you very much.  Again really fundamental contribution and basically Emanuel has raised points about the institutional complexity of all of this in terms of who is consulted, whose interests are heard, mistrust and so on and so forth.
And then Joao raised the question about consent.  Is there consent from young people to this process?  So before we get back to the other questions, I would like to put a quick question back to the Panel themselves for a very brief answer for whomever wants to answer.  Which is, is this all really about children's freedom?  Is that the fundamental question here?
And put another way, who are the real users of EdTech we should be thinking about?  The institutions that supply them?  The schools that pay for them?  The governments that regulate them?  Or the children themselves?  Brief responses from anyone in the Panel who wants to comment on those, which I think were under laying both great points.  Beatrice you want to come back?
>> BEATRIZ BOTERO ARCILA: We see several layers of users and the application and we also see several ‑‑ I think there are varying distributive effects that also change per user.  So as an example, if we are using a type of grading App that helps teachers grade, then I would say something like the direct user is actually the teacher.  But there is student data running through.  This might be most likely being paid by educational institution.
And how it effects different ‑‑ like the different actors, it also varies.  So for example, it might be helping teachers focus on planning the classes instead of grading or it might not.  It might be really hard to manage the software and teachers are not really being helped by it.
It might be helping students get ‑ a fair assessment or it may not.  It depends on the underlying data and premise and so on and so forth.  And it also depends on what type of governmental money there might be for hiring the software.  So something that we shouldn't ignore in these conversations are what are the incentives in place?  And you see many schools and cash‑strapped districts or so forth that see an opportunity in federal funds for educational institutions to attract money to the school, attract attention.  Which is why my personal interests lies a little bit on trying to avoid the main challenges.
So we don't want students data to go outside of the school, for example.  Regardless of whether it is a private provider.  I would argue, at least, data that can be deidentified.  We might want to make sure that there are some form of impact assessments or transference mechanisms to ensure that the technologies aren't biased and so on.  I think my point was I think it is important to add some complexity to who they are.  Many layers of users and advantages and disadvantages and many layers of risk.
>> NICK COULDRY: So it's complex.  But does anyone on the Panel want to say something about freedom?  May or may not be fundamental here because we will have three questions.  So briefly before we get back tots three questions we have.
>> VELISLAVA HILLMAN: I want to build on Beatrice.  Because the complexity that sense of urgency that is created, and usually the idea of ‑‑ like I said in the beginning, first of all we are lumping technologies benefits and risks somehow when we are not really clarifying are we talking about a school where there is teachers or there isn't even a building?  Or the ratio between teacher and student is 1‑100.  Are we really talking about an area where there is lack of connectivity?  Really lack of resources and local languages?  Or are we talking about in an area where there is ‑‑ or talking about users or students and learning environments where there is already a structure of learning and teaching in place.  So there is always that lack of clarity when we are discussing.
And the sense of urgency in the meantime.  So suddenly there is the notion that we need to automate the process of for example getting the attendance for children, which suddenly is again more data being generated.  Do we really need to automate this kind of process?  What is the sense of ‑‑ why is that sense of urgency created?
And like Joao said about the proctoring systems, is this really necessity?  How necessary is this?  Is it imposed by the teacher?  Is it agreed upon by the school?  Who is imposing these technologies?  And again where is the ‑‑ in that sense, definitely the student is not the user, is not the user of the applications.
>> NICK COULDRY: Okay.  I think we should get on to the three questions which have been asked.  We had one from Jose and one from Lillian and then another as well and then maybe one or two more.
Now, Jose, his question which was asked in Spanish, we have more coming too.  Was, does technology substitute for affect for emotion in the process of education?  Or as he put it, more poetically, could a robot smile?  Could a robot teach a smile?
So does anyone on the Panel want to answer Jose's question about affect in education?  Is it being lost through EdTech?
>> GRETCHEN GREENE: Robot teachers are smiling today.  My multimedia lab has social robots that tutors is one of their applications and that research is around how can you put affect and personality into the robot tutor in a way that encourages a student to work harder and learn better and they are having positive results.  They have very friendly robots that do a number of things but these tutor robots have appropriate affect.
What we would think of as like a friendly interaction that students really seem to enjoy and bestow a certain relationship with that you would normally attribute to the a human.  Not entirely, but they laugh with it and are having kind of a relationship with it and the robot is trying to figure without they are frustrated and responds appropriately to sort of pull them along into doing more homework.  So yes, there is work on that.
I think that kind of work, whether it's within an embodied thing and there is also research that an actual physical robot has much more of a relationship ‑‑ like a person will attribute things to it and add more of a kind of relationship with it than they will with even a video of the same robot or something that has not even the video or not even an image of a physical representation.  But however, it is that sort of pseudo‑relationship in that affect does seem to be very important for this kind of engagement and inspiration that we associate with good teachers and that I certainly remember throughout my educational path that personality really helped inspire me to be more interesting in the subject.
And so, I think ‑‑ and also that relationships even kids who aren't enjoying the learning, but they have friends at school.  Like that makes a big difference.  And so whatever that is as well as why do we have schools?  Like what is the point of the school?  Part of it is that there is certain kinds ‑‑ there is a body of information we want students to leave with.  There is a body of skills we want them to leave with that are academic.  But that's not close to all of it.  So we also want out of schools, a certain kind of socialization and learning certain kinds of social skills and emotional skills and so that too, I think, is related to what is this relationship between AI or row bot and if we sort of go all remote all AI, can students still learn that social thing that they are supposed to be learning?  I don't know what the answer is no matter how good the robots are.
Certainly I hear stories.  I have not read the research but certain lack of social skills, human to human in physical real‑time eye‑to‑eye, that appears to be caused by texting, like phone attachment.  Like if you actually take those devices away and have some teenagers in your car with, they don't seem to know how to talk to each other much less like the adults.  So AI aside, devices aren't doing a great job of some of the relationship thing that we need to build.
>> NICK COULDRY: And interestingly in Spanish in the comments, Jose made a similar point with how do you build this social child to child bonding in an on‑line connected situation.  So this question of affect is complex.  So thank you Jose for raising that.  We should move on to this question.  How can we effectively ‑‑ efficiently protect children and how at the same time can we protect the classic educational curriculum, which is sort of a regulatory point and also a fundamental question about the protects of children themselves, their rights to be protected.  Does anyone on the Panel want to pick up on that point?
>> DOAA ABU‑ELYOUNES: I'm happy to.  So I think this is like the million dollar question.  Like how do we make it work?  How do we protect children?  So I mean, we talked about very specifically the GDPR and I think that there are like implications of the GDPR and it's been considered in other countries as well by ‑‑ I totally agree with Manuel's comment that it's very European thing.  But as I said, even in the context of the GDPR, we have exceptions and if the technology is not provided directly to the student by an intermediary, we don't have the same protections but ‑‑ so I think like one important aspect is that even if it looks like we don't have a lot of protection, one good thing that kind of came out of the GDPR in general is that it allows individuals to ask for their data and while most of us don't do it probably on a daily basis, I think there are like researchers and there are like NGOs and specific organizations that this is exactly what we are doing.  So by kind of utilizing that, we can know where our data is going, where is it stored, what kind of data is being collected on us.
So even if it's a bit harder to see that immediate connection, it is ‑‑ it has a broader implication.  And I think awareness is perhaps the first, before we talk about actual.  So I think the more awareness there is among children who what are the rights, what can they do in case of a breach and trying to kind of ‑‑ because honestly speaking, no one is going to read any privacy statement of any website.  Adults don't do that.  I don't expect.  So I think trying to find ways to talk about this subject in workshops like that, in schools, to be aware it is possible to say, no.  That's probably, I think, the first step before we ‑‑ the first step of protection.
>> NICK COULDRY: Thank you.  Officially, we have five minutes left but we are allowed to go on a little bit later because this is the last session of the day.  But in case anyone has to leave in five minutes, we'll take three points next and put them to the Panel.  So we have a question from Rebecca which is, are there any good practical models for the occasional platforms out there ‑‑ educational platforms to use with her children?  Anything we could recommend?  So if the Panel could bear in mind Rebecca's question and also do you want to make your point and then I'll go to Jutta.
>> Joana: Thank you.  I want to thank all the contributors so far.  I already have five pages of notes I can write a paper with.  They have been all invaluable and it was a multiperspective Panel, I would say.
So I want to follow‑up on Gretchen's point around how do we do ‑‑ how does AI enable us to do this social thing in education?  And the reason is that area nation, the idea of area nation ‑‑ Aryan Nation is at the crux of criticism against the current, the traditional paradigm of education.  So I'm kind of trying to bring everything together and so I feel that with this new, in this new circumstances, we have a new form of Aryan Nation emerging, and just in case not everyone is an education expert or whatever, usually we speak Aryan Nation between students and teachers, the school and the external realties and so on.
So my impression is that we have a new form of Aryan Nation emerging and that has to do with the alienation from key education stakeholders from this new actor that is coming in and it's the EdTech industry.  And this Aryan Nation argues consolidated by the hype, the political pressure to give more technology and of course the panics around how to we do this more efficiently and so on.
To go to my question and apologies for the big intro, as these actors are being more and more like consolidated outside the sphere of what is actually happening in education, how do we compel them and make them more accountable?  How do we compel them to educate the public about what they do, become more transparent as our youth in the Panel has raised?  And therefore, how do we increase their accountability towards ‑‑ because as I said, like there is so many ideas here today and content.  The production or generation of content raises other concerns around data and privacy and what constitutes data and so on.
So just one ‑‑ to boil down to one thing.  How do we bring them in the conversation and make them make us part of this?
>> NICK COULDRY: That's a big and large question.  I want you to have a chance to pose her question and then we'll go back to the Panel.  Jutta.
>> JUTTA CROLL: I have two things to say.  The first thing is to pick up on what Doaa said on the GDPR that we have to have in mind that the GDPR, the first data protection regulation that has made the age differentiation and put children on the spot that they need more protection.  But at the same time w that intention to protect children more, it has also some aspects where it is infringing children's rights, especially the right to privacy of children that might be infringed when they need the consent of their parents up to the age of 16, which is incredible.
And the second thing I would like to pick up on, what Gretchen said, I do think the best protection that we can provide for children is doing more research.  And we are in the situation that with the man demic in so many countries of the world, children are now in the situation of on‑line education and on‑line learning.  We have a basis for databases for more research on how that effects the learning processes.  We will learn how their social interaction is affected by this type of education, with not being with their classmates in school, and we will also collect data on how they perform in the future.  So to protect them, I do think we do need to do more research in this regard and we could make use and benefit from the database that we can gain now during the pandemic situation.  Thank you.
>> NICK COULDRY: Thank you very much.  So does anyone on the Panel apart from me want to comment on Jutta's points or Rebecca's question, are there any good models for EdTech we should be recommending?  And Joana's big point about how is EdTech made accountable?  Who wants to pick up on that?  We have time, I think, because we are allowed to go over since this is the last Panel of the day.  But not too long.
[ Multiple Speakers ]
Could I just get a reaction from the Panel to those three questions?  I'll come back to you in a minute if that's okay.
Thank you.
>> VELISLAVA HILLMAN: Thank you for the questions and thank you for the questions I'll address because it links with my message I was trying to convey earlier.  I touched upon the economic question and who finances education.  So these are governments and families.  They have the responsibility and they should have the upper hand.  They should be in control to push and to ask for how and what kind of EdTech and what will be the role of EdTech.  And I think so that is one thing.
The second thing I'm going back to the question of the sense of urgency, the sense of can we kind of slow down and really think about what EdTech we are bringing and for what purposes?  And the more we think about the kind of EdTech that is coming to sue plant or improve things, the further we seem to be moving away from what really is, what really we should be talking about when we talk about education and learning.  What really matters to education and learning.  So these are the two things.  I think just to sum up, but governments and families we need to collectively in the interest of young people, we should have the ‑‑ we as in I'm also a parent, but they should have a bigger say in the role of ed tack actors.
>> NICK COULDRY: Okay.  Does anyone else on the Panel want to pick up on these three points we just heard?  Gretchen?
>> GRETCHEN GREENE: Yes, so on the question of how do you control what corporations are doing?  So, I think one of the problems in the U.S. is that we underfund education.  If you do that then you make local school districts and local schools ‑‑ they are looking for money and resources that don't cost much money.  If a corporation then comes and says, we will give you low‑cost laptops or we will give you low‑cost software that comes with the following conditions, it becomes very hard to say, no.  So I think funding education better is part of the answer.  I think also to ask each individual school or school district to try to ‑‑ they don't have a lot of negotiating power, not alone.  And they also don't have a lot of resources to try to figure out what is negotiable in this contract?  Who could be negotiable?  What data are they giving up and how is it being used?  That should be done at a higher level that those districts that can then resource.  So if at the state level in the U.S., or at the national level in the U.S., and I speak of the U.S. because that's where I am and I know the system best.  But it could also be done at the state or national level at the U.S. and those resources could be shared Internationally.  The education resources of, we have evaluated this product and here is a checklist of what any school could be asking about.  And here ‑‑ in the U.S. we have with elections, we'll have when there is something up for people to vote on, there is often a paragraph written that summarizes it, that tries to be neutral about the summary.  And so that kind of idea could be done in a way that you wouldn't be asking each school or certainly not each parent to try to do.
>> NICK COULDRY: Yes.  And that point has been made in the chat by Dee Gordon who argues that we should slow this down and that we should be putting more money into local systems of manning education.  Which precisely that civic knowledge you're talking about.  But I want ‑‑ Rick wanted to make an intervention.  If he is still there.  I can't see that right now.  He steams have just gone.  Do you want to make the point you were going to make?  Can you hear me?  I think he is gone.  He is still on the call but I can't see him.  I can't send him a message.
I think we are coming to the end of the time.  Unless anyone else has an urgent question.  As I said, Rick if you want to speak, now is the chance.  Or does anyone on the Panel have any final comments to wrap things up?
>> VRIKSON ACOSTA: I just came out of a convention and Civil Society in Venezuela.  I also put in the chat that now a problem that ‑‑ (?) I would like to comment.  How do we deal with the problem?  How do we teach our children the Internet education?  It's very difficult but we have to manage two areas, education and ethics.  We have to mix education with ethics because we are doing education and we can get the children to have a safety on line and protect themselves.  And another question I think (?) asking if there are any institutions doing things right or whatever?  Well, I can finish thesis on education in sciences and I am trying to look worldwide but haven't found any institution that has like one solution.  I don't think there is a right solution.  ‑‑
[ Dropped audio ]
>> NICK COULDRY: We seem to have lost your connection there.  While we wait, he may have something more to say.  Does anyone on the Panel want to comment on the point he made about how to introduce ethics to this discussion?  How do we sustain the role of the ethics which is part of education in the digital setting?  Any comments on that from anyone?
>> VRIKSON ACOSTA: Since the pandemic got everybody, are there any Best Practices competing in other countries?  Right now there isn't anything like that.  (?) children have more stress academically but it's because before pandemic they ‑‑
[ Lost audio ]
>> NICK COULDRY: We keep losing connection with Venezuela.  But we have the question about education and ethics and also being reminded of Rebecca's question about can we recommend any good models here?  In all the complexity are there any models we can recommend?  Thank you.  I have just summarized your point and putting it back to the Panel now.  Thank you very much.
Any comments from the Panel?
>> VRIKSON ACOSTA: It's weird my phone isn't moved it's connected.
>> NICK COULDRY: I put your question to the Panel and they are going to answer it now.  Thank you very much.
So any points about education and ethics or the final point, are there any good models of EdTech out there we should be sharing and thinking about?  Anyone on the Panel?  Beatriz do you want to comment?  Your microphone is on.
>> BEATRIZ BOTERO ARCILA: I don't know.  I think I'll just repeat a bit of what my colleagues said already.  I think there is a good point for engaging students in conversations early on.  As I think Doaa suggested.  But I want to emphasize the importance of taking into account the structural type of incentives that lead to the situations that we might be sometimes concerned about.  So I think there is an important place for discussions about whether the technologies might be biased or not biased and so on and so forth.  But looking at how education is funded and whether schools have the capacity to provide quality education without having to start bargaining with companies that are offering equivalent and so on.  I think that's very important to at least see to it schools and principles and teachers in a good situation so they can actually make choices that are not ‑‑ that are too influenced by surmounting challenges like budget or too many kids in a classroom and so on.  I think that's an important place to start.  Because they are the experts.
>> NICK COULDRY: Maybe that is a good place to end as well.  The idea we need a good context for actually making decisions about this so all the interests are taking into account, including the interests of children.  So, I'd like to thank everyone for all of their comments and questions.  It's been a great discussion.  I want to thank Velislava Hillman for the concept.  We are happy to be part of it.  And have a good evening.  And thank you for being with us.
>> VELISLAVA HILLMAN: Thank you Panelists.  I want to thank you for being with me and for bringing different perspectives.  And thanks everybody for joining us.
>> NICK COULDRY: Can we save the chat if someone is able to save chat? 
>> VELISLAVA HILLMAN: I think they can save it.
>> NICK COULDRY: It's been a good discussion.  But thank you to everyone and good evening or good morning or good afternoon, whichever is appropriate.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws195-protection-or-participation-child-rights-in-a-new-normal-%E2%80%93-raw^^

>> Good morning, everybody.  Good afternoon and good evening.  Wherever you are in the world.  Welcome to our session profession or participation child rights in a new normal.  I'm Natasha Jackson representing the GSNA, the global mobile organization.  This session is provided by both the GSMA and, you know, ENICEF and we have UNSIF on the lierch as well.  And we are having a debate session today.  So hopefully we'll be able to get good interaction with all of you participating wherever you are in the world.
We have got an amazing panel of people who are going to talk to us today about the issue.  Really we're focused initially oncyo individual.  And the global COVID‑19 crisis which we know has brought into sharp focus many challenges related to children's rights in the global context and particularly around participation.  And profession and that's been pushing the considerations that many people, many child rights stakeholders and those who have been interested in child rights from very different perspectives have been pushing over the years.  Issues like digital inclusion, on line safety, youth participation and so on.
And whilst it has been in a very difficult time in many countries in fact I'm sure in all countries around the world, I think there has been one positive coming out of COVID‑19 in some way and that is that the need to address the digital divide that children face the need to address is much more widely acknowledged and understood.  And I think that's one of the positives as I said.  But there are also of course many, many concerns and many issues have come up and those concerns include of course Internet safety issues.  We know many parents and careers and oirnlz have had to climb a steep hill on this period.  That's now the opportunity for us to get this child rights agenda up up up on the policy agenda and we have to use this and we need to get ahead with policy makers of any sort of knee jerk approaches whether that's by policy makers or parents or careers that these sort of knee jerk approaches that can favor protection for children over participation or even vice versa and look for solutions which maximize the opportunity that children have while also combating the risks.  UNICEF released a report oncyo individual in July.  Josi will put that on the links in the chat so anyone when wants to see it can access it.  It identified the 10 key rights issues that they see thrown up by children's engagement with a digital world and those are the particularly pressing in the context of this new COVID normal.  Is in that document there are business and policy maker messages on each of the tep points and also lots of other sources of information.  So please do go have a look at that if you haven't seen it together.  Our objective today is to have a deso we're going to bring together the collective experience we have in the panelists and insights they have and hope to bring in also you sort of the wider group, anyone participating to propose a debate on workable solutions to issues that have been eye lighted during the pandemic.  The way we're going to structure it is that each of our four panelists are going to have the opportunity to outline the issues that they've been encountering relating to children and young people during COVID‑19 whether that's closing of schools or educational settings, the role of information or disinformation and keeping children safe and healthy as well as impact of social ieses lation.  Social distances, and we will have two panelists speaking from the protection angle and two from the participation angle.
Participants, anyone watching remotely, you'll be given the opportunity to ask questions and debate any of the recommendations for messages they're giving.  Please can you euses the chat function on the right for any comments any reactions to things that panelists are saying to share any research or studies or own experiences and use the Q&A panel for questions for the panelists.  We'll be monitoring both of those at the same time.  My eyes might be darting around as we're doing that.  I apologize for that.  And we will post them back.  After the opening statements we will open it up and we will ask panelists your questions, get into a bit of debate on that and then we will close with some closing statements and also because of the IGF this year have asked for voluntary commitments.  We will be also be asking panelists if there are any voluntaryr commitments related to IGF2020 that they want to share with us.
So we will kick off on the protection side.  So our first panelist is Uri Sadeh, the coordinator.  Uri Sadeh trained as a lawyer, worked on various human rights top ibz in Israel including trafficking human beings, asylum seekers and Palestinian human rights and in 2007 after obtaining his master's degree in human rights from the London school of economics he joined INTERPOL focusing contentious crimes against children.  Five or six years ago he went on sabbatical and returned to Israel Florida to take part in the creation of online crimes against children unit within the national police there before he led investigations into online child sexual exploitation.  So he has really hands‑on experience in investigating these crimes and bringing child sexual exploitation and criminals to justice.  In in 2019, so last year, Uri returned to INTERPOL and now heads the crimes against children's unit.  So Uri, welcome to the panel.  We're delighted to have you here.
I'll give you about five minutes to give some opening statements on your experience during COVID‑19 and messages that you have from INTERPOL.  Welcome.
 >> URI SADEH: Thank you very much, Natasha, and thank you for the opportunity to present during this and participate in the panel and present during this event.  Ten seconds I'll sail INTERPOL is the international criminal police organization bringing together 194 police forces in different countries around the world seeking primarily to provide for international cooperation between them, help build capacity on different topics and provide operational support for those ‑‑ to those police forces globally.  Crimes against children unit within the organization is in touch with numerous specialized units around the world working on crimes against children predominantly online.  Crimes against children to build better capacity in the same manner, deliver trainings, create cooperation in this international crime and ensure victims and offenders are identified and either safeguarded or arrested.
What I'll focus on today is the COVID report that we've issued early September.  Trying to look at what the pandemic is doing to law enforcement's efforts and phenomenal in general of online child exploitation.
Now, see if we can have any lessons from what we saw over the first or the half a year of the pandemic.
The sources for our report which is available on the Web site of INTERPOL were predominantly law enforcement information.  Some private industry and partners, information whether they work on childhood expectation international NGOs provided input and obviously the open source.  And we look at it obviously the setting nor this interest and the peculiar situation is the fact that schools have been closed largely for extended periods during this time adults spend on line.  The home environment and restrictions on international travel.
So with the limited minutes that I have, I'll try to focus on a few of the findings which again people are interested can be found in the report.  So, if we look at law enforcement itself, we saw law enforcement around the world reported reduction in the number of reports they got concerning child exploitation cases from the public.
So it was obviously the limitations have affected their ability of the public of children or perhaps of caregivers to report incidents.  There's also we noticed a reduction in the usage of our specialized toads for investigating this specific crime area by law enforcement, colleagues in our member countries.
We saw a change in the level of reporting that industry is providing on a regular basis.  So many industry platforms, Internet platforms report regularly to law enforcement incidents that are expected as being child sexual exploitation and there was reduction in the reports and sometimes a change in the manner and the depth if you want of the reports due to the work from home environment which gives less access to different systems.
Also the cases for law enforcement where we saw the ‑‑ in some cases some of the force was diverted to other policing tasks related to the COVID pandemic.  Therefore, having less access to specialized network providing access to international child exploitation based in INTERPOL which was hindering their investigations.
If we look in general about the phenomenas as we saw it, we saw a significant increase in exchange of child abuse materials, videos and images depicting children being sexually exploited.  It was done in peer‑to‑peer sharing file sharing networks.  We could see an increase in discussions on dedicated pedophile forums which exist in abundance, especially on the dark net where often it is our sharing experience and material and discussing the crimes they're committing.  We saw an increase in that.  There was more time and more activity spent there.  We saw the significant increase in viral content circulating.  So police forces reporting more and more cases of videos that go viral and actually revictimmize the children that are depicted within this material and also exposes more people that are not necessarily seeking such exposure to child abuse material.
We saw pretty natural an increasing self‑generating materials.  So victims, minors producing child abuse material on behalf of ‑‑ or at the request of offenders that are contacting them online.  And these going ‑‑ being distributed.  We didn't see actually ‑‑ this can be revisited ‑‑ all of those findings I'm talking about are initial because data available was still limited.  We wrote this over summer which was worth looking at a few months or even a year down the road.  In the gaming industry where we know there is abuse as well children in online gaming are being groomed into abusive situations or extortion situations, we didn't see ‑‑ there were no reports of increased incidents.
We did see suggestions that there is more online payment for wild exploitation material and that's linked to streaming that's phenomena of offenders sitting in one country and paying someone else an adult elsewhere to abuse kids live on camera for them in exchange for payment.  We saw indications of increase on this phenomena.
And we saw an increase in natural increase in obstacles for victims to report where children are not in school and don't have this route of reporting or teacher or caregiver being able to detect abuse and therefore, reported ‑‑ expose it.  There is obviously less access to medical care and social services because of lockdown.
In a nutshell these are some of the findings in the report I encourage you to go and read the full report.
We have questions later on.  I hope I'm within the time limit.
 >> MODERATOR: Great.  Thank you, Uri.  Quite sobering stuff there in the report.
Really all of the issues in there are really, really upsetting as well.  I have a question for you, you mentioned this reduction in reporting of cases.  With schools being closed and children being confined much more, that's been the case.  But how do you think those sort of barriers and vulnerability they create for children can be mitigated?
 >> URI SADEH: It seems crucial now that we have lessons of the first confinement and some results of the nature it had that hotlines for example must remain open.  Hotlines reporting ‑‑ hotlines ta are served oftentor reporting incidents material and actual cases should remain open and accessible to the public.
There's other technological solution that's can be put in place even on law enforcement side.  Find online reporting mechanisms allowing children to put their complaints or initial complaints in online to reports can be a toll‑free texting service.  It can be integrated channels within the social platforms where children are, that sort of thing.
gaming, again, messaging applications.  The online environment should be exploited to that end in order to ensure that we have continuous service.  And the same goes for social services and medical services related sexual abuse, those must be seen as essential services that must be ‑‑ must remain open and people should be able to access them.
 >> MODERATOR: That is a great link to our next panelist.  Thank you, Uri.  Our next panelist the general director of the SOA organization in Palestine.  She's an experienced trainer in gender‑based violence.  Developed anti‑violence programs, published manual on eye eliminating violence particularly against children and women.  She's helped establish five help lines for women survivors of violence and child protection in Palestine and in the wider Middle East region.  She's also a consultant, published research.  And of course has been running a child protection help line which is part of an international network of child help lines called child help line international.
So welcome to the session.  We heard just now from Uri about the importance of hotlines staying available all the time.  And accessible to children.  Perhaps you could talk a little bit about your experience over the COVID period with the help line for children and women that you've been running in Palestine.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  Thank you.  Yes, I will share my experience.
>> Your video is not showing yet. 
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  I don't have the choice to open.  Okay.
 
 >> MODERATOR: There you go.  Nice to see your face.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  Okay.
As an organization we are running child protection help line.  And with the support of our partners we continue to provide our services remotely during 24 hours by 7 for children during the lockdown.  As our services were not affected during lockdown and in particular the protection system doesn't work and doesn't function as usual during the emergency situation.
And there were increase in number of children that contacted the help line services.  Mainly they reported physical violence, sexual exploitation, cyber harassment, attempted suicide.  And the high percentage of calls was from male and young men.  Increased 20%.  Many children didn't get basic needs as a result of economic situation for their families.  Some children didn't have enough food or they couldn't continue their study because they don't have the ability to attend the e‑learning.
And also the protection was very weak during this time.  I will relate this to the mainly poor countries that many families lost their job and they didn't have also enough space in their houses and the number of families is very big.  So it makes a lot of clashes or a lot of stress inside the house and the result of that children were suffering from different types of violence and especially we can ‑‑ as I explained before, it's for cases of incest, suicide, we started to hear, like, children report more about these cases and it talks the country and government a few months until they scatter to give services and I mean here the protection systems start to be active and we have like the first two months of the lock down it was really difficult.  To prefer children to the protection system we have in Palestine.  We find there is a big need to have help line and the help line givers an opportunity for children to raise their voices and we can hear their voices and give them space that they can report and talk about the difficulties they face inside the family.  So the help line was like a window or open the whole for children that they can call the help line and get the psychosocial support to continue on their life and also when they have any problem inside the family they will find a place where they can get help.
And I can say from our experience that we published a lot of FAQ sheets during this time.  The FAQ sheets give us a real information about the ground and to what's going on the ground with children.  And because these FAQ sheets result from our database that we document the cases that we receive on this database can show us what the ‑‑ what the needs of the children are.  Is we can see the difference between each month between the needs of the children like from the beginning of the lock down until today.  The graph is different each month but the FAQ sheets gives us rich information how to address our services and what to add.  And how also to prepare our staff for the response of the needs for the children during this time.  Yeah, so this is mainly what I like to share with you and I'm ready to answer any questions you have related to our experience.  Thank you.
 >> MODERATOR: Thanks very., OHAILA.  Again sobering message of the experiences you've noted for the first hand from the help lines.  You talk very much about how governments were slow to follow‑up.  If you took away the participation side of the equation and just focused on the protection, what would be your key recommendation or ask if you just focused on that?  .
>> It's ‑‑ I mean it's very important to have the communication with the government and with the protection system.  Because as I mentioned, after two months we tried to advocate a lot for that.
And we succeed to function the protection system and we get for example, a training for the government and the mainly for minister of social development, how to continue thif services through the online services.  How to be prepared for any emergency situation.  So planning is very important like to have a plan for emergency responses is very important.  This is what we tried to do with the government institution and with other referral systems in the country.
 >> MODERATOR: Okay, interesting.  We have some questions coming through.  We will get to those questions.  Also, just for remote participants, if you have experience from your countries that match what Ohaila is saying or if you have even different experiences, please feel free to comment in the chat and we'll monitor those as well.  It will be interesting to see the experiences from other parts of the world as a commonalities and differences.  So thank you, Ohaila.  I think your overview has been really interesting and helpful and is ‑‑ I want to now turn to a student himself at the University of Johannesburg in South Africa.  He's studying politics and international relations there.  He's a student leader and also amen ter for students in his department and he's representative for the South Africa for the commonwealth student association.  Bongani also volunteers for UNICEF South Africa and directed and produced a short film for UNICEF Africa and he's the limited youth reporter.  And he uses films and other methods to spread information and the stories and talk about from a youth perspective.  You can see his story on the GMSA on the youth site there's a video there I made at a workshop with Vodac ooh m at a photo storing workshop.  Bongani welcome to the panel today.  I think you are closer to school years than anyone else on our panel.  We're delighted to have a young voice on our panel as well.
And I think we'd really like to hear your experiences.  What have you been hearing from your community of young people, your network, how do they match what what we heard.  Please share your information with us and your experiences and those of your colleagues or compatriots.  Thanks.  Are we getting B or ngani.  He's having laptop issues.  That just shows that that is a key issue on keblghttivity that is not ‑‑ r ‑‑ connectivity that is not unfamiliar to many of us during COVID‑19.  So he's going to sort those outs and we'll switch to him later.  We'll now move to professor Amanda Third, codirector of the young and resilient research sefnter at western eurch varsity in Sydney.  She's an expert in child centered participatory research and lid child centered projects for children in the digital age in over 70 countries around the world.  She's worked with partners on corporate government not for profit sectors, children and young people themselves.  And she's part of the team led by the five rights Foundation that's drafting the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child general comment on children's rights in the digital environment.
So Amanda, sorry, she's also professional research fellow in institute for culture and society at western Sydney university, faculty associate in the center for Internet and society at Harvard.  Wow.  Great credentials and most recent book is "young people in digital society" which is published by Hargrave..  So Amanda, you do this research directly with young ‑‑ with children and not just young people but with children.  Perhaps can share some of your experiences and the trends and threats that you saw during the COVID period compared to prepandemic.
>> Amanda Third:  Thanks very much, Natasha and UNICEF and GMSA for organizing this panel.  It's wonderful and terribly sobering to listen to the perspectives being shared so far and clearly there are lots of challenges ahead of us.
I want to begin by engaging with the title of this panel.  Protection or participation?
And I thought I would throw out a challenge to organizations that facilitate children's access to and use of technology around the world.
The con vks on the rights of the child, which is still the most widely ratified human rights treaty in history ‑‑ calls on states and other duty bearers to respect, protect and up hold children's provision, protection, and participation rights.
So from perspective of the convention then it's not a question of either protection or participation but in fact of provision, protection, and participation.
It's our task as stipulated by the convention, to realize all three in con srt.
And this is a very complicated necessary and indeed urgent task in the world we've suddenly encountered.
Children are not particularly vulnerable to developing COVID‑19 and emerging evidence is suggesting that children around the world are not particularly concerned that either they or their loved once will contract the virus.  Nonetheless, children have been seriously affected by the crisis of the every Dave that's been brought about by the pandemic.
They say they've feeling intense and omp new emotions like anger, grief and anxiety and I worry that they're not equipped to deal with those emotions, they feel disconnected from peers and activities that support day‑to‑day well‑being.
And many are experiencing heightened tensions and even violence at home as families grapple with the very really infects of the pandemic on job losses and financial pressure.
So like many adults, children have a sense that the world will never be normal again.  It's quite likely that they're right.  In short, children are experiencing a crisis in the social f social worlds and this will potentially are long‑term effects on their lives.  My concern is that under these conditions because thrair not seen as a group that's vul theirble to the virus, their needs, rights and aspirations have remained under the radar.  They are, if you like, the invisible victims of this pandemic.
Now more than ever we have to make a concerted effort to address children's needs.  We have to keep their concerns front and center as we take decisions to deal with this crisis.  Which also means that we need good ways to listen to what children need and want.
Throughout the pandemic technologies provided many children with a vital point of continuity and connection.  It's really helped to structure their day‑to‑day life and give life under the pandemic order and meaning.
Of course this is not true for all children as Natasha noted in her introduction.  We urgently need mechanisms for addressing the digital inclusion of those children who don't have regular and reliable access to technology and the Internet.
But for those with access, technology has been key to tir well‑being through the pandemic and this is reflected in the sharp increases in their use of technology.
By virtual of being online, ever more children are more exposed to risks of harm as by fellow panelists already pointed out we've seen escalating rights of forms of violence that range from cyber bullying at the more pointy end of the child protection challenge alarming increases of child exploitation and these require urgent remedy.  But at the same time I want to suggest that we need to expand our thinking about protection beyond conventional online safety risks because children are experiencing a crisis in their social world that's compromising their well‑being.  And they need protection from these factors.
We need to keep children safe emotionally as well as physically in it the broader lives beyond the online world.
While we have been quite good at providing children with child‑friendly information about how to protect their physical health from the virus, we've not yelt learned how to leverage technology to protect children's rights to other vital rights of information and support to deal with the other dimensions of the pandemic.  Indeed, we're net to imagine all the waises that technology can be Han esed to shore up children's broad range of rights beyond those that play out in online spaces.
Technology if we're smart about it could be a much more powerful part of the solution.  But some solutions need to be driven by children's own insights and experiences about what they need and this is one example where we see that participation is not only critical but interconnected deeply with their protection.
Many of our responses to the pandemic to date have been driven by the sheer requirement to respond at speed.  We've seen a massive movement namely for example to get children's education online and on the surface it looks as though we've begun to recognize the possibilities of online education, making the kinds of changes that some educators have fought for for decades overnight.
And yet, many children are reporting that their experience of education is less than adequate.
Although the evidence is yet to come in, I do think that in our rush to get education online we've not stopped to think about what good education in online settings needs to look like.
Despite the massive efforts of educators all around the world, we haven't had time to think about how we might need to rethink education for online delivery.
And as with many other domains of children's lives we haven't stopt to involve children in the project of reenvisaging education for 21st Century onhine world.  Indeed, you might say that children's participation has been one of the big casualties of the pandemic.
If we're to take up the challenge of protecting children's rights seriously, we need to urgently prioritize children's right to participate in the decision making that impacts their lives.  We need to recognize that children have important insights.  That they're an enormous resource in helping us respond toe this new normal.  But to tap into this, we need to really rethink our structures and processes of governance.  We need ways of engaging children effectively in times of physical distancing.
And we need to make space for children to contribute to those processes of decision making not in one off kind of ways but as an ongoing and integral part of our processes awlings remembering that their protection and participation rights are intertwined.
Thanks, Natasha.
 >> MODERATOR:  
>> Thanks, Amanda, really interesting I have a question for you actually.  So you know you talk about how we really need to we think but how do we actually engage with children meaningfully?  And you know I'm talking particularly, you know, as GSMA, our members are corporate.  So how do we engage with them?
And how do others engage with them meaningfully rather than lip service or in any other ways?
>> Amanda Third:  Thanks that's a great question and one that ‑‑ a question that many people have because children's participation rights are notoriously difficult to realize, much more difficult to realize than protection rights in many senses.  Yeah?
And I think there are lots of things to take away from experience to date.  Obviously things ‑‑ it's best to reach out to children in the spaces that they're already in.   You know, speak in child friendly language, et cetera, et cetera.  There are lots of good principles for engaging children effectively that we can turn it to for support here.
But I think the major challenge is really to move beyond tokenistic participation as your question subjects.  And to me that really involves a radical rethink of the ways that we set up our decision‑making processes.  It really involves corporations thinking about well, okay.
so we make decisions about children's lives all the time.  How do we invite them into those processes in ways are meaningful to children?  And in an on going way, how do we expand the possibilities to interface with children?  I think there's wonderful examples of the ways that's been done.  For example just a non‑technology one is that I'm part of an entity called the 216 site children's Parliament run by the Liverpool city council in western Sydney university.
And the council has set up a children's Parliament which sits alongside the adult Parliament and members of the adult Parliament attend and listen to the decision making that children undertake and then there's a series of advocates who advocate for adults to take those decisions up in the broader world if you like.
And I think these are the kinds of examples that we could turn to to really think about more meaningful forms of participation for children.  In all kinds of practices governments and civil society to private enterprise
 >> MODERATOR: Okay, great.  That's the perfect segue to move to Bongani who I believe has fixed his laptop issues.  So Bongani already gave his bio.  But actually talking about corporate talking to young people so Bongani we had invited this GSMA to come to world Congress earlier this year and talk to business leaders there so start getting that communication from young people to the corporate sector.  Unfortunately, of course, COVID put an end to that and we had to cancel the conference.
But Bongani, please give us your perspective of the pandemic in terms of the experience that you have had personally or experiences from those you're connected with.  And also perhaps afterwards maybe you can touch on how the sort of youth voice and listening to young people and engaging them more in all the issues and responses and the measures that can be taken to improve the situation in these times of pandemic and other challenges, thank you.
>> Bongani:  You're still on mute, Bongani.
>> Bongani:  Sorry about that.  Thank you for having me.  I'm not sure if I'm audible enough?
 >> MODERATOR: You just need to speak a little louder and then I think you're fine.  We can see you.  Just a little low on volume.
>> Bongani:  Am I audible enough?
>> Yes.
>> Okay
hello?  Oh, perfect.
Thank you for having me.  It's really important for us to identify or recognize that there's more dangers for kids being on the Internet as opposed to not being on the Internet.
And as we've seen, things such as child trafficking which has already been spoken about, cyber bullying which has also been spoken about, we've seen how drastically increasing those things have been during the pandemic.  But with these incidents also being highlighted, I think it's also important for us to also ensure that young people ‑‑ that regulation that's are put there in place for kids and young people to be able to actively engage on Internet and online platforms.
Ask
 >> MODERATOR: It looks like we've lost Bongani again.  Such a shame.  That's one of the key challenges we've come up against is actually what do we do about children and young people who don't have access to the Internet?  Now, we'll get into that with the panel ‑‑ Bongani, you're back.  Please if you can take yourself off mute and continue, that will be great and I was just saying that this is sort of lack of connectivity that a lot of people are experiencing is one of the key issues and I expect with children it's even more so whether it's because of technology or because their parents or others are trying to protect them from what they perceive as the dangers online.
>> Bongani:  Thank you.  Sorry about that.  But as I was saying, I think most of the work that I do at the moment with UNICEF when volunteering with them so it's going to schools around the country, facilitates workshops on capacity building.
And what the pandemic has basically done is that now because of lockdown everything we're unable to reach out to the kids and have the normal workshops we have with them and I think a very critical thing with these workshops is also being able to provide some of the kids because they come not having any form of food.
And so amart from this, what we kind of do is that we've taken the workshops to an online space.  So now we have workshops on using Zoom an engage with them kids remain to creating we need to engage or have young people and children in online platforms regardless of the danger that may be there.  As I stated earlier on we need to have regulations that ensure that kids are safe online.  Regulation that's ensure that parents as well are involved on their kids online activity.
Another thing that I think the pandemic has also taught us is how unequal society is.  Inequality within our society.
So with the pandemic and lockdown happening, most of the kids who had, like, proper resources were able to continue with e‑learning, online learning.  While kids who come from disadvantaged backgrounds weren't able to engage online with the education and reed.  With academics, this speaks to the need for us to ensuring that kids to go to schools in different communities have the same opportunities and resources as kids who are offered better advantage.  And apart from this, I think another thing to also take note of is Amanda spoke a bit on this ‑‑ the need for meaningful engagement of young people within decision‑making processes.  And why there is this critical need for children to also be involved.  This speaks to representation.  And it also speaks to people's experiences.  So, if there are decisions that are to be taken that speaks to the Internet and also speaks to young people's involved, we can't take any dispitions without involving those people who will be affected by whatever decisions that will be taken.
And apart from this, I think another thing that we also need to take note of is the fact that when addressing issues of
 >> MODERATOR: We lost Bongani I suspect he'll be able to come back in a minute and join on the panel.  There were really interesting and quite clear messages from him there about regulation not everything stopped they were able to continue with the workshops.  We have quite a number of questions on the Q&A and also chat.  People have been sharing experiences.  I'm going to just open up for wider questions.  Hi, Bongani, I see you're back now.  We're going to open up to the panel and give you an opportunity to talk.  Don't worry if you go off and on, that's fine.  We'll keep bringing you in.  I'm going to bring Sosi from UNICEF who what particular questions do you want to start with to direct to the panelists.
 
>> Thank you for the introduction sessions.  False dichotomy has been picked up.  We wanted to get the debate flowing and once we come to the end come to concrete ways off course protection and participation need to be both upheld onlien so it's great to have that kind of picked up on instantly.  I see a question here that talks about right to privacy during COVID as consequence of children's increased participation online.  What does this ‑‑ the impact this has on collection of children's personal data and sews yated risks.  I just want to take the opportunity and thank you, Natasha forgiving me the chance to quickly jump in and share a brief that was published recently on the record impacts on child rights dimensions of that which I recommend to everyone but I wonder if any panelists have comments to pick up own this dimension of children's right to privacy during lock down and increase the data collection and associated issues with that. 
>> Sorry, would you mind repeating the question in brief.
>> 
 >> JOSIANNE GALEA: Sure, we had a question in the Q&A that disoomedz in on the right to privacy and the increased data collection on children during COVID specific issues there and potentially some solutions as well.
>> Yes.  Certainly, thanks, Josi.  So privacy is just a key challenge to by virtue of the fact they're spending more time online and also interfacing with variety of different platforms.  So privacy is really being challenged, I guess.  One thing I would draw attention to is that I've just recently done some work in fact working with 700 children around the world in 28 countries.  To try to understand their rights in the digital age.
And when it comes to issues of privacy, for the first time in my history of working with children in this kind of way, children have really been sensitized to the issues around data protection and privacy.  When we talked to them previously, they tended to highlight interpersonal privacy as key challenge.  Watching what they're doing and feeling surveilled by the people around them.  But I think you know what they're atune to and it's no doubt connected to the fact that around the world we have begun to have deeper conversations around data protection, as a consequence of some of the events that ‑‑ or breaches I guess you might say of data protection internationally.  And those conversations that adults have been having are indeed filtering down into children's consciousness and they are ‑‑ I think the only word for it is out wage.  People might collect data in ways that are not transparent to them.  They're worried about who collects data, what they collect it for and why.
And yeah, lots and lots of unanswered questions.
But I think you know what we need to really think carefully about ‑‑ and obviously there are things that can be done by governments to enforce data protection laws and you know the GDPR legislation is obviously critical there are 24EU7BGZ going on in a similar way beyond legislative protections and what's happening to our culture and the level of culture.  Our children have been taught that it's normal to be surveilled.  And it's ‑‑ you know, you're ‑‑ there are constantly under someone's watchful eye whether it be a parent or a private company who's willing to exploit them for economic section.  This is not just a breach of I right to privacy but a breach of the right to freedom of thought.  We're teaching Ching children not to think and do things that might come naturally to them because they live in this highly curated world.
So I think the challenges run very, very deep.  But I also think talking to children that there is a rising call.  I think they're going to be demeaning more from their platforms because they don't think that having a free social media service is a fair trade for privacy.  So watch.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Amanda, that's really interesting.  And speaking from the more corporate side, we have seen a few companies already started to have youth panels I think Talia, the operator that operates in Sweden arpd parts of the Nordics and other countries has a youth panel where they have young people coming and talking directly to the business and hopefully that's a trend that we'll start to see more of and certainly at GSMA we're encouraging all that and our commitment will be along that.
I want to stay with little bit about this idea on the data protection angle a little bit and also move over to Uri on this.  So Uri.  There were two anglesser hoo.  One of course is the debate that sometimes comes up which is the right to confidentiality and privacy that can also impede law enforcement investigations into criminals.  So the fact that you know they also have a right to privacy and a lot of the forms on which some of the ‑‑ you know ped files and others are interconnecting is encrypted and law enforcement don't have access to it.  So there's one sort of policy debate on that which I know the European mission and others are starting to think about in a vexing law enforcement.  Other of course is the fact that children are only really many children are finding the tfdz to turn to the hotlines and help lines when they're away from perpetrators.  And what sort of evidence there is and that's a question I'll ask for you.  And what sort of evidence you may have for insights from other countries on that.  So sort of two questions there.  Take both or take one.
 >> URI SADEH: I'll answer the second first.  It is an interesting aspect that we didn't see in the initial data we received.  There wasn't a lot of data from hotlines at the time.  So that might be something interesting to look at now or a little later.  It is logic that gives it suddenly find ourselves at the home environment especially if it's supportive home environment.  Away from abuse if the abuse is in school or kindergarten have the chance to disclose the chance to break away a little bit from the routine abuse they're facing so this is in fact a beneficial side of it.  Obviously there's the other side some victims must have been locked up with their abusers but there's a whole variety there.
Actually I should put in more details after I saw the comment in the chat here.
Another aspect we should be aware of we talked about privacy of children putting on those platforms and educated that's the way to learn or to communicate is the early exposures.  And it has been put online and earlier than they would have otherwise now because schooling and social communicating within their social group has moved online due to lockdown so you have a whole group of children who have been predictive arms.  Earlier than I think how do we ‑‑ can you then stop it at that we go back to normal school or how you have kids that are as lounge as first graders that are communicating online and therefore, exposed to abuse very early before they have protective mechanisms.  This coupled with the fact that while we are in remote studying if you're not online you don't exist.
The question about encryption obviously the encryption privacy while we of course want to protect protect, the police work to protect privacy while we talk about child sexual exploitation on line, you very often depend on the service providers providing some information about the abusers active offending against children online.  There is an increased usage of encryption on platforms which indeed blinds not only law enforcement but provides service providers themselves to the abuse that they know and we know and numbers are enormous is occurring on the platform and indeed stand on this if you're providing a platform where children are becoming ‑‑ are being abused this is not an assumption, this is a fact and you know it and we're talking about millions of reports coming out of platforms.  Going encryption going blind on it doesn't solve the problem.  Only serves the offenders.
And of course again, European legislation which is some aspects of protecting the privacy must take into consideration the need to protect vulnerable relations online there predominantly children and they leave some leeway for industry to work with law enforcement and try to detect chimed abuse and try to filter out child abuse material which is what this revictimizing the children that were once abused and NOI consumed again and again by offenders that gain reviewing.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you, yeah.  The question on balancing rights is always there.  Participation in any of these crimes and disadvantages.  And I just want to quickly before we start summing summing up to go back to issues there, bs, Bongani if you're there put the video on and then I know when you're on.
Because I think both Ohaila and Bongani it would be interesting to hear quickly one of the other issues that we've heard of, which is around misinformation.  So you know whether ‑‑ or disinformation even where children have come across information that is false or misleading or deliberately so.  Any of the issues that you've seen coming up in the help lines and that's ‑‑ Ohaila if you could say something first and Bongani is this an issue disinformation and fake news type issues in relation to COVID.  What's been your experience there?  Thanks.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  I want to add I mean more about what what my other colleagues mentioned.  We start to receive calls from children that they don't want to continue also the e‑learning because they face a lot of bullying during the class session.
Because they're using the e‑learning through different social media and like Zoom or other programs.  But the children use this program in a bad way.
So children should know how to use these channels as a safe channel for each child.  Not to use it as a channel to bullying or to attack other children.  Because children are afraid also to enter to the e‑learning and we received some calls in the help line like this.
The other thing is children spending a lot of time on the Internet.  So we don't know which area they are chatting or getting through.
And some of the families they don't have the knowledge how to use the digital ‑‑ I mean digital knowledge.  And how to make it more safe for their children.
So I think it's very important to have raising awareness to parents and to the children and use digital channel and if we are not to any other children or also to protect our ‑‑ to protect their sons.  It's very important.
 >> MODERATOR: The morns of education is always something that has come up.  I mean, children often also learn from each other as well.  And Bongani, do you have a particular message on that or experience on that in terms of learning to be safe online?  You're still on mute?
>> Bongani:  Sorry about that.  Technology is really getting the most of us today.
But yeah, I think there has been a lot of miss information going on during lock down and during this entire Pablo Allietti.  And this guys back to a point I made earlier on.  Rejust touched on it the issue of education, what I wanted to bring up is the need for partnerships with grass root level organizations.
I'll be engaging with meaningful sharing information with not just schools but parents as well.  How to use the Internet on the safe ways of using the Internet.  I think as much as children and kids are exposed to their Internet, not all parents have safe information or knowledge on how to use the Internet or how to not regulate or say but guide the kids on the safe use of intreft.  So I think that's one key thing that is really important.  That partnership between the private sector government as billion as grassroots level organizations.  And another point I wanted to make was on the kinds of information that organizations such as GSMA and UNICEF for instance put up on the Internet.  So with some of the work I'm doing which is taking short films ands raising awareness, I think that's another really important thing.  Ensuring that organizations also come in and share good information and basically two ways of to raise awareness for kids in the Internet on how to best use the Internet.
So yeah, I think those videos by different organizations kind of raise awareness are they important.
So best way of engaging with kids who are already on the Internet so yeah, I think that's my contribution to this question.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Bongani, that's really interesting because was we know from a lot of research, children are spending a lot of time watching videos and that's where they get a lot of the informal information and Amanda do you want to jump in and talk about what you see?
>> Amanda Third:  I just warchlted to echo Bongani's points about the importance of parents.
it's very true that a lot of children have not had adequate supervision during the pandemic because even though parents are not in the home they're preok pied can dealing with the fallout of the pandemic.  And I think there's real scope for us to think creatively here.  We also know a lot of parents don't have their own digital lit rasies are not strong enough to be able to support their children adds quatly and that's been bowrn on in the study on on online safety in the Pacific where parents often didn't have an understanding of how the Internet worked that they could communicate to their children.
And so I think children do have a tendency to explore technology and use it intuitively.  And find its strengths and limitations, they're very keen on doing that.  So I do wander if there's actually a really strong opportunity for us to think about how to use children as educators inside their own families.  To think about how we promote children to teach across generations some of those digital skills.  I think these are ‑‑ you know, I think if we come at these questions with a child participation, sometimes we can find little worm holes that open up perhaps different opportunities
 >> MODERATOR: That's really interesting.  And one of the things we've brn thinking about at GSMA is also on inequality side, it's ‑‑ you know we've heard about how in countries where there is ‑‑ there are less people connected so where there may be coverage but there are a lot of barriers to people going online, one of those is often fear, fear of the parents who are worried about letting their children go online and also the fact that they don't have the literacy there.  And GSMA is a quick plug on development we have a program that deals with mobile Internet tools and trainings which is a mechanism by which mobile operators and some of the subSaharan Africa are doing this.  I have people out in the shops or communities who are helping adults learn more about how to use some of the tools.  And that's a first step.
If that were to be complimented with probably some kids who may not have access all the time to those technologies if they also can sort of double up that by teaching within the home, I think that might be a good step to start filling in digital inequalities.  Across different parts of the world.
 >> MODERATOR: Natasha, I think there's another really interesting phenomena that is going on in many parts of the world and that is the device sharing phenomenon where families don't all have every member of the family doesn't have a mobile phone.  And I think you know device sharing comes with certain kinds of risks and pressures and children certainly speak about di device sharing as a constraint on their time online and they can be exposed to content that's not appropriate because they're viewing it on the device that's shared with all the family members sm but again, device sharing if we thought about it from a strength space, perspective, could really be Han esed to build lit rasies across generations and so I guess I'm quite interested to hear Ohaila and Bongani's views on device sharing and how that works and whether that might be a possibility. 
>>.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  I can quote an initiative we're wawnching right now and that's ‑‑ I mean we try to launch an initiative to collect devices, like people can donate these devices. we can get devices for children at schools because there is some schools they do research about the children that they have access to e‑learning and we find that many children male and female young girls don't have access to e‑learning because they have one device in the home.
And if there are more than one child so they will use the same device it will put them at high risk to use the same device as the parents use and children use and also keep ‑‑ I mean it will not give all the children the right to continue the e‑learning.  So we try to have this jish tiff to have one device for each child and we talk about families that are going to have large number.
This is what we try to do.
 >> MODERATOR: Great initiative.  Bongani, device sharing.  How many ‑‑ how much is that been an issue people having only intermittent access to devices and how have you ‑‑ what have you come across on that aspect?  .
>> Bongani:  Please repeat that.  Don't worry.  Actually we need to move to closing statements.  We've got about 10 minutes left of this.  We'll come back to you Bongani at ‑‑ in a minute.
But perhaps we can move first to Uri to see finally what are your recommendations and closing sort of messages for participants here listening and you know what is the most important thing you want us to help move forward on these issues?
 >> URI SADEH: One of the main things to remember is while COVID is a good opportunity to highlight issues we've discussed here today, especially when we're talking about child sexual exploitation online, this exists before COVID and it will exist after COVID.
it is not bad.  This has a lot of if you want media and got closer to people and awareness has been raised as to the extent of the dangers online for children and need for services to be accessible for victims, parents to be aware, et cetera, this is a very prevalent phenomena that is happening regularly.  We're talking here about the need for access to devices, access to Internet and indeed from the points of view of investigators working morning to evening on trying to save children who are sexually exploited using those devices.  This very same Internet and catch offenders that are spending their time onthose devices and network to try and harm kids.
It's not necessarily ‑‑ there's conflicting interests for the good and for the bad of children and youth in this connectivity.
I think the key things that we need to keep bringing up is the need the need to spend the funds or allocate the funds necessary to address child sexual exploitation on line to ensure that the law enforcement is equipped for it.  That it is accessible to children, that there are mechanisms in there for victims to raise their abuse to complain, to seek help.  There's clearer need for continuous cooperation between industry and plans if you want and law enforcement around this because there is no ennorse ourselves arrest ourselves out of this phenomena this is huge and collaboration of all of those to raise awareness, equip children with the tools they need to try to prevent more of the abuse and enable them to complain and enable law enforcement to then try to identify and bring an end to the abuse thank you.
>> Thanks, Uri.  I've just been reminded by the colleagues that we actually finish at 10 past so we have a little bit longer.  That's good.  My apologies for that.  But I but I wanted to then move back to Amanda actually.  Amanda, you heard UUri's call there for the technology, the cape be cts for law enforcement, for children to be online.
If you were to be extreme in your ask and request what would be your wish list, your really extreme wish list?  And how do we take more realistic steps to get there?  Right?  What are the small things we can do next that will start us down the path.  Sometimes the first step is the most important.
>> Amanda Third:  Yes.  Natasha,, I do hear Uri's call and indeed, I would echo his call in the sense that I think what the pandemic has really highlighted for us is that we require urgent action to address some of the challenges to children's rights increased use of technology during this time.
And I ‑‑ you know, I think it's very clear that the risks of harm for children are real and they're distressing and to be frank with you, I feel quite overwhelmed when I think about what it is that we need to do to resolve those problems.
But I also think that whilst I know we are all looking for a simple straightforward and immediate solution, actually, much of the work that we need to do is difficult and it's going to take time and thought.  And, of course, good solid processes for engaging children.  And we really have to commence this long term work now.
That's the urgent thing is to think about the long term future and commence the work now.
I think the issue of digital exclusion ‑‑ and I see that's coming up in the chat ‑‑ is a really critical one.  Regulatory and legislative frameworks.  Parents having access to meaningful resources that support them to guide their children.  Technology companies undertaking threat assessments and ensuring that children have what they need and children having the information and support that addresses the social and economic impacts of the pandemic on their lives.  But that's ‑‑ with that said, I think there's also an important opportunity in this pandemic for us all to ‑‑ this would be a big bold audacious hope, Natasha.  It's sometimes suggested and I think one way to think our way into this is that they want us to reflect briefly on the moon landing.  I know that sounds like a bizarre thing.
But what's sometimes suggested about the 196 soafn moon landing it was a pivotal idea of globalization around the world.  Broadcast live on television and in the process of being broadcast, the moon landing assembled something of an international audience and broadcast images of a globe without boundaries back to the international audience.  Compelling us to imagine ourselves in the part of a global community.
So in the same way under the pandemic children are engaging online as an international audience if you will to do every day things like going to school.  So for the first time in history there's a mechanism for children to think of themselves as a global constituency.  And I think there's a really radical and unprecedented possibility in that very fact.
Imagine if we could enable children to unite to address their common concerns, so imagine and enact social change at school as we see them begin to do around the climate change challenge.  What a powerful movement of change that would be.  And I guess we can only realize that by taking children's participation rights really seriously but it's tapping into that power that would be my one great hope for our current generation of children growing up in a pandemic.
 >> MODERATOR: That is a really exciting prospect.  I must say the idea of children uniting for change.  Bongani, if you're connected at the moment, put your video on because you are in a way, one of those youth leaders the idea of children coming together and uniting around areas that can ‑‑ like climate change.  What do you think you can do.  What would be your call out to your fellow sort of youth leaders in terms of that.  And what can can we do as industry or academics or civil society to help bring that about and bring that about in safe manner.
 
>> I think it's a really great point that Amanda brought.  We need to Royce that the world is evolving.  The role of children and young people within the senior order has been evolved.  We've seen the youth activists how they're able to organize the Internet as a way of organizing themselves.  And also getting more people and more momentum in the activism.  So I think what's really important at the moment is for us to ensure that we'll be really ‑‑ we put everyone ‑‑ we champion the slogan of leave no one behind.
I think the slogan is always being used but when it comes to decision making platforms, young people only use as a token if I can say.
So organizations such as GSMA, UNICEF as well as government the way though have more engagement consultations may be with young people making decisions ensuring that young people do have seats at the table and yes, ensuring that young people do have a seat on the table and apart from that a critical issue that also came up on this discussion of issue of security as well as resources, I think as we've seen with this engagement that connectivity is a critical issue.
So we need to ensure that there is enough effort that I've been young people from across the road are able to engage and have proper connectivity in order to engage on the Internet.
And maybe my last point will touch on the issue that more kids are being involved, more kids are being ‑‑ starting their own YouTube channels and all that.  Hence, there is a drit Cal need, a role that government needs to play.  So it's not only ane issue of government doing things only but it's an issue of everyone understanding that they have a role to play and they need to come to the table.  So I think I'll leave it there for now.  And yeah.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Yes, leave no one behind.  That's a really nice segue to UNICEF.  JSosi, if I can bring you back in you heard what Bongani was saying and I know UNICEF's idea that no one child is left behind is quite key.  Do you have any additional comments or findings sort of closing thoughts from UNICEF that you'd like to share with us?
 >> JOSIANNE GALEA: Thank you for that.  Very, very briefly.  Mostly to thank the panelists for your contributions.  It's a very valuable to hear directly from you this terms of what you have seen Ohaila your work and Uri seeing those trends in that report.  Bongani thank you for sharing your directs experience and helping us think through what meaningful involvement really looks like and what the different roles for stakeholders are.
And Amanda, all the insights from your research.  It's great to hear such hope in some of the proposals andoid I can't see that we've heard that really seizing the opportunity and in this crisis while also being very fragmentic about the real risks and harms that are taking place and it would be great to follow up on parties pafnts.  Sorry we dptd have time to address everything that's come up in the chat but I've seen really interesting comments about curricula and digital and things I'm keen to continue this conversation and thank you for engaging in the topic and framing of the debate we put forward so looking forward to continuing this debate in the future.
 >> MODERATOR: Okay.
Great, we're not finished yet.  Oaila, I want to bring you back in.  Okay.
So in terms of your closing statements or your really extreme wish list, what would you really, number one, want people to be doing, not just from governments and policy makers but also as industry and everyone listening on the call.  Please go ahead. 
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  Thank you.  I think it's very important to keep the child help line running in each country.  It's the children trust and children can talk with the high confidentiality.  They can express themselves so keep the child help line running and support them to continue their work is very important.
Also, to help low income governmental to empower the education system.
E‑learning efnlg indication system that children can continue their learning and to see children dropping from the school and not continue their learning.
Also for the parents, like to to be more close to your children, to listen to them, to talk to them and not to talk above them.  Because children, parents spend a lot of time talking about their children but listening to them.
So to listen to the children is very important.  I hope that we can move in a safe way from the pandemic because I think the word of the child will be will be different for the future.  They are with a lot of information to be safe in this world.  Thank you.
 
 >> MODERATOR: IGF has issued a voluntary commitment that will further the golds of the IGF and also the digital cooperation roadmap.  Is there something that either you as an individual or your organization will do in the next year as a sort of new commitment that you are ‑‑ that you'd like to share with us?  .
>> Yeah, I talked about the initiative of the laptop or the iPad for each child.  And it's an initiative that we launch as voluntary work.  I mean it's not as part of the organization work.  So we can share this niche tifer with you.  And give you information how we did this.
Because we try to ask that inside the community to support this initiative because it's important that each child have access to learn.
And this initiative is voluntary work that I do with other colleagues, you know, so I can share this experience with you.
 
 >> MODERATOR: All right.  Thank you.  There is actually a link on the IGF2020 site.  I think Josi will put it in the chat where people about can record their commitments as well.  I think the panelists here we'll talk about our commitments but also everyone on the call please have a look at that and share any commitments, even now and in our chat or also on the IGF link.  So Uri, just closing over to you, briefly, on voluntary commitments.
 >> URI SADEH: Is there something that you as an individual personally or something that your crimes against children unit voluntarily in this way? putting him on the spot there.
 >> URI SADEH:   We can will continue our daily restless struggle for this ‑‑ in fact as I stated, everyone is overwhelmed with the amount of protection that is needed.  And we do it daily.  I commend my team for the having to face the material that we have to face daily, they have to face daily, which is not something your brain is prepared to face.  I think.
And takes time to cope with.
And I think what drives us all is the knowledge that we are actually struggling to safeguard the child at the end of the road.  And to put an offender behind bars if needed so they do not harm further children.
So I would ‑‑ my commitment would be limited to that, to promoting the protection of children and their rights.  And through continuous work of INTERPOL's crimes against children unit
 >> MODERATOR: It really is terrific work and full admiration to you and all of your team and all those around the world who are working through the sorts of material that you have to deal with.
Really, it's really appreciated and another thing I would say is the report that you put out in September of this year was really interesting and as things change, if they change that would be really welcome by all of us so can keep on our side assessing what we're doing and see where we need to do more.  So thank you very much.  I'll pass over to Amanda, Amanda, do you have a voluntary commitment or something that you'd like to share?
>> Amanda Third:  ICANN Uri I'm feeling on the spo the but gut instrifntle we need to find ways to realize children's partition pace rights under the children's physical distancing, so my commitment would be to explore that question between now and the next IGF and to report back.
 >> MODERATOR: Okay, thank you.  I think just to share with the audience as well am I personal commitment.  I'll come do you Bongani.  Great to see you're still on.  My commitment is similar to Amanda is around participation and listening to the youth voices so within GSMA continually encouraging our leaders to get young voices on the agenda and at our events to listen to them and to encourage business leaders and CEO tion of our members to do more to listen to young voices and hear directly from them about what they need.  That would be my commitment.  So Bongani, I'm going to leave you with the final say as the youngest on our panel.  So please just give us some insight into any voluntary commitment you'll be doing also think wider with your university, thank you.  I think you're still on mute, Bongani.
>> Bongani:  Thank you, once again.  And I'm really sorry once again for the technical issues today.
 >> MODERATOR: No worries gives us a reminder of how important it is to keep you and others like you connected.
>> Bongani:  True.  I think I have three commitments that I'll volunteer to.  One is continue sharing and creating stories.  For raising awareness on the Internet.  So being in a different social media platforms.  This will be engaging directly with young people and issues that they face as well as safe to use on Internet.  My second commitment is hopefully continue having more road shows with around the country with UNICEF.  That way I get to engage more with young people and kids.  And utilize that more on sharing very important safe use of the Internet.
With kids because they're the ones who are more volumenerble to the Internet.
And basically share positive information with them as well.  I think my third and last commitment is I volunteer my time for organizations such as GSMA as well as UNICEF and other organizations in consulting with them, sharing our experiences as young people.  And what we can possibly do moving forward.  So yeah, those are my three commitments and yeah, thank you so much for having me as well today.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I think that says it all so we ask for voluntary commitment from everyone and from our imrowng youth speaker we get three commitments.  I mean what more can I say?  Thank you so much Bongani.  And thank you to all our panelists.  Is it has been a really great session.  I hope you found it interesting.  And please get in contact with us if you want to share more.  We will continue to be talking about these issues.  So thanks all, very much.  And I hope the other IGF sessions go as well.  Great, thank you.  Bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws207-ensuring-trusted-data-sharing-for-monitorining-the-sdgs^^

 
>> Hello, good morning.
>> Good morning, Alexandre. 
>> We can start now.  You can start, please.  I hope you don't have, do you need a interpreter? 
>> ALEXANDRE BARBOSA: No.
>> You can start.
>> ALEXANDRE BARBOSA: Good morning.  Good afternoon.  Good evening, everyone.  And thank you for attending this session, the IGF 2020, entitled Ensuring Trusted Data Sharing for Monitoring the SDGs.  I'm Alexandre Barbosa from the regional center for studies on the development of the Information Society at the Brazilian network center.  It is a great pleasure for me to moderate this panel.  I welcome and thank this group of distinguished speakers for having accepted our invitation to speak to you today.  It is important to mention that we have in this panel experts renowned for their knowledge and large experience in the statistical data production, and this is a group very much involved in data advocacy both by promoting the use of data for evidence based policymaking, and encouraging the production of reliable and internationally comparable data.  So I'm really very happy to be part of this debate, because measurement and data production are very important to CETIC.br as related statistics production for both I would say policymaking and also for monitoring ICT policies and international agenda such as the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda, SDGs.  And before we start our session, let me very quickly announce the rules for our online interaction for this virtual session.
Each speaker will be given 8 minutes, around 8 minutes for their initial remarks.  Then I will be receiving questions from participants to the panelists in the chat box, and I will address them at the end of each round of interventions, if time allows.  This meeting is being recorded for report writing purpose.
To start our session today, I'd like to share my thoughts with you and also offer some insight from the Brazil's experience in the production of ICT related statistics, and not only Brazil, but I would say that a national statistical system which is not only the national statistical office but the whole systems are under increasing pressure to produce high quality data in a timely manner on a wide range of areas, and I would say often with a link to the resources.  Besides policymakers need more and more disaggregated data on multiple social demographic variables, such as gender, age, race, disabilities.  We can list many variables, but also disaggregated by variables that are relevant, that make sense to national and local context.  This is really important.  And I also say I would like to say that this shows how innovation and modernization of national statistical systems are of utmost importance.  We need to go through innovation process and also modernization of the systems.  I'm quite sure that data sharing is really becoming a important debate among data producers.  More and more alternative data sources, and data collection methods, also we can name multistakeholder partnerships and data sharing are part of the innovation process in my opinion.  Traditional official data producers may not be able to provide timely reliable disaggregated data that is needed for policy design and SDG monitoring needs.  We need to search for these partnerships, and therefore, a new data production ecosystems that bring new data providers and data sharing opportunities must be part of this discussion, and must be really discussed and put into practice by the key stakeholders.
In this session today, we will address the urgently need actions to build a comprehensive data production model that incorporates different sources, data sources, and also data sharing mechanisms to meet policy data needs.  We will also discuss here today key opportunities, challenges and alternative data for governance of such new models of public statistics production.
That is to ensure that trusted data sharing and data use is possible.  Needless to say to this group, if you are here participants listening to the discussion, it's because you have interest in data production and data use.  Needless to say to this group that we are living in a veritable data revolution.  More than that data is currently produced faster than it can be used and transformed into information that can really effectively drive this automation that can first digital, the digital economy and of course Sustainable Development.  So in my opinion, we data producers will have to move beyond our own boundaries, if we are to establish partnerships that will allow us to shift from using traditional data sources to using alternative data sources and share data.
This is, I think that you all know as well that this is largely due to the fact that the ICT industry and mostly the private sector own very large amount of relevant data that would likely be unavailable to data producers such as national statistical office if it weren't for agreements and partnerships.  This new environment of course poses numerous challenges for us data producers, requiring governance models that enable a trusted cross organization data sharing for instance, and in particular when we go to private data sources.  In fact, I truly believe that the ticket for the future in terms of official data and statistics production as it was once mentioned by Robert Growth, it is a combination of traditional design data from surveys, data or whatsoever with alternative sources, such as big data.
This is the combination that Robert Growth say that it's the ticket for the future, we have to combine data sources.  Assuming that many countries, especially in the global south is still facing major data gaps in the production of official and timely data for SDG monitoring, and also considering that big data has the potential to complement traditional data sources, we could conclude that so called data revolution offers many opportunities, but also imposes the need to include statistical system capacity so as to better respond to new requirements related to SDG measurement and alternative data sources including data from the Telecom and Internet providers, data from social media companies, data from the Web, data from mobile and tracking devices, or private sector transaction data, such as credit card and banking transactions, are really very important and can help us a lot in this process of data productions.
This is just my initial comments, to share with you what I really think and what I really believe that is the future of data production.  Without further ado, I would like to introduce our presenters for this session.  We have Daniel Ker from the OECD measurement analysis digital economy from the directorate for science technology and innovation, Jaco Toit, chief of universal access to information session, at the communication and information sector at UNESCO in Paris, OECD also our colleague Daniel from Paris in France, we have Mark Uhrbach, chief of digital economy metrics at the Statistics Canada, Dominik Rozkrut, President of the Statistics Poland, Professor Alison Gillwald, Executive Director of Research ICT Africa and Professor is Professor at University of Cape Town in Nelson Mandela department of governance, and Helani Galpaya, Chief Executive Officer at LIRNEasia.  Daniel is trying to connect.  So maybe I will leave Daniel to be the last to speak, but just to say that we have a very good mix of international organizations, national statistical offices, and also academia and Civil Society organizations.  So I will go directly to our colleagues from UNESCO, Jaco, and here we have a representative from international organization that will share with us his view on all these issues that I have mentioned.  And I would like to invite Jaco Toit from UNESCO to share his views on the challenge and benefits of data sharing especially in the context of the SDGs, and how we could move into this new and comprehensive data production ecosystems.  Jaco, it is my pleasure to give you the floor and thank you again for joining us today.
>> JACO TOIT: Thank you very much, Alexandre, for this opportunity, also to talk about how does a international organization like UNESCO actually produce and share and monitor information on the SDGs.
As you might know that UNESCO's mandate is quite wide and within this mandate, we collect a lot of data on the SDGs, where UNESCO is the custodian of several indicators, within my section on universal access to information, we look specifically at collecting data on access to information, so the number of countries that adopt and implement constitutional and statutory policy guarantees for public access to information, and for that, we have used very traditional ways of collecting data, where we have a national questionnaires that are destined to oversight bodies for access to information.  We have institutional questionnaires for public authorities like ministries of environment, of finance and others.
Once we receive this data, we also verified it then with UNESCO databases on countries with access to information and laws.  So it is a very traditional way of collecting data, as an institution that is intergovernmental.  But when we collect this data, I think we also realize that we need additional sources of data and have to look at other ways of collecting data, specifically within the realm of access to information, we send originally our questionnaires to SDG focal points, but they were not familiar with the national or institutional implementation of access to information legislation, and then we had to look at additional recipients of our questionnaires.
Also when these bodies actually receive our questionnaires, of course we had very grand plans to have full data sets, but people are not familiar with our terminologies or the specialized terminologies that we are using, as it relates to SDGs, and that ended up that people did not provide all the data that we needed, and some cases, incomplete responses because relevant bodies do not necessarily see the importance of collecting this data.  And then finally a point that I wanted to mention is data ownership.  We collect data from public institutions, but we also encourage Civil Society groups to collect data on access to information, because they can for example produce shadow reports on the question of access to information.
But how do we put this data together, so that we could make sure that the Government institutional information is a source and Civil Society organization is put within the right context.  These are open questions that at least we still struggle with.
In order to address these elements, I think we try to look specifically at the guiding principles which is vulnerability, accessibility, interoperability and reusability, as a prism in order to say how do we manage this data so that we benefit from data sharing and minimize some of the risks from the origin of this data.
In terms of fund ability, UNESCO works in cooperation with the inter‑agency and expert groups on SDGs to validate the metadata to ensure that UN statistical standards are followed.  I think that we are quite fine with.  We also based our questionnaire specifically on implementation for some of the principles related to access to information that we had to interpret with group of stakeholders.  We publish our data on dedicated platforms where people can download, visualize and analyze the data, in terms of accessibility, but how do we bring the different data sources together.  That is still a open question.
We also, while we collect data on a specific indicator, we want also to look at the interoperability of this data.  For example, how does the data that we collect on access to information can be seen through the prism of gender, for example, or through the prism of SDG 9, which is on industrial cooperation.  This is something that we haven't succeeded yet in my view that we collect SDG information in our box, but how do we put these different boxes together.  I know UNDP through the maps initiative tried to do that, but I think we still are far away of putting this together.
In terms of reusability, we make sure that the data producers, Government, Civil Society or others are very well attributed in terms of the data, so that when we mix it, we can actually see that where it comes from to put the context, as we look at official data.
When we look towards a new comprehensive data production system, I think it's important that when we look at the SDGs that we realize that SDGs are not freestanding, but subject to each other.  I think this is a challenge that we have to try to solve and to work more on.  We have to realize that different organizations are involved, so while governments or statistical services are our primary try in terms of producing this information, we also need to look out of the box, as you said, to private sector, towards data scraping and other elements and how do we do that.
Lastly I would like to mention also the importance of looking at sharing, to pay attention to open access policy, UNESCO has a open access policy but how do we apply it to open data.  How do we move forward in terms of open data, when we look at official data, and I think these are all open questions that we might want to look at.  I'll stop there and thank you so much for this opportunity.
>> ALEXANDRE BARBOSA: Thank you very much, Jaco.  Maybe we will get back to you in the next round.  But I do believe that UNESCO is doing a very important, playing a important role in this new data governance ecosystem production, I would say, because of course access to information is very critical to UNESCO and open data, so and I have been following what UNESCO is doing.  I guess that not only UNESCO but also other UN agencies are really very, will play a increasingly important role in terms of providing a debate around these issues that you have mentioned, data vulnerability, accessibility, open data, and also all the things that comes with that, like privacy, which is a very important topic that I hope we can discuss in the next, with the next speakers.  So thank you very much, Jaco, for this very important contribution to this debate.
Now I would like to welcome Daniel Ker from OECD that I have already introduced him.  He was with difficulties to connect.  Welcome, Daniel.  I would like to invite you to share and to provide your view on the issue of alternative data sources versus traditionally designed survey data, and the challenge associated with each of this type of data.  I know that I have been following also very closely all the work that OECD is doing in terms of this topic of data sharing of having access to alternative data sources.
I really appreciate, Daniel, your willingness to share with us what OECD is doing in this regard.  You have the floor for about 8 minutes.
>> DANIEL KER: Thank you, Alexandre.  Firstly I'm sorry I was late.  I was trying desperately to get in, but not working hard enough it seems.  But I'm here now.  I'm not sure I'll be able to cover everything OECD is doing in this area, but I'll talk about things from my area and do my best to touch on some of the wider work.
The first thing we need to say is that it's not really about surveys or alternative sources that you mentioned.  It is definitely about surveys and complementary sources.  They each have their own strengths and limitations that can be complementary to each other.  Well designed surveys do a great job of measuring a huge range of economic and social phenomena across different sectors, households, businesses, Government, nonprofits, all the way down to individuals as well.  They are well‑established approach and there is a wide literature on how we can ensure the results that we get from surveys are appropriately representative and robust.
Nevertheless, surveys do have shortcomings, and these include cost and the burden of respondents and a trade off between timeliness and representativeness but surveys are not great at measuring some things.  That is one area that we can draw on other data sources as a complement.
Data from other sources might be useful to help us address shortcomings and help us provide insights in those areas where surveys don't work so well.  We need to design this complementary system between the two.  I want to quickly say that my area of the OECD we are concerned with measuring and analyzing the digital economy.  There are some areas that could be worked on with information held by key businesses in particular.
E‑commerce for example, surveys do a good job of telling us how many firms engage in e‑commerce, but other sources could help us better understand the volume of e‑commerce revenues or the share that e‑commerce is in monetary terms.  There is another area that we are very interested in, international flows of cloud computing services, which are quite abstract and confusing in terms of how they are structured.  Online platforms which I'm sure will come up repeatedly, especially platforms allowing people to sell their labor or time or skills, issues related to well‑being, things like exposure to misinformation on line, it would be interesting to get information from social networks on that, and thinking about the SDGs.  One example that came to me was there is a SDG indicator, the broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants down by speed.  It would be great if we can get information from, there will be no businesses must withhold on whether these are business or consumer subscriptions, that is currently not something widely shared and known but should be something the businesses selling the services know.  Also real world networks speeds versus what the network says the speed should be, these networks must be monitoring the speeds of traffic through their networks, so should be able to share information on that if they were willing to.
There is many more areas where we could think of synergies like this.  But there is certainly a number of key challenges.  The first one is understanding what we as statisticians we want and articulating that in a way that makes sense to businesses.  When we talk about data sharing, it is really easy to get confused between sharing data sets and making it sound like we want Facebook to hand over their entire data set that underpins their entire business, for example, or sharing statistics derived from those data sets.
In general, our aim as statisticians is to produce summary statistics, but does not need to require the data sets themselves to be shared, although it would be nice if they could be.  This to an extent is a question of division of labor, but could be a way of managing concerns around commercial sensitivity, and but at the same time we need to ensure that the processes that we have to create the statistics are robust and they deliver comparability, aggregate ability in the data, etcetera.
But to do that, we can agree the way that the summary statistics are to be calculated, and I will touch upon some examples from the OECD distributed microdata projects that offer a potential model for this in a moment.  I think we need to be clear to ourselves and to businesses, are we asking for information about the business itself or are we asking for information about their customers, so in the case of a platform, is that the people or businesses supplying services and using services through the platform rather than the platform itself.  There is a blurring of lines there, but we need to be clear that we understand what we are asking for first.
The second key challenge I'd like to highlight is that businesses and statisticians tend to look at the world in different ways.  What sounds wise to statisticians like basic statistics can sound like a scary commercially sensitive map of their entire business and how they make their money and where from, or even worse, concepts like GDP have been described to me in workshops that relevant by some businesses that came to us, so we need to find a common language, way of articulating what we are looking for.  Some established statistical norms also, such as the idea that you can identify the production of the good or service to a geographic place and its consumption to a geographic place, those don't necessarily apply well to firms, that operate multilateral, multinationally without borders essentially.
But nevertheless, what we can do is try to find ways to encourage firms to share data if we can find a common way of understanding and talking to them.  One thing that firms and statisticians increasingly agree on is that data are an asset, but for a business an asset is not something they would normally share for free.  We need to find a value proposition that works for the firms, that where they can say this isn't just about me giving something that is great for the statisticians but I don't get anything in return, we need to see a value in that sharing.  This could be linked to efficiency, linked to reducing burdens on them, linked to corporate social responsibilities, so the firm feel like they are doing something good, and linked to giving them a real picture of the market that they operate in.  There are various things there.  Or of course, one could talk about taking legislative action to secure data sharing, but really if I go back to the multinational firms that operate across countries without borders, that is going to require a huge amount of coordination across countries, and furthermore at the moment already the powers, the different statistical agencies have in different countries to request data, varies a lot.  You would be starting from a heterogeneous base.
To encourage firms to share data, we need to encourage them to have confidence in data sharing.  One way to ensure this or to facilitate this is through legal frameworks.  We need a common legal understanding of what is expected by the parties and how that can be forced legally if necessary.  One thing that we found at the OECD may help is provision of information through trusted third parties, so businesses are used to disclosing information to their accountants.  There may be a conduit through them that can help as well.  Those accountants can provide assurance on the legal frameworks.
There is technical aspects, things like how is the data going to be stored and processed.  Is it going to be secure, is it going to be up to the right standards.  There is a need to bring in the right people on both sides to have those technical conversations and to help businesses understand what can be shared while remaining within the rules on privacy such as GDPR.
It is worth highlighting that the independence of statistical agencies from Government can be a important string to our bow, in many OECD countries national statistic offices are set up at arm's‑length from Government to safeguard the statistics they produce from interference.  We can leverage that to say, look, we are not going to have the tax agency coming in the back door and double checking what you said on your tax filing last year.  There is a degree of separation between these arms of Government.
A couple other things to highlight, data anonymization that we can use, this can include not only anonymizing subject of the data but also its source.  That can be important in markets where, if we are able to get enough firms around the table together to manage disclosiveness in a concentrated market like infrastructure as a service, cloud services, there is only three big players in infrastructure as a service, if you go to one of them and ask where they make their money, they say that is a map of my business.  If you go to three of them, you can convince them to talk to each other and provide the same data to a trusted third party, for aggregation.  Once they aggregate the data, you have some degree of disclosure control that you can hopefully win them on board with.
Another issue to highlight is statistical limitations, so we need to try and understand what the limitations of the sources could be, other ways to communicate them.  Importantly and I'll come on to this briefly, we want to be able to continue production of statistics over time.  It is well and good doing it once, but statisticians want to do things over and over.  This isn't just analysis.
Finally, one thing for us as statisticians is willingness to take risks.  We need to be willing to put in the resources to try to pursue data sharing, despite the uncertainty of whether you will have success.  I've seen several times in several organizations the ideas are there, but we stop short at the line of putting resources there, because you don't want to have to go back at the end and report that you didn't get where you hoped.  But you need to try and take these risks.
I'll quickly highlight a couple models that have worked for us at the OECD and elsewhere.  We had success with several one‑off models.  This is great for analysis but not a basis for regular statistics I was talking about.  We have used contract instrument such as loan disclosure agreements to get detailed transaction data from Spanish banks, and that allows interesting analysis.  We have been approached by businesses we are interested in working with about implanting our analyst into those businesses for a period of time to do analysis and produce statistics that we can take out.  But this is one of those examples where there wasn't the resource or the appetite for risk to really embrace that opportunity.
I've mentioned the broadband statistics earlier.  We have some OECD statistics gathered through regulators.  Regulators have regulatory power, but they tend to operate in markets that have a relatively small number of players.  This also shows the benefits of having personal relationships with those players, and some of the other markets that were interested in may not have regulators in the same way, but they have small numbers of players we can try to build relationships with.
I'd like to highlight a success that Eurostat had on this.  They had detailed negotiations, managed to secure agreement with four short stay accommodation platforms to regularly share data on books and guest that is could be aggregated into statistics.  While we are waiting to see the tangible outcomes of that because these things take time, the agreement is there.  It shows the breakthroughs are possible if you put the effort in, and that international organizations can play a important coordinating role and offer potentially a value proposition to some of the businesses as well as on behalf of our member countries.
Basically, by saying, if you have the choice as a business of completing one standardized submission agreed across countries, rather than many heterogeneous submissions done with each individual country, that could offer them some value in terms of time saved efficiency.  That is an approach we are trying to make work with reporting on terrorist violence and extremist content at the OECD.
We have had success in bringing together groups of stakeholders from business and the statistics domain around the table, around the common measurement purpose.  You can see some of the outcomes of this in the OECD.AI portal observatory portal that have several indicators on it.
Of course, none of this, we shouldn't ignore the fact that there are markets that can access the data, it can be easy to overlook, but there are examples where private enterprises are selling access to data to those producing statistics, including the OECD.  But of course, one of the big problems is supply and demand don't necessarily reveal themselves organically in a way that gives a market solution.  Related to that, I'd like to highlight two pieces of OECD work related to data sharing.
First, recommendation of the council concerning access to research data from public funding.  That says if you are doing, if you are a private company or anyone doing research that was funded by the public the data should be shared as widely as they reasonably can be.  The second is a 2019 report called enhancing access to and sharing of data, reconciling risks and benefits for data reuse across societies.  This takes a much wider perspective than just the perspective of producing statistics, but many of the points in there are relevant to sharing for statistical purposes including the need to balance the benefits of enhancing data openness with the risks and the need to recognize legitimate private and national and social public interests, when deciding where the balance lies, the need to reinforce trust and empower users to proactive stakeholder engagement and community building, and the examples I touched upon are examples of that.  It is putting in the time and the leg work to talk to companies and try and build the community around the shared purpose.  Finally, encouraging the precision, provision of data through incentive mechanisms that make sense and hang together.
To draw it all together, it is important to understand that the process is going to be resource intensive, and it requires a lot of dialogue to bear fruit.  This requires willingness on both sides, including the willingness to take and manage risks both for the business and for the statistical agencies.  We need to build on the successes that there have been to illustrate the value propositions that there can be for businesses and to strengthen those value propositions to make it easy to get groups of compatible companies in a room to talk to each other to talk about the practicalities of data sharing, for statistical purposes, and overall to try and normalize, targeted controlled and appropriate data sharing for statistical purposes.
Hopefully that was useful.
>> ALEXANDRE BARBOSA: Thank you very much, Daniel.  It was very interesting.  I was saying in my initial remarks that the ticket for the future as said by Robert Gross is this combination of data sources like design data, survey data and organic data sources such as big data.  Of course, you brought one very important topic which is the distinction between, what is really data sharing.  Does it mean providing access to data sets, or just sharing the statistical results.
Right now, I would like to mention that in Brazil we are working with IDG which is our national statistical office, they have access, real access to the data set from our Mumbai operator in metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro, and they are doing a model to try to estimate the proportion of the population using the Internet and also the proportion of population covered by 3G and 4G networks.
Those are statistics very easily produced by this type of CDRs from mobile operators.  But of course as you said, data set became an asset.  So develop proposition and how we are going to have access to this data, all the legal agreements and commercial agreements, it is a very important issue to be discussed.
But now, since we have now heard from UNESCO and OECD, two international organizations, I would like to listen what the national statistical offices are doing and what are their thoughts in terms of this new data production ecosystems, and data sharing.  I would like to give the floor to Mark Uhrbach from the Statistics Canada, and maybe Mark, thank you for being with us today.  As we all know, Statistics Canada is a best practice reference in terms of data production, statistics production.  I would like to hear from you what do you believe that data users such as policymakers maybe are very hard user of data and statistics, what are they requiring in terms of data disaggregation, more complex data set, what are the views of data users when Statistics Canada produce statistics, what are the users' requirements, and what do you think that the COVID‑19 pandemic has forced national statistical offices to look at alternative data sources and also alternative data collection methods, since for many surveys we cannot go into the household or the companies or other establishments to collect data.  What are the rules of this new data sources.  Mark, you have the floor for about 8 minutes.  Thank you.
>> MARK UHRBACH: Great, thank you very much, Alexandre, and thank you very much for the opportunity to speak here today with such a distinguished group of guests many of which I've had the fortune to work with over the past many years, and it's always a challenge to follow Dan.  But I should be used to it by now.  (chuckles).
A couple points I'd like to make today.  The first one will build on what Dan was talking about earlier in terms of, I think we agree that really survey tools that we have used in the past alone aren't going to get us is there in terms of measuring what we want to in the future.  As we have talked about, there is lots of advantages to some of the traditional methods that we have used, but we can certainly supplement and improve on those as well.
Going back to your question, Alexandre, although the focus of this session is on the development of data to meet policy design and SDG monitoring needs, the topic is timely within the context of the COVID‑19 pandemic.  Throughout the world, here in Canada as well, we have seen the need from policymakers for realtime or near realtime high quality information on a ongoing basis, in order to attempt to try and make the best decisions possible during a dynamic situation.
In many countries, this data has come from the national statistical organization, here in Canada that is Statistics Canada, we have been responsible for providing a lot of that, although we have provided that information in a different fashion than we have done previously.  At the beginning of the pandemic, Statistics Canada was able to use some of our traditional tools as statistician using surveys and administrative data that already existed, to show the effects and the potential effects of COVID on segments of the population, and on certain sectors, so looking at the potential of people to telework from home, whether we could identify potential, in sectors of the economy that we expected to be hit relatively hard by this, areas of the service sector of course, restaurants, tourism, things like that.
We were able to produce some of those statistics very quickly.  But those tools alone were not sufficient to meet the needs of this unprecedented situation that we found ourselves in.  Within a matter of weeks, the agency reacted by supplementing some of the traditional sources with a series of crowdsourcing exercises, Web panels, Web scraping activities, and also mobility and satellite data that were obtained both through public sources and private sources.  The combination of the use of these methods allowed the agency to provide policymakers with much better perspective on the effects of the pandemic, on widespread and national level, but then also on a much more granular level as we were able to get into some of the details.
For the first, Statistics Canada, this was a area that we have been working on very much in the last few years, but I think what happened is as a result of the pandemic, it accelerated many of these initiatives, and it provided us with a bit more free license to explore some of these alternative data sources, especially as you say when traditional survey data could not be collected due to the lockdowns that were experienced here in Canada, and allowed us to use some of these sources to measure impacts of COVID, due to some of the shifts in consumer spending and some of the protective measures that were in place that restricted our movement.
Though some of the metrics that we put out, I think kind of in hindsight perhaps were not perfect, the response allowed us as statisticians to learn quickly the potential of some of the other data sources, and provided policymakers with up to date information that they needed to make better social, economic and health decisions, and try and chart a course towards number one, a safe recovery in terms of health, but also in terms of financial recovery for the country.
I think it's clear that we couldn't have done this just by using traditional methods alone, they would have locked some of the detail and timeliness required for the circumstances.  So that is not to discount any of our traditional methods that we already have in place.  In some cases traditional survey tools will still provide some of the data that we need and the indicators that are necessary, both to monitor the SDGs in this example, but also meet the needs of policymakers.  However, for new and somewhat emerging issues related to the digital transformation which is my team's area of focus within the agency, I think we recognize now that this will not be enough.  When we look at the e‑commerce transactions, the use of online platforms that Dan referenced earlier, there is a opportunity to use big data such as transaction level data or activity logs, to try and better measure this and these nontraditional privately held potentially big data sources will provide some of the inputs to build the next generation of indicators, as the digital transformation continues to evolve.
In many cases the lessons learned by NSOs through the world since the onset of the pandemic can continue to be built upon as we go forward to further develop comprehensive model that incorporates different data sources and data sharing mechanisms while still maintaining the integrity of the statistical system.
Second, I'd like to talk a little bit about that value proposition for data providers.  Dan touched on the OECD's attempts to do this as well.  This is something that we have been faced with at Statistics Canada too, while there is that opportunity to partner with businesses who possess valuable data to help measure emerging data challenges, I think we need to demonstrate to them why they should do this, and I think this is particularly true in the case of the digital economy.  There is a lot of opportunity there, where digital trails exist throughout, and in many cases the best source of data for measurement are the providers of the services themselves who have built the firms on the information that they gleaned from these big data sources.  For us at Statistics Canada and for many national statistical offices, there are two methods to attempt to obtain this data from private firms who often hold what they see as proprietary information quite closely.  The first is trying to compelling the firms to provide it under legislation.  However, for many firms that hold the data that we are trying to get, related to digitalization, these are often multinational firms that have headquarters outside of the country, and our legislative powers there are limited in terms of providing that information.  The second option is to demonstrate this value proposition to firms.  If they are not compelled to provide the information, or even for Canadian firms that are compelled to provide some information, what incentive do they have to provide better data to us and to do it on a more timely basis.  If we all view data as an assets, firms need to be able to trade on that data that they are giving up, and see the value in doing so.  In this case, the value that resides there is helping to answer some of the country's policy questions and issues.
A couple of examples within Canada, we have made progress in terms of partnering with some private firms to provide key information that is used to produce indicators.  We do have a partnership with many large retailers to provide scanner data, statistics Canada uses that to build a more representative consumer price index.  This data source became key during the pandemic, as a risk mitigation strategy, when prices that are typically collected from the field were unable, we were unable to take, to use that method due to the health restrictions that were in place.
As well, ongoing work that we have now with some of the major Telecom providers could help to unlock some of the new metrics related to broadband and mobile services provision there.  Those conversations I think are necessary, as data now is big business, official statistic producers are no longer the only game in town.  However, we have a role to play there still, and NSOs can demonstrate the value added through data analysis linkage and analytics, as well as the standards of quality that might be applied, which we apply, higher degree of quality in many cases than some other data providers out there.
The point for us to make in obtaining some of the alternative data sources that we can, as a NSO, we can do more with more information, we can paint the most accurate picture possible for the country, and the alternative to that is really that we can only provide the information, the information that we provide is limited by the information that is provided to us, and that could lead to potentially incorrect decision‑making and policies.
Finally, I'd like to make the point in order to facilitate data sharing, I think as a data steward, we must establish trust with those whose data is provided to us, so to that end, Statistics Canada has created a trust center which attempts to explain to firms and to individuals why their data is collected and how it is used, and put that out there in the transparent fashion.  As well, very importantly, it outlines how their data is protected once it comes into the agency, and statistics Canada's accountability framework, and that is all done with the idea of building that level of trust between those that provide information to us and ourselves who put it back out into the world.
I will leave it at that for this discussion.  But thank you very much again.
>> ALEXANDRE BARBOSA: Thank you very much, Mark, very interesting.  Thank you for sharing all the difficulties and challenge that Statistics Canada is facing, like us or other data producers willing to use alternative data collection methods and data source.  It is indeed a big challenge.  You gave very good examples.  National statistical offices such as yourselves plays a important role in this debate, mainly within the UN statistical system and debate, based on the fundamental principle of official statistics how we are going to discuss this data governance for the production of official statistics.  Thank you very much for your contribution.  Maybe we get back to you if we have time.
Now, I would like to give the floor to another very relevant national statistical office, Statistics Poland.  I would like to invite Dominik Rozkrut.  I'm happy to see you here with us.  Thank you for your kindness to bring your expertise and experience.  Very recently I joined a session with Dominik Rozkrut as a participant in the UN global data, big data for official statistics conference.  I could witness all the innovation projects that Statistics Poland has under the leadership of Dominik.  Thank you so much.  You are invited to share with us your innovations and personal view as the President of Statistics Poland in terms of this new environment of data production.
>> DOMINIK ROZKRUT: Thank you very much, Alexandre.  I'm honored by this invitation.  I did whatever I could to participate even though I'm in a bad position for other reasons.  But I would like to say that I'm obsessed with innovation in our office, and we are doing a lot of innovative projects.  We want to be at the top of the world in terms of what we can do in the statistical office, and I think that there is a huge perspective of what we can still achieve together, working internationally together, to tackle the new data sources and to make use of it, and in favor of our societies, because this is our ultimate goal.
There are a few things I would like to mention that, I won't repeat with those that already spoke.  I want to talk about the challenges.  There is a important point, we can assume there are these new data sources, like administrative data, years back.  We had to tackle those sources somehow.  But there are things that we have to consider and I'd like to mention three challenges.  First challenge in terms of how the official statistics is organized, we are unfortunately, this is a joke and a serious thing at the same time, part of the public authorities, so it conveys a lot of limitations in terms of how we can act.
In our case, many public health authorities currently lack the capacity and skills to fully realize the potential of the data.  Even though we would have the access, theoretically, probably won't be able to take advantage of it.  We have to prepare for that.  There are a few initiatives especially at international level I'd like to mention in a minute.
The second challenge is that the vast majority of data is collected by the private sector, and there exists little economic incentives, yet many barriers like ethical, privacy related, reputation to share data, beyond any small projects and commercial projects as well.  This is the second limitation.
The third challenge is there is lack of dedicated professionals who are responsible for sharing of data externally for social benefit.  On the side of the companies as well, that we have to train people that will be able to cooperate with the public sector, and with nonprofit organizations as well, to flourish this data ecosystem that would enable us to exchange data and take advantage of the data, and mutually, all together, you know.  So these are the three challenges that I would like to say that are very important.
There are a few areas of obligations that turn out really at the moment that we can really imagine that if there would be a way to access the data, will be able quickly to react and producing some interesting statistics, and just for the sake of having it as a complete discussion, I would like to mention mobile network operator data that is pretty common, everybody knows that.  There was a fantastic case of API provided by Google and Apple recently, in terms of the pandemic, I think that's, that was marvelous thing.  But of course that doesn't stop there.  There are so many other applications that we can think about, if we would only be able to access these data.  This is very, very difficult.
The second area is financial transactions, online payments.  We have always tried to do so and there have been many private corporations in Poland, for example, which were able to provide statistics based on this source at the time of the pandemic, it was pretty meaningful.  I think it should go somehow into the mainstream of official statistics, because it really helps us to produce something that is meaningful, timely and granular.  That is the second area.
The third area is something easier I would say, intelligence data, the data that we can go govern ourselves, but we have to prepare ourselves towards these applications, we need to train people.  It is not as easy as it seems to be.  It has to be linked with the other data sources, and there is many methodological issues involved in that.  We still also have to, and that's, may be surprising, basic statistical methodology that would allow us to use new data sources which we didn't foresee two years in the past.
The fourth area is counter data, some countries are already using it, but there is major countries around the world not doing that, so that is a role for us to promote it, and satellite imagery.  What we are doing, we especially invested recently in satellite imagery.  We have been for the first time this year producing estimates on agricultural crops, based on satellite imagery.  We incorporate these new metas into broader spectrum of applications.  We are very satisfied with that.  We are very proud of that as well at the same time.  Of course, AIS which is location system statistics and a few others, these are areas we invest gradually in order to build up the teams that are able to cope with the complexities of these sources.  But this is doable.  I can tell you this is really doable.
We don't have these, it's very important to say, I remember at the beginning of my career when I started my career, both at university and in the bank, the commercial bank, and I was surprised by the fact how not developed it was in terms of digitalization, and in today's terms.  On the other hand, that was a big limitation, big barrier in order to do this new matters whatever, and you had to invest a lot into software and licenses, whatever.
Most of the tools that are necessary nowadays are available as open source, and that is a brilliant occasion for all of us, in order to, in terms of taking advantage of that, and really, you don't need to spend money on that.  You just need to train people and grant yourself an access which is the main topic of what we are discussing here.
There is one area especially important, forgotten often, is healthcare systems.  The big data in terms of pooling together the data from different parts of the healthcare system can really help us in situations like we have now in the pandemics, also in many other serious problems, therapies, healthcare systems, this is the area that can make the biggest difference.  But I don't think it's well understood or mentioned enough.
To make a little humorous, I have this kind of saying, talking about accessing these data sources, like yeti, everybody talks about it but no one has really seen him.  The question is what to do.  Of course the pandemic increased the level of innovation.  We all agree, we need across our groups of chief statisticians, I meet with Neil from Canada and other my brilliant colleagues and analysts, try to harass them with a question, what can you do in order to sustain the level of innovation that you had at the moment, because I argue that when the situation comes back to normal, we will come back to be very slow as usual as statistical offices, and but for these questions they don't like me, but on the other hand they agree to have conferences on that.  And the next OECD committee meeting will be devoted to that topic in particular.  That is very important.
The European Union are trying to do a lot.  I'm engaged in these actions.  We had a business to Government data sharing expert group, established by the European Commission.  I was part of this group.  We were working for two years trying to build up some document that would investigate the possibility to create a European data spaces and how to facilitate data sharing, things like that.  We have by the way come up with some set of principles in terms of how we should think about accessing the private data, publicly held data by statistical offices.  These principles include the principle of minimal data, so we should get access but proportional to what is needed for public good, transparency, privacy, confidentiality, this is the way we achieve the trust.  Nondiscrimination, level playing field, that is important, so if one company is obliged to do something, then the others operating similarly have to do the same.
Of course, following existing statistical frameworks, this is one of the things that we can offer as statistical offices to the creation of data spaces.  We have the standards, metadata standards, all the classifications, things like that, that are the core of the language of sharing the data so that we can use that together.  The issue of data stewardship was already mentioned, and the role as a steward, at the company, we need to train people who can be those data stewards and collaborate and creating collaboratives for data sharing.
Following this, in the EU we have the European statistical system.  We have published a position paper on the European data spaces, and arguing for the increased role of the official statistics in creating those European data spaces.  I don't want to take too much time on that.  But this is extremely important topic for us, up to the degree that we have already the President of the bureau of the European system, so we have established a few months ago a special task force on access to privately held data.  We meet very often, almost once a month, we meet in order to push for creation of the legal basis to access the privately held data for the official statistics within European Union.
My ambition would be, to be also one of the leading regions in the world, as it was in terms of the General Data Protection Regulation, to establish some kind of legal framework that will allow us to, for the public good, to access the privately data, privately held data.  At the UN level we are working on global working group on big data and official statistics.  We had a general meeting today but I didn't participate.  I couldn't participate in that for some reasons.  But also within this group, I lead a group task force in capacity and training, and we are developing some programs for national statistical institutes, so they can start training their people using the materials that we produce together.  There is a lot of investment into this area.  I think that is our future.  Of course, there is a bigger role than that for the international organizations.  I would like to challenge all of the international organizations, not only the European level, but always OECD, what are you doing in order to facilitate that.  It is not just a question of producing a fancy report, whatever, but it is a question of achieving the goals actually as quickly as possible.
To summarize my intervention, I'd like to come back to something so basic as fundamental principles of official statistics.  They are based on this single fundamental human right to have access to the truth.  That is what official statistics are about, we are there to provide people, the individuals with necessary information to take informed decisions.  Of course, it doesn't really matter if this is the regular source as we imagine it for the last 50 years, or is it administrative records or are these big data sources, privately held data.  We are there.  We have our obligations.  We have to provide our societies with the necessary information, and times are that we need to use also these new data sources as well.  Thank you very much.
>> ALEXANDRE BARBOSA: Thank you very much, Dominik.  Congratulations on all these efforts that Statistics Poland is doing especially under the mandate of the global working group on big data for official statistics.  I've seen now the work that you have been doing, you and your team, on capacity‑building.  This is really very relevant.  But one thing that strikes me, listening to you, the culture of data sharing varies from country to country.  Maybe private corporations and banks or other type of data providers from the private sectors in Poland may be more open to sharing their data than let's say in Brazil or U.S. or in Canada.  This is something that strikes me.
It is interesting to see that there is a cultural issue behind these possibilities of data sharing.  Thank you very much.  Now it's my great pleasure to invite Professor Alison, who has been doing wonderful work in Africa in general but in South Africa, to the center that she is Executive Director, Research ICT Africa.  We have been cooperating in the past years with RICT.  I would say that she represents a important organization related to the data production.  Professor Alison, could you share with us your experience with both demand and supply side statistics production in African countries, and in your view, what are the main challenges that data producers are facing in Africa accessing alternative data sources.  If you could also in this 8 minutes share your thoughts and views on data governance.  You have the floor, Professor.  Thank you for being with us.
>> ALISON GILLWALD: Thanks for the generous introduction.  I'm going to time myself so Helani has time to speak.  If I run over time, please stop me, if nothing rings a bell or does anything.  I think people have raised points I wanted to raise.  I'll try to follow up.
  (distorted audio) 
I've got a very large dog that is now, now had enough of Zoom for the day, going to try to get rid of it (chuckles).
I wanted to highlight the points made around how COVID has amplified the implications of not having the data.  Your question was how much data do we have in order to monitor the progress towards SDGs.  In fact, across Africa, across a whole lot of the indicators but particularly across the digital underlying digital ICT indicators, we don't actually know.  We don't know what progress we are making other than generally by way of target, but we don't have the data, because it has not been able at the national statistical level.
COVID has highlighted this.  We have seen that people, governance don't have the information that people need in order to make decisions.  We have seen even that this digital inequality is playing itself out in the data that is available for COVID mitigation.  People are not connected, they are unable to use the technologies for contact tracing and the data is not coming up at AI dashboards around this.  Many countries, we are resorting to old manual systems because there is such invisibility, such problems with representation in these existing data sets and data methods that you have been referring to.
It's wonderful to know they are there.  But they are actually really for large part of the world they are a figment of some hemisphere imagination.
What have we got, and what can we do?  I think that it's important to identify some of the limitations with some of the data that we do have, and because there obviously are enormous potential with big data, and ensuring that this data becomes part of the public good, statistical public good available data that is nonrivalrous and nonexcludable.  People can use it.  It doesn't exclude some company using the data.  We need to think about complementary forms of data as new forms of our national public good databases.
The point is that a lot of data we still are dependent on is supply side data, and across Africa, supply side data provided by operators, and often there isn't a regulatory audit to these, regulatory institution audits of these.  Often institutions that are responsible for this within the UN, ITU, are dependent on our very small limited number of countries represented, nationally represented surveys that we are doing.
I want to emphasize the importance of this because there is a lot of talk at the moment about how we are going to, public data can be accessed and emphasize the need for us to continue to strive to try and get these nationally representative data sets.  I want to make this point particularly in relation to the Internet before moving on to the fact that we need much more data than simply Internet connectivity data which we seem to have settled for in the past.
But the supply side data that we are receiving in Africa, and we have seen this in the figures of mobile phone ownership that are over a hundred percent, in countries that we know everybody does not have a phone, the supply side data cannot disaggregate the data.  We cannot even get a simple figure as a unique subscriber from that supply side data.  We know that people have multiple SIM cards, etcetera, so we don't even have the most basic information.
Where we do get disaggregated information in various forms, this often is, this masks the various other policy information that you need around inequality.  The figures that we are seeing around gender for example, gender parity or gender differences, these are masking the real underlying drivers of inequality.  For our work on gender, because it's been touched on but not spoken at length, we are broadly, it highlights the fact that education and income are primary determinants of access to education.  It is the fact that women are not getting education, and therefore the associated incomes, that they are unable to participate.
It is still a matter, it is about whether you are in rural areas which still continue to have much lower penetration rates than urban areas, etcetera.  This is the only demand side data can you get that in prepaid mobile markets, where people aren't registered, and even the registration can be a wonderful statistical tool.  Everybody knows that registration of SIM cards is a farce in most countries.
What we need to do is understand the importance of that.  From a research, evidence based policy point of view, it is only through that nationally representative data that we can do the kind of analysis, the modeling we need to do in order to disaggregate the data and as I said, unveil the masks.  That is a important thing to keep in mind.  We can't abandon those.
I should say in this Forum that the traditional funding, that we don't get statistics offices across Africa, the in‑depth statistics that we need, we might get a annual survey, something like that, but that is about it.  We are not using standardized indicators, international indicators, mobile phones, household penetration.  We have enormous problems around connections to most basic statistics, but the important part of this is that we have been doing these surveys for over a decade in Africa, the data depended on why the ITU, the World Bank, regularly pleads with us, they can have it before we publicize it, etcetera, and yet we cannot get sustained funding for this public good, public accessible, database all made accessible, and yet we can't get funding from them.  Even traditional funding that has come, that has been remarkable over the last years, decades or more, has dried up.  That money is now devoted to artificial intelligence and other things, big data, that you cannot actually get a basic survey done.
What is interesting about COVID, we have suddenly had governments saying where is your data, your data is from 2018.  Where is the next round of data.  It is not there.  We don't understand implications of COVID as a result.  I want to urge us as a international community to, these are global public goods now, we are talking about global services, global things that we have to govern globally to make effective and we need to share those resources, including looking at the global digital text as a very small portion of that going towards the indicators we need for governments to be able to use this data meaningfully.
The other point I want to make, we need new digital indicators.  We are looking at old Internet indicators.  We need indicators for the digitalization that we are seeing across our economies and societies.  That is what we try to do with the after access survey that we did together with LIRNEasia, and maybe Helani can post that access link for us while we are speaking, but that goes beyond ‑‑ there is my time.  It goes beyond the basic indicators to look at microwork, platform workers, mobile, done for a long period of time, Cybersecurity awareness, data governance, all the stuff that we need in order to govern, to be able to share data, to be able to allow data to cross borders, these kinds of governance arrangements that we need for data sharing that aren't even in place yet.  We need empirical demand side data to effectively govern these data governance.  Thank you very much.
>> ALEXANDRE BARBOSA: Thank you so much, Alison.  It is our great pleasure to listen to your bright insights.  I will not summarize what you said because I have to run to get Helani, so last but definitely not least, I will give the floor to Helani Galpaya from LIRNEasia, which is a important Think Tank in Asia Pacific, you probably know in terms of the work they do and research they do in terms of policy research on infrastructure industry including ICT industry.  Helani is very much involved in the production and also advocating for the need for data for evidence policymaking.  Let me ask you to share your experience with us, and give us your insights on issues such as privacy and Civil Society data sources and privacy of data in the context of a new data ecosystem.  Please, you have the floor.
>> HELANI GALPAYA: Thank you, Alexandre.  Thank you, Alison, for putting yourself on timer.  We are a Think Tank.  We are outside of Government.  We work in south Asia, southeast Asia.  We do both traditional survey related data collections, like after access which is useful, over the past 7 years, looking at big data and methods of using new sources of data and predicting certain social science behaviors using these sources of data.
A lot of work is, OECD is like fiction for us, we have over 90 percent penetration of cell phones, that is it.  There isn't a lot of things.  That is our IoT people walking around.  What really is for example negotiate three month old on running basis so historical, access to records from multiple network operators, for example, in Sri Lanka, we have used that data for major things including advising governments on transport planning how it should be, what is the change in nature of the city, in our part of the world, cities are changing so fast, even four year economic census is not going to capture residential versus commercial areas as part of the change.
To capture where people live, people migrate to at a given time, and to understand where diseases are spreading, by combining the people movement data with everything from rainfall and vegetation data, so to understand where the disease spreads.  One of the things that we worry about in using this proxy indicator of people is that whether this is really the signal that is seen in the core detail record of a Telecom operator is in fact a person, or there is multiple people.  We have signal from a human being, is important to address, given behavior that we know elsewhere.  We worry about who is in and who is out, while this is very nice, there is still at least 10 percent who don't show up with the phone signal.  How do we collect the data about them, and we worry about that all the time.
We of course worry about the personal information that is represented in this core detail records because it's, nothing if fully anonymized.  We assign a unique identifier, and it is at least in theory possible to go back and recreate some proxies for who these people are or where they might live.  In parallel we are doing research on how to use these large databases, where you can anonymize them to the extent they are not usable, to answer in these social science research questions we are asking, or you can use techniques like creating synthetic data, and we are doing this on creating synthetic data on call detail records for example, so that you have the same level of confidence and error rates and use ability of data sets, but there is a huge level of privacy preservation that also comes in return, beyond just anonymization.
Another type of research we do is to understand the long term changes in demand for skills and education.  For example, going back to UNESCO's, the skill frameworks, transfer of skills, we have data from large job platforms and we are anonymizing them using natural language processing, to understand what are the skills and how has the demand for it changed over short periods like pre and post pandemic but slightly longer periods, therefore what are the indications for vocational policy and so on.  In both of these, the way we have been able to access data provides one of biggest problems.  It is based on relationships.  Because we have had the relationships with many of the Telecom operators and have been operating in these markets for a long time, the job platforms, we are able to negotiate this data.  Unfortunately, this is still how the data is shared, and all the examples I heard from this panel is also because of power or relationships that you get the data, right?  While we are beneficiary of that, we have been on the other side of this also, because there is no common agreement on sharing even the basic Telecom data.  That is a fundamental problem.
What we have is large multinational companies and platforms coming and doing the reverse, not just giving their data to some one party, but coming and negotiating with governments in a way that nobody else can, no other small firm or Think Tank can or society can, and taking Government data, for example, and using it to do very valuable things, like highly sensitive modeling which can save lives because compared to physical model of flooding this alerts people 48 hours before.  This is fantastic.  We can issue an alert.  But why would the Government not make that data available, to insurance provider and research organization in the country.  Second, what are implications of all the time relying heavily on a model that is developed on data from India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, America and so on and getting results versus developing capacity in other countries because over time you are going to lose capacity and you are going to lose the ability to get models unless you have access to the core of the model and algorithm used by multinational.
The next time the flood hits and the multinational algorithm is wrong, who is going to take accountability for this?  We are not addressing a lot of these issues.  The whole ecosystem around data governance and sharing is problematic, big players are at a advantage.  Relationships are at an advantage.  Singapore is doing interesting work looking at small players can come in, contribute with their own data instead of having to make payments to access data.  We run into the problem of data provenance, when we talk to a NSO using these new methods, it is a skill issue, they don't know how to do it.  It is a different conversation from a stats Canada that we have in many of the south Asia countries, how are we doing, is the model reliable, transform modeling has been done in this way for ten years and so on.
I will stop there.  There are regulatory ways of getting people to come to the table, there are incentives which many of the people have talked about, and there are other innovative ways.  Thank you.
>> ALEXANDRE BARBOSA: Thank you so much, Helani, because you highlighted the fact that the context, the regional context like we are talking about Asia and southeast Asia is very different from Africa, from Latin America, of course from Europe and global north in general.  This pose different challenges in terms of access and data sources, and also in terms of fundings and sustainability.  Those are important issues that we have to keep in mind, because we are not talking about the same level of development in all these regions, Latin America and Africa and southeast Asia.
Thank you so much.  I'm really sorry that we are running out of time.  We have some questions, we had people following here in Zoom as participants, and also YouTube, as if I'm not mistaken, the peak of participants we are in the total Zoom plus YouTube about 45 people which is quite good audience for this topic.  If you are here participants, dear participants, it is because you have interest in data and in statistics and data production.
I think that some participants brought some questions that we are not going to have time to reply but I would like at least to acknowledge and to read them.  We have five questions, two of them was already replied by Jaco from UNESCO.  We have one, could you please share the data governance model used to gain insight for realtime decision‑making.  Second, how does data ownership, data stewardship managed in heterogeneous platform with public‑private partnerships, PPP, considering trust, transparency, to obtain a sharing economy.  Another question, regarding the organic data sources, accumulated by private entities, often used for private purpose, such as competitive insight, innovation, etcetera, how can we encourage owners to share the data with regional statistical office for the production of public statistics.  Next, so far, we have discussed the collection of data to monitor SDGs, but I'd like to be, I'd be interested to know whether the organizations represented here also model this data to predict the development of SDGs fulfillment.  That is a difficult question.  How can we assure that no one uses national data sharing global level for illegitimate geopolitical goals.  I think that we need globally agree that governance, conventional UN framework in this regard.  Another one, how, does the African Union has any plan for better data in Africa.  Last, what is the UNESCO UIS, what role is UNESCO playing in ICT data collection for monitoring SDGs, so very interesting questions.
But unfortunately, we don't have time to discuss.  I think that for me, I could learn a lot from your experience and your insight.  Of course, we didn't even touch things like bias of big data, coverage, issues related to coverage.  I guess that Alison has mentioned about representativeness of data for evidence based policymaking.  This is another issue.  Privacy, sustainability, funding.  So all these issues are important to be in the debate.
I think that today was just a flavor of what is waiting for us data producers, and key stakeholders in this ecosystems to discuss.  I was about to ask one minute round of last comment but I think I will skip that part because it's not possible to give a good message in one minute.  I would like to finish by thanking all the speakers.  I really appreciate your time, appreciate your being here.  And I would like to read what the UN IGF organizer has asked to form a call for voluntary commitments.  There is a call for voluntary commitment that has been launched, it is a call for voluntary actions or pledge for, to follow the goals of the Internet Governance Forum and the Secretary‑General roadmap for digital cooperation.  This is really relevant, in my opinion.  Any stakeholders can make a voluntary commitment of a action to be carried out during the 2021 cycle until next year IGF, 20201, that I really hope that we can be together face‑to‑face in Poland, I hope or beyond, actions that are supportive for achieving or implementing IGF objectives or action areas related to the Secretary‑General's roadmap.  Therefore, as moderator of this panel I invite all of you to respond the call for this voluntary commitments.  Your commitments can be done either verbally during the session that is finishing right now, and if you prefer, you can submit them through the Forum available for that purpose, which will also be facilitated in our chat box.  I guess that Ana Laura has already disseminated this link for you to reply.  But I will make sure that we will send a E‑mail to you with the link.  Self report and self evaluation of this voluntary commitments will be made possible through the IGF Secretariat Web site, and will be reviewed at the first open consultation.  Thank you so much for your commitment.  Please stay safe.  I send out the best energies to you in this very difficult and very strange moment that we are living.  Definitely, data production, data sharing, data governance is going to be a hot topic for us, and we have a responsibility in this debate.  Thank you so much and I wish you good day.  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws289-women-and-the-platform-economy-access-autonomy-and-agency-%E2%80%93-raw^^

Had to recognize some safety delivery workers that have trade union are represented by that and then we have floarnlg new type of which is called app which is process that is really interesting because it's workers that are struggling to have a new a new union be registered in the ministry of labor that is for representing all the apps.  Nonetheless one thing that is really ‑‑ that it's really bringing hope in the trade union process of the platform economy in Latin America is how they are becoming regional.  We have some ‑‑ we have had some experiences of trikes that are all over the region at the same moment in the same day.  And so we have strikes coming from Ecuador, Klum Bongani, Argentina and Chile, all the same day making a regional movement to protect the working cons of these workers.
Bogota.
>> Their their representation of Argentina and Ecuador is remarkable how women are leading the process of manage who have the trade union being shown and having demands of workers being put out so government tried to find a solution for these workers public opinion started talking about workers because they are in really bad conditions.  Leapt with struggles and need solution to the state.  In Argentina we're preparing a law to find an answer for workers and this will give them collective rights but also will do if you work less than 32 hours a week, then you have a more flexibles what you can do for timetables and what you can choose and also you have minimum coverage and if you work more than 32 hours, we're trying to prepare to put it in Congress and approve it in the next couple months they should be rights as worker but also the representation as a trade union improvement in artificial intelligence teefn ain Chile also the struggles and organization of workers is really answering some of the demands and they are also gaining some right but it's all through the judicial sector.  They have to case the file and have to make it a trial and gain rights, case by case.  And there's not ‑‑ even though there's some projects of law going in the Congress they didn't find a solution yet.  In some countries like alcohol ba this is not in the table.  The governments do not want to speak about ‑‑ Colombia.  They say they're entrepreneurs but I think ‑‑
>> Sophia, would you rap up in a minute.
>> Yeah.  I'm wrapping up.
>> Okay
S occasioner FIA:  I think the reg nam struggle is bringing flowers into this struggle because some countries do not want to answer to these demands and to the trade union boom and in general in Latin America the regional union, the regional strategy that these workers are having with the feminist movement specifically is going to bring answers I think in the next couple of months and years to come.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you for that Sofia overview of worker strategies as well as some gains made in the Latin America context which you already pointed out to give some kind of hope for workers globally.  So next we have looking at issues around autonomy.  So researcher, social entrepreneur and coordinator of social law project at the University of western Cape and she's also project manager for digital platform cooperative project.  Over to you.
 
>> F AI RU Z: Mullagee *   It's afternoon here and thanks to the previous speakers, I wasn't entirely sure how the program was run but I'm pleased that I've been left for the last input because I do believe that autonomy depends access and action that will determine the nature of ought on me.  Access and agency.  As I preparing this I thought it was necessary when we look at how to imagine social protection of platform work, my background, my research has been with domestic work sector in South Africa mainly.  And familiarity with domestic work in other parts of Africa.
And I think it's important also to note that you know South Africa was one of the few countries to have legislation specifically for domestic workers as early as 2012.  Played a very important role in the adoption of convention win eat 9.  That as a background alsos in terms of when we're reimagining social protection in the age of platform work, we assume that there has been a shift.  And I felt it's important to just reflect on what that shift has been.  We talked about you know we come from a kind of organizational work ‑‑ organization of work in terms of what we referred to as standard work.
Somebody goes to an office or whatever the case may be.  And legislation has been sort of very much developed around standard work and organization of work in a very standard kind of way.
Then we saw a shift to non‑standard work with agencies, sort of intervening in that relationship process.   You know, so taking the direct relationship between employer and employee away.  Until we find ourselves in this situation referred to as the platform economy.  And bear in mind that my you know what sort of lies behind my thinking is very much the domestic work sector which is predominantly women in South Africa.
So what has been the digital impact.  I think there's a lot of mist fiction of technology which I think also clouds the issues that we've been dealing with.  And so the challenges and over time from standard work to platform work what we've seen is the evolution of labor acts and Social Security rights.
So that is sort of permeated the shift that you see to where we are now.  And what does that really mean.  Economic and social exclusion, unemployment, poverty and hunger.  And sadly, the pandemic has amplified those issues and the cracks in our society.
At the same time we do believe ‑‑ and having worked in the sector which has often been described as hard to organize sector, we see the technology as an opportunity as a tool for transformation.  So on one hand we see it as a tool for transformation.  And on the other hand, we see it as an opportunity for reorganizing work and society with improved collective bargaining because we've seen out collective bargaining has also been eroded.  So.
So I'm pleased to hear what's happening in Latin America.  And the kind of solidarity which has been both among platform workers there.
One of the big issues and it's come up here.  I think Sofia mentioned it.  Is this notion of misclassification.  The misclassification of workers as independent contractors.  And that obviously revolves around the relationships and it's about ‑‑ we talk about misclassification in terms of relationships based on existing laws.
So we see with platform owners, the obfuscation of employment relations.  They've given up the responsibility as employers.  They argue and we've seen it in our platforms with domestic workers as well.
They are kind of driven by algorithms, and they can turn you off if they establish a patterns of organization so they just discontinue or disconnect you from the platform.  They found that the same would apply for workers who become ill, you know, you just get deactivated from the platform.  When you inform your company that you've ‑‑ that you're pregnant.  And in total contravention of the laws.  So those are relationships.  The misclassification enabled platform owners to have the kind of power that we've seen exerted over workers acrosser the world.  But we've also seen challenges to that kind of misclassification.
So in terms of this relationship you have a platform owner, and you have the end users.  And you have the providers of goods and services what we would refer to as workers.  I've spoken about some of the deficits, the social prediction deficits created by this new way of work.  Exclusion, we see greater unemployment.  Digital inequality itself is exclusionary.  Many platform workers are less skilled, you know, your more informal workers, exclusion is a big problem.  Remuneration another big problem.
You know, platform workers are made to be we are told constantly, in terms of the domestic work in this country the minimum wage is very, very low and platform companies will tell you but we pay our workers way above the minimum wage.  They don't tell you that they have now excluded ‑‑ may seem like you're learning a lot more on a gig by gig basis but you've been totally excluded from the kind of social predictions that the law and labor law in the country and constitution allows for.  So you're made to believe that you're earning more when in fact you're actually have been excluded from other social benefits.
Working conditions again it's made ‑‑ workers are made to believe that you have great flexibility.  But what is not communicated or it's kind of how people are fooled to believe that you're flexible.  You can work when you like.  But what in fact happens isation of work ‑‑ fragmentation of work.  On one hand workers are required to carry the cost between gigs which doesn't happen.  A standard employment situation.  For that to organize another deficit which you know curtails the ability to conditions companies name an algorithm.  It's all about the tick.  In domestic work in women's work we also we very diminishment reducing work we see this constantly cleaning services and perpetuating old cleavages.  So you know, where do we go from here.  How do we ensure greater protections.   You know, based on literature, based on our domestic workers of the year's ‑‑ I'd also like to point out that the issues that domestic workers have faced in the 10 years that I've been working in the sector, are exactly the same issues that workers are facing today.  Definitely of organizing fragmentation.  The fact that work is so optimized, which makes it hard.  You don't know who the employer is.  You are running to create and ensure that you have an interim that organizing ‑‑ you know becomes secondary to your survival.
So in terms of going forward, what kind of regulated frameworks can be designed to protect platform workers.
And you believe promotion of rights and protection should be the underlying feature of the new ‑‑ way regulation isn't adequate when new regulation is required.  So a pushback against this super exploitation that we've witnessed with platforms in recent times.
So promotion of rights and protection which actually seriously pushes back this super exploitation, appropriate regulation of work especially platforms, and then that needs to be placed on the agenda once again it doesn't matter whether you are in a platform or what is a platform anyway?  The issue of misclassification ‑‑
 >> MODERATOR: Sorry, just ask you to wrap up now in another minute, Fairuz.
>> FAI RU Z MULLAGEE:  Just quickly in terms of principles that should govern such a prork, preliminaries of fair work, principles that counter act monopolistic behavior.
And if I can just wrap up, you know, and say again, autonomy based on principles of fairness as the outcome of access and agency would require organized and empowered platform workers.
And thank you for the time.
 
>> Thank you, thank you for taking us through some key structural challenges around the needs of work ‑‑ nature of work as well as some of the solutions and ways to go forward.
So I would just request all the participants to type on chat if you have any preferences for the breakout sessions that you want to join.
So there are three breakout rooms and each of the speakers will be in the breakout rooms that they spoke about.  So there's one on agency.  There's one on autonomy and one on access.
You can just type in the chat if you have a preference for any of these.
And I would request Maria to just assign randomly if there are people who haven't shared their preferences as well.
So we have about 20 minutes left in the session.  So we'll take about 15 minutes.  And I would ask Maria to bring us back with five minutes to close.
(Breakout session) the law gives you all the rights of the national law but with the flexibility, let's say if you work two hours, then your employer should be putting the amount of money to the Social Security that corresponds to those two hours.  And if you want Social Security, you need to pay the rest.  And if you want to enter to healthcare system for example.
And for example vacations, you have vacations but only for those two hours that you work.  So it's like they give you a personage of the amount of hours you work in a month.  And the salary also it's a calculus made by our minimum wage law.  And it's a little bit above the minimum wage but you need to have the salary according to the amount of hours you work.  And the only thing that we did is that we put a clause that says you cannot reflect assignment that the platform is giving to you because otherwise the problem will be that workers will say I have a minimum wage but I do not take any jobs.  And the company has to pay me nonetheless.
So we said that you can't unless you case a file ‑‑ you file a case saying that you don't want to do some specific delivery because the customer is really bad and harasses you or ever.  In that case you can but can it not say no.  You are too far away and whatever.  If you work more than 32 hours a week, you work more than 32 hours a week, then you have the right to ask for all the coverage that our national law has.  And so in that case, the company has to pay you full Social Security, full healthcare, full full wage, you have the right to have vacation as normal as any other, woulder in Argentina and you have to work more than 32 hours a week.  If you work less, then you have this flexible type of system where you get paid by a percentage of what you work.
And .
>> Sorry, Sofia, I wanted to know about the women workers.  So this law is for all the workers.  But what about ‑‑ what are the issues and concerns about women workers there?
>> With women workers there's a specific clauses in the law that says that the algorithms cannot discriminate against them and that the ministry of labor can see the algorithm and source code whenever they want to.  To check if there's discrimination against women and if there's an algorithmic bias.  And also you can choose your schedules according to your care work that you have at home.  Even if you are into the more than 32 hours a week system, you can choose your schedules.  And you can conciliate the productive and reproductive work.  In case you work more than 32 hours.
So that's the answers that we gave to women.  To check the source code and to check the algorithm because there's a lot of algorithmic bias and that's the answer that we gave to women.  This is being discussed.  It's not approved yet.  You cannot say that this is the case for the Argentine law because it's in this discussion and they're preparing this to send it to Congress.  It's not in Congress yet.  But we're trying to make a solution for them in terms of technical issues and in terms of care work.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Sofia, do you think this will address the issues that were highlighted in the presentation around unfair pay as well as company policies that are disallowed women workers from designing schedules where they can take up work in the night for example. 
>> SOFIA:  Well I don't think a law can answer all the problems but, if the ministry of labor closed the right to check the algorithm and check evaluation system, maybe you can stop some of the problems like the pay problem and algorithmic bias.  But the fact that women tend to choose night hours because during the day ‑‑ thaptz not something the law can solve.  You need a more social and national policy to address that.  That the problem is that you don't have care networks to give ‑‑ to leave your kids.  That's the problem.  You cannot go through a law and platform workers but it should be solved in another way trying to build care networks.
Because that's the main issue that women do not have a place to leave their children so they have to work in crazy hours.
And so I think it's not the answer you should not be looking at the platform law but to other type of instruments.
 
>> We have two more minutes if anybody has any other questions or things to discuss?  If not, I can just talk about another issue that we were looking at in the Pakistan i context.  We found that there was a solution to the fact that platforms often outsource, there's a message to return to the main session.  But I'll just quickly finish.  We saw that in the Pakistan i context a lot of women were continuing to remain with on demand platforms because instead of outsourcing indirect costs like transportation, the main platforms there specifically for domestic workers are covering those indirect costs such as transportation such as using data packs in that.  So that actually went the long way in retaining workers on the platforms.  And we hadn't seen this before in other countries.  So I wanted to mention that as a strategy.  Retain women workers.
As a message to return to the main group, I think we can just click on leave room and we can return to the main session.
Thanks to Sofia and everyone else for this discussion.
 
>> Can we take an extra five minutes?
>> Okay, thanks.
We'll just wait another minute for everyone to come back.  And then we can start with the report back.
So just for people who are joining in now, we are doing a short report back.  Because it's okay for us to run over by around 10 minutes.
So we'll start with the session on agency if that's okay. 
>> TANDON:  You want me to speak.
>> We'll just do a short report back, I meant access, not agency.  Sorry.
>> SOFIA.
>> AAY USH:  Yeah, so one of the key questions that came up was around sort of what skills would be important in especially in light of the sort of barriers to ‑‑ and then sort of enabling effect of participation in the platform economy.  And none of us were very well placed to completely answer that question.
 
Yeah.  We spoke about how we have the ability to do financial transactions continues to be an important problem.
Someone spoke about how learning for government when it comes to getting for using digital application is different dpr that for men and women.  That is smag that needs to be factored in.  We spoke about how it is important to further non‑technical without which they receive ‑‑ more and more unavailable to men especially ‑‑ and this is a finding especially from our experience at the grassroots.  And then we spoke about what can we do to make sort of access to the platform economy more sort of equitable in terms of design the platforms or behavior or even government action.  We ‑‑ the group specifically about how we need to talk about ‑‑ talk more about how accessing it is not regularly helpful and as someone pointed out in presentation does not lead to effective participation.  And yeah and how the experience ‑‑ how sort of the offline norms sort of that country existed and structuring of society already precludes access to phones, access to financial agency.  And how the SNG model could be an effective one and someone else talked about an interesting point again on how men learn from other men but the rest of the thought was we got interrupted by us coming into the main.  If you'd like to finish thoughts on chat, please do.
 
>> Thanks for that would Sofia or anyone else want to report back on the second group on agency?  .
>> I think you can go ahead
>> Okay. great.
>> Tandon:  Great.  So there was a session on agency we were largely discussing Argentinean law and soaf I don't was telling us about how the process actually came about so there was a lot of national coverage and attention paid to workersish eufs in the platform economy and after that gained traction there was some discussion and consultation around not putting workers in the sort of national law because that might be the easiest solution the national labor law that might be an easy solution but but a lot of workers were migrants or students and they wanted the flexibility that the platform economy was bringing.  So the draft law that came up after this consultation process sort of prorated some of these benefits such as taking or getting social security contributions from employers.  These are all ro rated and salary as well, of course, are prorated to the number of hours that you are working.  If you're working more than 32 hours a week, you get all the rights that are available in the national labor law.
And with regards to women workers in particular, there is a provision for an audit which would allow ministries to look at whether or not there are gender biases and women workers can choose try to make their schedules more flexible even if they are working for more than 32 hours.  They will try to balance the productive work.
So this was all insight on the Argentinean law by Sofia which was very useful.
And yeah, we briefly discussed some industry strategies as well but this was a lot of our discussion.
I'll hand it over to the third group to do report back as well.
 
>> Hi, everyone.  I can report back ‑‑ if Fairuz if that's okay with both of you.
So we had ‑‑ we mainly focused on the question of what kind of regulatory framework could we design to make platforms more accountable.  It was generally agreed that regulatory frameworks are essential.  But only if their implemented properly and yeah, the implementation of such frameworks was raised as something that's quite difficult to do and there was a focus on South Africa context where it was mentioned that in South Africa particularly for the domestic work sector there have been specific laws created to protect domestic workers.  However, these laws haven't had the best implementation which kind of limits their effectiveness.
There was also a discussion around kind of what Fairuz mentioned in her presentation.  We really need better working agency and access to improve laws under implementation.
So both workers and users of the service need to be empowered to demand more equitable use of the services.  Unless that level of organization is improved, difficult to implement the kind of changes we'd like to see.
Moe mentioned there's been a lot of movement in the platform economy organization space particularly in India over the past several years.  Also in other countries as well.  In India there are several unrecognized worker collectives for gig workers.  But still without improving worker agency these laws are not going to change.
At the end Fairuz mentioned that fair work's code of good practice is a good starting point for considering how to improve the platform economy in terms of contract management pay and representation.
And that, like, discussing the fair work principles in kind of such a setting as this with like minded individuals is a good place to start to kind of push for better regulatory frameworks.
I hope I covered everything, if not, then please step in, someone.
 
>> I think that brings us to the end of our session.  And it was really interesting.  The presentation about the nuances of women's access to platform work you know the way access doesn't guarantee good work.  Thank you to Sofia for bringing us insights from what's happening in Latin America and how worker agency is being rethought of and immunization efforts going on there.  Thank you to Fairuz telling us about autonomy and how access and agency is really needed to forward that and the principles of fair work need to be followed in order to improve working conditions for everyone.
Thank you, everyone, for joining us and participating in the breakout rooms and for all your contributions as well.  I do have to ask if anyone would like to make voluntary commitments for the IGF.  If you would like to we can put the form in the chat box where you can sign up.  This will run for the next year.  So until the next IGF session.
Thanks, everyone.  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws343-imagining-an-internet-that-serves-environmental-justice-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> PAULA MARTINS: Good morning.  Welcome, all.  We hope you can give us a few minutes, we're solving some final technical issues because we want you all to see each other and to be able to speak when you want to share your views so everyone will be promoted to speaker.  We're just finishing that and we can start. 
>> Everybody is a panelist.
>> PAULA MARTINS: Thank you.  Welcome to Imagining an internet that serves environmental justice.  This is a workshop that's coorganized by APC, by blue link and others.  A few housekeeping announcements to begin with.  Since ‑‑ well, now that we have solved the problem, you can all see each other, you can always use the chat, but we will have a space for dialogue, for interaction, for questions at the end and we hope that you can open your mic and participate and you can see each other and take the word and open the mic and we'll have a space for that.
There is interpretation, it is only available in Zoom, in the live streaming, YouTube you will only hear the original audio and people will be speaking different languages.  Be aware of that.  Maybe a reminder perhaps to all of us, to speakers and participants, because we are using translation, because we have interpreter, we ask you to please speak slowly and clearly when you take the word.
I'll start by introducing myself, I'm Paula Martins, policy advocacy lead at APC, an international organization and a network of Civil Society organizations that was founded in 1990.  We're dedicated to empowering, supporting people working on Human Rights, protection of the environment through the strategic use of ICTs.  So environmental concerns are really part of the DNA of APC.  The concerns have been there since the creation of the organization.  This year, in 2020 gival really a renewed commitment from our members, including blue link and other, we decided to address with a specific focus, environment sustainability concerns and we have carried out activities to identify new priorities for working this area and to coordinate efforts with members and partners and this workshop, it is part of the efforts as well as the research that will soon be presented by my colleague Alan Finlay.  With that, I pass on the words so you can introduce yourself.
>> IARA MOURA: Hello, everyone!  Good morning!  Here in Brazil it is still morning!  Intervozes is a Civil Society organization striving for communication rights that existed for more than 17 years and most recently we have come closer to APC, we have integrated into the APC network and we have been working internally to solve issues related to environmental justice and how it is tied to communication.  We have been following up on tragedies and crimes that have been committed against the environment, most recently, the leakage of oil in the Brazilian coast and this is related to communication rights and freedom of expression.  I thank you for this opportunity.  I'm happy to be here sharing all of these notion was you.
We need to dare imagine an internet that contributes to the fight for environmental justice. 
>> PAULA MARTINS: I don't know if Pavel Antonov ‑‑ he was having some problems to connect.  Just checking if he managed to?  I don't think so.  Okay.
I just wanted to share a little bit of what we have been doing today with you.  I'll be sharing very briefly some ideas regarding the thinking behind this workshop, the conversations we have been having on this area.  We'll pass on the word to Alan Finlay that will present research that we're doing with members and partners trying to map the environmental in a rights and we'll have interaction with invitees working on two questions and our idea is that our invitees will come up, bringing up key ideas to the table and we'll open up, have a conversation with you all.
In terms of how we have been framing this work, in the session, we'll be exploring the links between different rights and different rights movements.  Our goal is really to identify the crossroads that could allow us to start building a common agenda between different movements.  We'll make reference to different categories of rights.  We'll be talking here about Human Rights, environmental rights, digital rights.  In one way we consider that this division is actually artificial, digital rights are like the new face of Human Rights in our contemporary digital societies and by referring to digital rates we're talking about how technology and in particular ICTs impact on the manner in which we exercise our Human Rights both online and offline.
Environmental rights, they're not yet created in international law the same status as Human Rights but we believe they should and we call on the UN in particularly the UN Human Rights Council to do so.  The truth is, many of the challenges that impact on these categories of retes, they're intertwined, especially as they effect individuals and communities in situations of vulnerability and marginalization.  These communities are always the most impacted by violations of human, digital and environmental rights.  Take, for example, indigenous groups in the Amazon, they're struggling for the protection of their lands, for their forest, for their culture and in doing so, they have several of their human and digital rights violated, they are threatened, many are killed, they have no access to communications to tell the world about what's going on, to share the stories, many are surveilled, and what we think that the relationship between technology and the environment, it is quite complex, while technologies many times are seen as the solution, as the best tool to face climate change and environmental degradation, increased production of ICTs are contributing in harmful ways to impact land on mining and as already mentioned, leading to violations of Human Rights, including labor related violations and many others.  Really for us, Human Rights, digital rights, environmental rights, they should be taught as a continuum.  However, of course, the movements working on this different area, they have not always joined forces and we have considered these enormous areas we can face, we cannot tackle them in isolation any longer, the question, it is how can this movement overcome the challenges of speaking a different language, of working on different policy spaces, of using different strategies, and actually managing to work on a shared agenda.  This is really what we want to discuss here today.  We're seeking to identify the foundations for a rights‑based governance to the internet that takes into consideration environmental rights.  In order to proceed with our conversation, I'm going to stop again and just see if Pavel managed to join us?  No.
Let me introduce you to a tool we'll be using today, as I said, we'll open up with two questions that we'll present to speakers, but we want you all also to reflect on these questions, maybe if you could share the screen now and present our tool..
This will take you to a shared drive and then you will have the two questions we'll discuss today, how are the environmental rights intersecting with digital rights.  Very broad questions.  What we want with the first one, can we go to the following slide?  We want to identify in concrete terms how the rights are reinforcing each other, how they're conflicting with each other, there is a potential for conflict and the next one, if you would like to think of other ways that they're intersecting with each other, you use the third slide and you can just take one of these post‑its and write the idea in the post‑its.  What we would like do, you go to this tool, you insert your own comments and then while you're doing that, you look at the other comments that are there, maybe you agree, think that there is a very good point that was already raised by someone else.
We invite you to drag one of the signs that you have on the bottom, and you cast your vote next to the ‑‑ we're just showing the plus one, I agree with that point so that we can really collect priorities.
Please just show ‑‑ just include your own ideas, but also if you would like to reinforce, support other people's ideas, please use the plus sign and we can also have these understandings about commonalities and priorities and then the second question.
Let's go to the second question.
It is how can digital rights and environmental defenders work together towards shared priorities and here we again have different slides.  What we thought about, what we thought we could explore in the first slide is really the different levels and we could work together, you take the post‑it, you drag it, you try to identify if this is something that they could be doing at the global, regional, local level and again, you have the plus sign there, so if you want to agree, with other people's ideas, you have that option.  Could you move to the next slide?  So we always give you the possibility as well if you want to use another ‑‑ you want to make the comments irrespective of this, you use this slide, and you just leave your messages there.
You can always copy and paste the slides.  If they're over, we have the final slide at the end that has a number of extra post‑it, you just copy, paste, cut and paste.
We have shared the link.
What we will do now, we'll really while we're listening to our speakers, we invitatory next, to take note of any key points that you hear and really engage using this tool with the conversation that will be taking place among them and now I can see that Pavel has joined us.  Welcome!  I just explained the tool and introduced the questions.  It is over to you for introducing your speaker, yourself, moving on.
>> PAVEL ANTONOV: Hello, everyone.
I'm Pavel Antonov.  I'm representing BlueLink.  The Bulgaria Civil Society network.  As you see, I'm having significant troubles handling technology which my organization is a member of promoting for the last 22 years!  I'm particularly excited to be at this workshop because it is a next step in a process which has taken as I said over two decades for us, BlueLink started as a network for Civil Society, environmental groups in Bulgaria, back in the time when the internet was a very new, exciting opportunity for all of us, and we thought it would provide the solution for most of our problem, protection and making our societies more sustainable.  This didn't quite work like this, as you know, over the past ten years we have seen an interesting new shift which is in a few words, it is that we have unprecedented access to technology as citizens, as activists, as users and we have really unfortunately, unprecedented created our impact, we have ‑‑ in the green movement, we're working with, we're experiencing signature pressures and difficulties in the internet and information technology, they're not providing the solution we expected.  Here we are, back with APC, thank you to APC for making this happen, for making another step in the process which took off almost two years ago now for a second time as more than ten years ago we already had our green and IT initiative and we were already then taking, and now we're back on to the conceptualization and we had Working Group or a discussion within APC and then we had previous IGF that was a turning point for us when we could discuss with members and external partners the issues and then ideas started to shape that we should be looking at the points where digital rights and environmental rights crossed each other and we should look analytically at the various aspects of the crossroads.  This is technological crossroads, this is also policy crossroads and even crossroads in terms of how do we as Civil Society on both sides of this divide support each other. 
We had two events at the right com giving us more specific input and here we are, I'm glad to say that APC has done a marvelous job and we have already processes in place, analytical, research process, which we're happy to be able to hear the progress of.  I'm looking to find the workshop description and I will tell you in the details, as I was asked to present the speakers here as probably already heard is Shawna Finnegen from the IPC and you have heard from Paula, a policy expert of the APC, but the second coorganizer is Intervozes and among speaker, we have Iara Moura of Intervozes, we have.
>> MARYELLEN CRISOSTOMO: , representing the national coordination of articulation of black rural Quilombla Communities and Alan Finlay, the researcher leading the analytical process I mentioned about, the open research, we have Leandro Navarro, the board member of APC and representing Pangea, a member of APC in cat lone I can't, and ‑‑ yeah, Paula, I already mentioned, Paula from APC.
>> PAULA MARTINS: We have done a first round of introductions, now we could move on to Alan..
Can you see that?  The slide?
>> ALAN FINLAY: Essentially, APC asked me to do a mapping of the environmental sector.  I'm calling it the environmental sector but I'm fully aware there is political problems with the word sector because of the implications because of economic structure, so on, but just as a convenes.  We wanted to understand better how the sector works because as explained, APC has been involved in environment activism for many years and some members at different levels but there is a gap in the macro understanding of how the sector works.  The research I have been doing includes interviews and surveys with APC members and environmental organizations.  Just for this IGF session we thought it may be good to present some of the ideas of the different groups in the environmental sector, what I will do now.
Essentially, I'm going to suggest that there are 6 groups, this is from the interviews.  This is not my analysis, it is what is an analysis from the interviews.
Essentially, the six groups, they can be distinct groups or they can be cross overs.  You need to sort of reboot at both levels.
The first one, obviously, the environmental justice movement.
The key issue around that, to understand, it is NGO, activists, there are strong networks and organization, Greenpeace and friends of the earth, those are two of the biggest, most powerful, Greenpeace is not a network organization but very powerful, friends of the earth is a network organization and the biggest and most important grouping is the Indigenous Peoples and local community groups and that is essentially when we talk about the environmental justice movement, we talk about those groupings.  The other actors in that space, the governments, the UN, big business, it is a major important other actor besides government.  The UN pays a convening role between the two groups or of the three groups rather.
The big business, it is the agri businesses, they have been described as very legal and lots of legal power and many behind it because it costs lots of special interests involved.
At the UN level, the thing we need to understand, it is at the level of conventions, agreement, it is very, very structured.  It was described as an activist, there isn't really ‑‑ of course, there is work to be done, as always, it is a very structured space and the UN play as very structured role in that space, to the point that because this is an antagonistic space with environmental justice movements the UN separates business and the environmental justice organizations and Indigenous Peoples organizations in the global forums.
This is a first obvious difference between the internet governance space and the environmental space because in this level, they don't like to use the word multistake hold, they don't use it.  The UN talks about stakeholders and other groups and the primary reason for that, Indigenous Peoples, local communities insist that they're right holders, not stakeholders because they insist they don't have the same power as big business and they don't want to be called stakeholders.  We, in the internet governance space, including the IGF, of course, talk about the multistakeholder environment, promote that environment, certainly when it comes to environmental justice, that's not a word frequently used and it is deliberately not used.
As I say, at the global level, the groups, they're kept apart.  The UN apparently has preevents for businesses and NGOs, it is not the mixed space like the IGF and I was told by one of the activists that an event like the IGF, at the global, the regional level, would be virtually impossible, including at the sponsorship level from business.
Structured at the global level, the regional level, it is messy and diverse and one of the reasons, it is not all countries are assigned to the same agreements but probably more important, it is that with technology and the internet, this is a general statement, it tends to come from the global downwards, right, the technologies get developed in the Silicon Valleys around the world, within China, within the U.S., Japan, the first experience in adoption happens in developed countries and as a result the first advocacy and the first policy directives and the first policy work and legislative work tends to happen at that level.  Of course, there is the reverse that can happen and we all have many examples of that, of the general trends.  It teams to be a topdown adoption of technology and of policy.  A clear example of this, it is the general do the protection regulations in the E.U. around privacy which are used by many African states as model templates when developing their data privacy legislation.  Within the environment, it is not a technology, it is not a standardized technology as much as we can call the internet standardized.  It is about the environment.  Of course, it is about biology, zoology, frlora, fora, animal, people at the local level.  That means countries have different issues that are not necessarily always replicated in other regions.  At the regional level, the issues are different and there are some issues that don't make it to the global level.  Environmental advocacy, it is a bottom up approach necessity of what they're talking about.  This is an interesting dynamic that it would be interesting to explore more here..
This is strong amongst environmental justice groups and there is some isolation, groups like friends of the earth play a pivotal role and the strawberry effect, it is that's how the network seems to work and I was given an example of an ordinance banning banana spraying in Costa Rica was linked to other issues and it was done by friends of the earth.  They play a very, very important role as a network.
The second thing, the conservation grouping, they could ‑‑ there are different organizations that are powerful, the wildlife national fund, conservation international, Interpol, conservation, it deals with crime too and this is another distinction that you need to think to what extent corruption, crime, law enforcement is relevant in this space..
You see things like this in the industries.  It is described, what is heave‑described to me as a pale male sector and this is because it is sort of to some degree it grows out of the colonial past of the idea of conservation, protecting natural resources in Africa, for example, perhaps even in the Amazon region, colleagues can tell me more about that, there are movements more and more into areas of local livelihood, community projects, there is community engagement but it is a multistakeholder environment, they don't have problems with the environmental justice groups, governments, they lack the space because there is no call for systematic change and yet they can be seen to be doing good work, of course.  But they have the panda branding on the government logos and apparently it is not uncommon for government employees to go work for the world wildlife fund and this cofunding happening and some levels of conflict between conservation and environmental justice, for example, they may be researching snake venom in a conservation area but environmental justice people will raise issues about piracy.
This is a multistakeholder environment as we use the term in the internet governance, community, it involves community, entrepreneurs, this is the language, social responsibility, a strong services industry, it is a very expensive industry, conservation is very, very expensive.  The third grouping, one that we all ‑‑  the third grouping, it is University base and conservation groups and they are apparently not strong Lynette worked, I just spoke to someone in the region, it is more about who you know in universities, the language, it tends to be similar but they do education, they work through education and persuasion in that sway.  It is not policy advocacy but at the research, trying to persuade local level governments to adopt environmental friendly approaches.  You can see the language in circular economy, open dot, sharing the information.
The social science, a crosscutting issue, mixed groups gathered around issues of the Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement, land and land use and some new movement of the indigenous sector coming in and Indigenous People coming in that issue of land, land use and that's a mixed group, climate action network is a good example, then you have the legal and environmental justice lawyers and the youth groups which are the Gretas and her alliances, they tend to be more and more in the environmental justice side.  I leave it at that.  Hopefully this is useful to sort of not think of the environmental sector as what is it about but how it is different and distinct groups working in that area.
Thank you. 
>> PAVEL ANTONOV: Thank you for the presentation.
I'm particularly happen to see it shaping and sort of providing more specific inputs on the discussion.  I need to introduce one more speaker that will be from the Civil Society African Group and that's Yunusa Ya'u, as it seems from my plan, I should pass him the flurry now.
>> YUNUSA YA'U: Thank you very much.  I'm Yunusa Ya'u from Nigeria.
>> PAULA MARTINS: I think you had the word to not only introduce yourself but to go on and address the two questions.  We have a round of answers from each of the speakers and they'll choose between the two questions that were presented before.
>> YUNUSA YA'U: Thank you for that clarification.
I think I would like to address the first question, the intersection between the digital rights and environmental rights.  For me, there is actually no two distinct different rights.  It is a question of emphasis.  I would like to use three different instances to show this when we consider discovered rights and what we consider to be environmental rights.  Environmental rights, it is actually about an issue of scalability, how people are in a healthy environment, the last one is access to information, access to education.
Given that the education and information, it is increasingly migrating online, people can only have education through access to digital means and also have information to digital means, it means that if education is a right, then the tools to assess education and to assess information actually are rights and therefore at the core of having access to education, it is actually the right to access to digital tools, access to digital technology, so forth.  Therefore, we kind of talked about the ‑‑ we talked about the environmental rights without ensuring that you have access to education and access to information.
Secondly, environmental rights, it is the citizens participation in terms of decision making as to the environment and they should invoke what should be taken and so forth.
This is really a question of participation.  We know that today participation is digitally available.  So being included digitally, it means people can be able to participate in decision‑making processes, and once you're excluded, you're not able to participate.  Therefore, the right to access, the right to participation, it is central to the issue of how we manage and how we live in the environment.  You can look at the participation and the decision making on the environment and the Human Rights participation under the tools for participation and decision making.
There's a question about affordable and clean energy, again, it is a question of choices.  If people are excluded in their perspectives of those issues, they're also exterior included, the issue of environmental justice, it is about inclusivity and that's central to digital rights.  So for the rules of the environmental rights, it is actually the issue of digital rights and so the issue of separation between the two, they're just simply a question of emphasis in terms of two different sectors for people in the environmental movement and emphasizing the digital rights, that's different and those people in digital rights, they look at the differences.  It is just about kind of what is the platform Spectrum in terms of articulating the rights and incentives.
Thank you.
>> PAVEL ANTONOV: Thank you.
Do we need to follow a certain order?  Shall we just invite the next panelist ‑‑
>> PAULA MARTINS: Feel free to choose the other.  Just note that we're a bit late so I will ask everybody to stay to the 5 minutes so that we still have time for a brief description at the end. 
>> PAVEL ANTONOV: Let's not move any more time.
Shall I ask Leandro Navarro to come in?
>> LEANDRO NAVARRO: Hey.
I'm Leandro Navarro.  I'm a researcher at the University in Barcelona and also cofounder of Pangea since 1993 and board member of APC.
I'm just going to try to give an answer to the first question.  You know the ICTs technologies, it is unfortunately part of the problem of the environmental problem and also potentially might be part of the solution.  I would say that our rights, when talking about rights, this is human‑centric, we're the subject of the rights, either the digital rights, the environmental rights and we see and worry about nature as our environment so obviously it is ‑‑ so the natural environment, it has a clear impact on the Rights of humans in different contexts and it can enhance or reduce the rights.  It can increase or reduce inequality, discrimination depending how it is applied and we can increase or reduce our environmental footprint.  We know that we have a problem because for instance all these months we're regulated to online only and this is because we interacted in a certain way with our natural environment.  We are suffering the effects of that.  I wanted to share with you, like if you want to take a look, this diagram, this economic model, it says that we live in a small region in a safe, justice space for humanity sitting between the minimum social boundaries, determined by Human Rights, and the maximum planetary boundaries that are defining the environmental limits and to me, one way to see how we are trying to use the digital environment to be sustainable, it is this nut some way to be in this safe, just space, in our life, it requires a kind of self‑regulating system that maintains the conditions between the boundaries for life on the planet and this space, it can be seen as the right to nature as a global public electric good, something that's for everyone, he cannot exclude anybody to be a part of and enjoy this natural environment, but we have realized that there are limits and it needs to be carefully governed as global comments.
Our resource system, it is limited, it can be congested, so we have to make sure that we stay within the social and planetary boundaries.  Since there are both the social and the planetary boundary, we just can't call those rights, therefore, we have to work together to make sure that this self‑regulating system works effectively so that's my point regarding the first question.
>> PAVEL ANTONOV: Thank you.  Thank you.
Let's move on with some of the other speakers that haven't commented.
Would Iara Moura be willing to join in at this stage?
>> IARA MOURA: Yes.  I would like to contribute too.
Well, I wrote part of my contribution here in the chat to make better use of our time and not to lose time.  Okay.  Now I'm going to ask your permission to read this, what I wrote here.  Let's think about the two sides, how environmental rights and how social rights and internet governance is interconnected, how do they learn from each other, let's say?  There are many conflicts when it comes to access to water, to land, to those which are called the public goods.  There is also a lot involved in the fight against racism and against patriarchy and so there have been 29 groups organized over time in Brazil, all with their own history and characteristics, there can be commonalities.  There are big company was mega projects financed by foreign capital in the food industry, agri business, infrastructure projects, oil extraction, and all of those crow yeahs conflicts and the way that companies reduce and reproduce their lives every day.
Within this context, the internet, ICTs, they're a tool meant to improve the capacities, to improve the ability of the communities, to tell their own stories and to report the crimes committed by the governments and the private sector, however, the use of ICTs also creates many challenges regarding autonomy, there is also a greater state surveillance and private sector surveillance over the territories, and this deepens the inequality caused by gender, class, race.
So the way that the internet has been structured, the governance, the economic interests that shape social media, for instance, internet structures, they create further gaps in society and create gaps in the access of public goods and also only promote extractive activities and that goes against the way of living of traditional communities.  It is all based on profitability and the violation of Human Rights and exploitation of people who live in rural areas like Indigenous Peoples and black communities in Brazil.  There is a long history of all of this happening in Brazil.
Organization concepts can inspire our agenda to fight for digital rights and internet governance.  The idea of consent and self‑reliance, the previous consultation process which needs to provide more information to people are key when we talk about internet governance.  All of these concepts and practices are part of environmental policies and they need to be a part of policies that will have an impact on traditional communities.
Beyond the plans to ensure one way of connecting, and one model, Oneworld model, rather traditional communities in Brazil can provide different insights to create different models that go against this speech which involves only one development model based on economy and based on racism and based on the patriarchy.
The monitoring between Intervosas and connect, with 29 members of the communities in 11 states of the five regions in Brazil, it points out that the radio and the television are the means through which the communities gather information and then comes the internet.  Most people have low access to the internet, they have limited mobile data plans or they have prepaid packages so they are not having the necessary access to the internet or the ideal type of access that they could have.
We need to acknowledge the way in which traditional communities connect and we also need to promote the use of their own technologies that have been created for many years.  We're talking about satellite communication often wiring, all of these technological things, all of this is very important.
It is only to be implemented when there is informed consent and we also need to remember that the water, land and the internet as well, they are public goods.
This is not rather an answer to the question but it does provide interesting insights.  Thank you.
>> PAVEL ANTONOV: We have one more speaker on the list who didn't provide input, and that would be Maryellen Crisostomo.
>> MARYELLEN CRISOSTOMO: Good morning!  Yes.  I would like to speak as well.  My name is Maryellen Crisostomo, I'm Quilombola, I'm from a state located in the Amazon and I'm a part of communication group for the rural black communities in Brazil, it is a national coordination of articulation of black, rural, Quilombohic communities and I'm a student of the Portuguese language and I'll talk a little bit about what CONAQ has done for this Quilombohic movement in Brazil.  In 1996 in an evaluation meeting, it was the first Quilombohic rural group meeting carried out, the preliminary commission created the CONAQ, our national coordination, whose main purpose is to position itself as a social movement.  So CONAQ has been fighting as an institution for 25 years.  According to our finding document, the history of Quilombose is a history of resistant guaranteeing the existence of thousands of Quilomboses in Brazil.  It is difficult but we have had many achievements.  Resistance is the key of our process.  This is a historical process which is continuous.  There is a bifocal resistance to the past and the present, this is an element factor of our current organization.  Our organization is a non‑profit organization that represents most Quilombohic communities in Brazil, we have representatives from the Quilombohic communities from 23 states in the country.  (Listing the states).  
Our goals are the following, to fight for guarantees of collective use of territory, implementation of Sustainable Development models, implementation of public policies that consider the organizations of Quilombola communities and that are consistent with the Quilombola way of living.  We also prioritize the autonomy of Quilombola with women and want to promote participation of young people in Quilombola and promoting common use of territory, natural resources and the harmonious co‑existence with the environment.
Our 1988 constitution defined Quilombola as a traditional peoples from Brazil.  However, these rights that we're subject to, they're not always guaranteed, and there are many violations to the Human Rights, only in 1995 did we have a limited territory for the Quilombola community in Brazil which was contemplated by the 1988 constitution.
From then on, there's been very little progress.  The national geography and statistic institute in Brazil identified in 2019 that there are more than 5,000 Quilombola communities and we are present in 33% of Brazilian municipalities.  However, only over 270 territories have been reserved for these communities.  Without those reserve, without the territories, it is very difficult to fight for our rights and so the Brazilian government, they have cut the budget for these communities for years, which makes the protection of the territories even more complex.  In the face of all of, this our territories, they're now being invaded and our leader, they're being murdered in the name of agri business expansion in Brazilian territory.  Without the reserves, the territory is not possible to protect flora and fauna around us, the internet and ICTs, they're essential to our resistance process because it is only through them that we can show our level of marginalization caused by the state policies.  CONAC itself has monitored the COVID‑19 pandemic in the Quilombola territories and it is very difficult, in a very poor way probably, but through the ICTs tools we have at our disposal.  This is only because the Brazilian government has not shown any of the impact of COVID‑19 in our territory.  There are more than 44,000 people who have been infected by COVID‑19 so far and many deaths.  The Brazilian government has excluded the Quilombola communities from this new law promoted to ensure access to health system and it has been more than 60 days since we denounced them, however we have not gotten any reparations and we presented this to the Supreme Court in Brazil in the hopes that the justice system would help us during the pandemic.  However, 60 days have also gone by, and we have not reached any decisions, any agreements.
Even if Quilombolas don't have access to the internet as mentioned, at the beginning of the pandemic, alongside our partners and with other members of our network, we tried to identify who had access to communication, who had access to the internet and we realized that there is very little access to means of communication and actually the survey was carried out online and so there were few respondents.  We know that these are the only ways to which CONAQ and other civil society organization cans reach the societies during the pandemic, you have to mitigate the effects of the COVID‑19 while the Brazilian government is still rejecting our Quilombola concerns and demands.
In certain states, there are even more challenges and there have been blackouts and there has been no power for eight days.  This happens randomly and the only way to ensure that this does not happen is to put pressure on the capital government and the capitals of the state government.  There are people with no access to power or to communication tools.  The delays in the solutions coming from the government causes the Quilombola communities to fear a backlash when the situation comes back to normal.
We ask the international community to pay attention to what's happening in these communities in Brazil, especially the states where there are power outages and the Quilombola lives matter, our slogan is no lives should be left behind so that's what we need to do, we they had to keep fighting and I thank you very much for giving us this space to talk about this.
>> PAVEL ANTONOV: Thank you very much. 
This is shocking in one way and also quite valuable perspective which I believe we need to be exposed to much more often to set our minds right on how communities, indigenous communities, environmental groups can really benefit from the technology.  We have little time left, as I can see, I just want to mark two policy principles which I believe could be common in digital rights and in the environmental protection, environmental protectionly, we have something well‑known over the years as the precautionary principle, it is a principle which has no policy and technology should be in police before it is proven environmentally safe.  It is quite controversial because the industry dislikes it.  I believe this is a principle, digital rights could employ too and another, another interesting aspect, quite relevant with the debates we have here and in other countries about possibly the taxation of the information and technology industry because of its negative impacts on local economies and local communities by resources and so on.
This is environmental taxation, that's another shared principle.  Those are two principles which I will mark on the post‑its as a possible common area and we have more such principles in touching elements.
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws72-tech-for-the-planet^^

 
>> You can start as soon as you want.  Please go to the list of attendees and promote to panelist anyone who needs to be there.
>> BARBARA WANNER: I think you all should be able to speak.
>> Hello.
>> Hello.
>> BARBARA WANNER: We have everyone?  You can push the video icon.
>> Hello.
>> (overlapping speakers).
>> CAROLINE LOUVEAUX: I don't have that icon.
>> Nor do I.
>> BARBARA WANNER: We had problems with that yesterday with some speakers, you don't have the little icon in the lower left hand corner?
>> No.
>> BARBARA WANNER: I want to give, since we are beginning a little bit late, I wanted to give some general sort of housekeeping questions.  First of all, if any participants that have joined us and there are quite a few, we are grateful for that, if you have any questions, if you could, let's see, if you could just put, post those in the chat, and I will keep track of them, and we have allowed certain segments to entertain questions for, from the audience.  We will go to your questions then.
I wanted to give you, there have been a few changes to this workshop since we first filed the proposal.  First of all, my name is Barbara Wanner, U.S. council for international business, we co‑organize this with the Government of Switzerland.  This workshop is called Tech for the Planet, where we hope to highlight many exciting examples of how technology can help society tackle environmental challenges.  Jorge Cancio of the Government of Switzerland will be our moderator.  Before we begin, I want to draw attention to the important and related work by the youth for digital sustainability group at the IGF.  Four working groups produced 12 recommendations from the perspective of young people, and I commend the group's excellent work to you.  I will post that link in the chat in a second.  Also, I want to confirm who our speakers are this morning, because they have changed since we first filed the proposal.
We have Matt Peterson, director of Amazon's Climate Pledge Fund, Caroline Louveaux, who is executive Vice President of MasterCard.  We have Nick Wise, Western European and Others Group, and will provide IT perspective on technology environmental challenges, Paolo Gemma, senior specialist and representative of Huawei, and our unsung hero for this workshop will be Livia Walpen from the Government of Switzerland, our important substantive Rapporteur.  As many of you on the call and in the panel have probably been aware, this year's IGF planners are asking speakers to state their voluntary commitments.  I will post the link to that in the chat and encourage everyone to make use of it, if you feel more comfortable doing so as a organization or individual privately afterwards.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Good morning, good evening, welcome to my workshop on tech for good.  My name is Jorge Cancio and I work for the Swiss Federal Office of Communications.  The IGF is excellent venue for discussing digitalization environment.  That is why we supported this topic becoming the main track in this year's IGF, which comes with one main session and more than 14 sessions, on this we are more or less midway in this IGF and also in the environment sessions, and this is also the reason why we are working with the workshop organizers of this workshop.
Today we will hear and discuss exciting experiences and initiatives coming from different private companies, we will learn more about the work being done by the ITU in Geneva, it will be structured in four segments.  First we will have a scene setting with two perspectives, first from Amazon and then from ocean mind collaborating on the potential of technologies solutions to environmental problems, and here we will hear about the relevance of how ecosystems to human well‑being model abundance of data and the need for AI to house and understand the data.
Second, we will deep dive into four case studies and examples of solutions deployed in the field by MasterCard, OceanMind, Amazon and the ITU.  Third, we will then have a specific discussion about multistakeholder approach to saving the planet, where each speaker will provide impressions from various stakeholder perspectives on how their involvement is important to realizing meaningful solutions.  Finally and fourth, we will wrap up with a short take‑aways from the panelists, where they may also share their commitments to the IGF if any, and to further work in the intersection between environment and digitization.
Please use the chat pod for social exchanges and conversations amongst the audience participants, and if you wish to place a question for the panelists, please use the Q&A pod.  Barbara, please advise me also on, during the course of the session, if I oversee any questions.  So without further ado, I think let's start with the first segment where Matt Peterson and Nick Wise will proceed on the potential of technology to develop meaningful solutions, environmental challenges.  Just as a short introduction, Matt Peterson leads Amazon's Climate Pledge Fund, a two million investment program focused on supporting building new technologies that make the goal of becoming net zero achievable.  He is a experienced technology executive and joined Amazon in 2006.  Prior to that, he worked in private equity and cofounded a Internet start‑up.  Nick Wise on his part is founder and CEO of OceanMind, nonprofit organization, dedicated to protecting the world's fisheries.  Using artificial intelligence, OceanMind empowers effective fisheries enforcement and enables more responsible seafood sourcing increasing compliance and sustainability.
The floor is yours, Matt.  I hope the technicalities work.  You go first, and you have around five to seven minutes.
>> MATT PETERSON: Sure, can you hear me?
>> JORGE CANCIO: We hear you loud and clear.
>> MATT PETERSON: Thank you for the introduction.  It's a pleasure to be here.  I'm the head of the Amazon Climate Pledge Fund, and the Climate Pledge Fund is a two billion dollar investment vehicle started earlier this year as a complement to Amazon's climate pledge.  Amazon's climate pledge was a initiative announced last year where it's a commitment for Amazon to be net zero carbon by the year 2040.  And as part of that we are building a Coalition of other companies of similar size to Amazon to join the Coalition and share in that goal of being net zero by 2040.
One of the first things that we figured out after that initiative was set up was that in order for companies to get to net zero by 2040, the technologies that exist that will make that possible, a lot of them don't exist today.  These are things that are still being developed, the technologies are very new.  Products are still nascent.  Even if they are available, they are not at a scale that a company like Amazon or others in the climate pledge can take advantage of in the current form.  We thought about what a pledge fund would look like as a result of that.
We asked ourselves, if these companies that need to be supported to help Amazon reach its own goals of being net zero carbon, can somehow be accelerated and develop their products faster, get to the market faster and get funded easier, then that will benefit everybody involved on the pledge as well.  That is the goal of the Climate Pledge Fund, is to identify companies whose products, technologies and services will help Amazon and other companies get to net zero faster, and put money behind them to accelerate that effort.
The big difference between what we are doing and what other say venture capitalists are doing or other investment firms is that we are asking ourselves up front, is this a product or technology that Amazon can use, and we look through our investments through that lens.  If the answer is yes, that gives us an early look into what could be available, it helps us determine whether or not it's going to be a successful company or successful product, because it works for a company at Amazon scale it probably works for a lot of other companies too.  Most importantly, what we are doing for the companies is not just giving them money.  We are not just putting capital into their operations in looking for them to grow and hoping all will go well.  We are giving them money to grow, but also giving them a customer too.
The idea is that over time, we can support companies both by developing products and be one of their biggest customers going forward and help them sustain that over time.  An example of that, one of the first examples of the company where we have done this is with Rivian, a electric vehicle manufacturer.  It's gotten press lately, raised a lot of money, and we were an early investor in them in 2019.  As part of that, we invested hundreds of millions of dollars the same way any investor would, but later in the year we made public our commitment and made public our purchase of 100,000 electric vehicles from Rivian with the goal of within ten years to completely electrify our last mile delivery fleet.
As much as we are supporting Rivian from a investment perspective, the real value we are adding is supporting them from a customer perspective in buying 100,000 of their vehicles which will eventually aid Amazon in becoming net zero.  Ultimately, once we have done that, other investors who have seen the results of Amazon being a customer, the company has raised two or three billion dollars since then and they have a anchor customer to show it's beyond a prototype, beyond something theoretical.  It is usable by a company like Amazon.  That is the goal of the program, of the Climate Pledge Fund program, is to find other products and other companies similar to that, where we can be a customer to help us decarbonize, help other companies make climate pledge and help other companies around the world decarbonize with these technologies and support them both from a demand side of giving them business as well as supply side of giving them capital.
The program started earlier this year, in June.  We announced five investments so far.  Later in this program, I can walk through some of them, and how they fit with Amazon.  But by and large, what we are trying to do is use Amazon's scale and size to help these companies succeed because we have a common goal of decarbonization.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Great, Matt.  Thank you very much for keeping to time, and for very interesting how you are using scale both from the demand side and also looking for good investments to decarbonize and to help other companies.  I don't see any questions.  So I would pass the floor over to Nick Wise, who will set the scene for his side and what OceanMind is focusing on.  Nick, I hope also technologies are working on your side.
>> NICK WISE: Hopefully you can hear me.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Yeah.
>> NICK WISE: Fabulous.  Great.  Thank you.  OceanMind is somewhat different in that we are a implementation organization.  We are one of those organizations attacking environmental problems with technology.  The challenge that we face with environmental problems is that typically huge and interconnected thriving ecosystems are essential for our well‑being, and we rely on nature to provide us with food and oxygen, clean water, and habitable climate.  But damaged ecosystems provide less, less food, less oxygen, and as we have seen they have reduced ability to regulate the climate to maintain favorable conditions.
In recent decades, we have come to realize that although nature is vast, its balance is fragile and more easily disrupted than we previously thought.  To make progress on some of these big environmental issues, we need data, lots and lots of data.  Monitoring the state of a particular environmental situation, such as the rate of deforestation in an area, requires a vast array of sensors both local and remote to observe the situation.  Monitoring the impact on a change in the environment such as the impact of deforestation on biodiversity, oxygen production, carbon absorption and so forth is more complex.  Observing secondary effects and attributing them to a root cause is challenging and data intensive.  In times gone by, the data challenge would have been met by scientists observing events, supported by imagery, but all manually processed.  It was a arduous process.  It worked at a site level but didn't scale well.  But today the world is a different place due to technology.  We have ubiquitous satellite imagery that lets us see the entire surface of the planet every day.  We have new satellite sensors gathering new data in greater detail than before.  We have new platforms such as drones, and we have the Internet of Things powering sensors.  If you know what you are looking for, the chances are now that there are multiple data sources that can inform you and if there aren't, it's easier and cheaper and quicker than ever to employ new data regimes and observe nature at scale.  We are facing a new challenge, we have gone to a lack of data to overabundance.  There is so much data looking at everything that the challenges in making sense of the data and working out what it means, to understand the data in context we need to bring many sources together and analyze it in aggregate.
This means we need scales of bandwidth, storage and compute that is only possible through the cloud computing platforms, getting data transformed and cleaned, stored, indexed and available is only the first giant problem though.
Extracting knowledge from the data is only possible through computational analysis.  The sheer volume of data means no human is ever going to look at it at all.  Computers must sift and filter and draw out interesting features discarding those that don't make the grade.  With the growth in data, we have therefore seen the growth in data science.  Machine learning is increasingly being applied to spot patterns and trends in data and highlight features of interest.  Artificial intelligence is developing to support decision‑making based on learned patterns and distilling data down to actionable insights.  This gives rise to more challenges of accuracy and bias in ethics as people lean more in the recommendations of machines to make their decisions without truly understanding how they work.
Yet, this modern technology gives us a exciting possibility, we can now more effectively than ever monitor and manage our planet and the state of nature.  We can track the degradation of biodiversity in remote locations, we can see that the oxygenation and acidification of the ocean and observe overfishing and associated reduction in abundancy.  We know about the thousands of species threatened with extinction.  What we can see, what was not apparent before and with this visibility comes the opportunity to take action.
Technology is the key that unlocks the problem of restoring our environment in my opinion.  Anyone with just a laptop can now open a cloud computing account, obtain data observing almost any aspect of our planet, apply algorithms and toolkits to spot features and patterns and trends in the data and identify potential actions to reverse trends of decline.
Then they can monitor the effect of taking a action in near realtime and repeat.  We have a real opportunity to take a agile approach to environmental recovery, small incremental steps building up to monumental change.  We all have that ability to drive change no matter what our industry or mission.  We just need the will to act.  And today we are going to hear from a few of our colleagues that have already shown the will and they are already creating impact.
I'm hopeful that everyone else will want to join us as well.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Absolutely, I see that there is a common theme emerging from many discussions.  I've been hearing about data, about data governance, interoperability, trying to make sense of that abundance of data.  This is really a very fruitful ecosystem where we are moving here in the IGF, where we can put together a lot of knowledge that we will be able to tackle this to address this.
I think that we have already one question.  We have about two minutes to address that, if it's possible.  Barbara, do you want to read it out?
>> BARBARA WANNER: Sure.  Thank you.  This is from Lennart, from ISOC in Germany.  I see why Amazon invests in companies whose products could be useful to them, but wouldn't it be responsible to also invest in companies that protect the environment whose solutions are not directly applicable to Amazon, but maybe to other organizations?
>> MATT PETERSON: That is a good question.  We look at it in two different ways.  The first is that Amazon we believe is a proxy for many different companies.  We have a business that transcends logistics, transportation, cloud computing, retail, physical stores, many different areas of the economy are represented by Amazon.  As much as we say that these businesses that we invest in help Amazon, it also helps all of those different industries I just mentioned.
From our perspective, what we can do for Amazon, we ask ourselves if we can help these companies through our direct involvement.  If it were outside of our business, our core business, then basically we couldn't help them as much as we could as if we were a customer.  We come back to the question, what can we do to be a good supporting partner to the companies we invest in, and if we can do something, that would be helpful and be supportive, that is by essence I think a good indication of investment for us.  Second, maybe another, apart from that, we have other programs besides the Climate Pledge Fund as well.  We do have programs like the right now climate fund which invests in natural solutions as well.  We partner with a nature conservancy to implement nature‑based carbon removing projects in various parts of the world, it is a hundred million dollar fund initially.  Those types of projects are in addition to what I'm doing as part of the Climate Pledge Fund.
We have a portfolio of approaches that we are implementing besides just what my part of the world is.  Look in aggregate, we are going beyond Amazon in many different ways to address these issues.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Thanks so much, Matt.  I hope that with this we can go for the second segment, also in the interest of time keeping, and in this one, we are looking to more specific case studies and example.  Matt and Nick will be joined also by Caroline Louveaux and Paolo.  Caroline is the executive Vice President and chief privacy officer for MasterCard, and she leads the global team responsible for legal compliance, policy and regulatory engagement on privacy and data protection.  She advises the company on a broad range of privacy and data related issues.  Paolo Gemma is a senior specialist and representative of Huawei on the issues related to energy saving environmental sustainability.  He is a member of ITU‑T study group 5 which deals with environment climate change and circular economy, where he is Chairman of working party 2, which deals with environment and energy efficiency and the circular economy.  He also acts as Co‑Chairman of the focus group on environmental efficiency of AI, and other emerging technologies.  He is Vice‑Chairman of the united sustainable cities initiative.  In this segment, as I mentioned at the very beginning, it would also be very interesting, as Barbara mentioned, if the panelists could give any views during their explanations on the youth for digital sustainability recommendations.  They just mentioned two of their recommendations.  The second one which I think is relevant here is that the youth caucus recommends promoting access to the Internet and other ICTs as a matter of sustainability, everyone wants to connect the next billion, taking into consideration the significant environmental impact that digitalization comprehends, also recommendation 4 of the youth caucus that businesses should champion diversity and sustainability by hiring C suite representatives and consulting subject matter experts and strengthening their commitment towards principles of diversity, equity and inclusion and ecological digital infrastructure.
Having said that, and letting it trickle into your minds, I would like to start now with Caroline.  I hope also technology is okay on your side.  I understand that MasterCard has recently adopted a program to empower consumers to address climate change.  Would you mind explaining a bit about who MasterCard is and what your program is about?  Caroline, please, the floor is yours, and you have about 8 minutes.
>> CAROLINE LOUVEAUX: Thank you, Jorge.  Can you hear me properly? 
>> JORGE CANCIO: Perfect.
>> CAROLINE LOUVEAUX: Everybody knows who MasterCard is.  We are a global technology company.  Our role is to process payment transactions on behalf of our customers, mainly banks and merchants.  We of course also make sure that transactions are safe, secure and there is no further activity in our system.  What does that mean for climate change, we are exploring how we can leverage access and play our part in the fight against climate change, and our key assets include global network, our expertise on data, so I was interested in Nick's presentation and focus on privacy and human rights.
That is one piece of the puzzle.  We are connecting our assets and expertise with those of partners, is where we see opportunities to have the greatest impact.  It is what we are doing right by doing good together.  With our global reach, MasterCard can engage and empower not only companies, other companies who work in partner with us on environmental issues, but also individuals.  That is the difference, we have about 2.6 billion cardholders around the globe, which is approximately one third of the whole human population so it's a huge group of people, we can really engage and encourage to take an action, and to play a active role in this ecological transition.  How do we achieve that with MasterCard.  We have launched our process planet Coalition which unites the efforts of banks, merchants, and cities to address the climate change with deforestation of a hundred million trees over five years.  We announced a expansion of the Coalition, introducing even more corporate partners around the globe, and more climate change experts on advisory committee.  The goal is to deliver a true network effect, where the collaboration makes much bigger, much greater than the sum of its parts so everybody can benefit.
Let me give an example.  We are working together with merchants through redemption of loyalty points against the planting of trees, so basically people are going to be able to spend their loyalty plants they have with merchants with planting of trees instead of in complement to other items that they have catalog of merchants.  It is one example to illustrate that we want to emphasize the role that people can play by making choice in favor of the environment.  We constantly are looking for opportunities to leverage our partnerships, and our technologies, to deliver more sustainable digital economy.  For example, we make a mobile app available to people so that it can make direct relation to the partners of our Coalition and to round up every day purchases.  We are building a widget API connection between banks and merchants to make it easier and faster and safer for people to make those donations and to contribute to climate causes.
We have many more examples.  But this is in a nutshell what process plan set all about, we empower and inspire consumers to take action against climate change and all of that while leveraging our key partnerships.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Thank you so much, Caroline.  Any reaction or any word on the recommendations from the youth Internet Governance Forum, on your side?
>> CAROLINE LOUVEAUX: Are you asking me the question?
>> JORGE CANCIO: Yeah.
>> CAROLINE LOUVEAUX: Actually, yes, I had some comments that I was looking at other recommendations which are more aligned with my expertise on privacy and human rights.  Do I need to expand on those?  I was looking for example on the fair digital businesses recommendations, and the sustainable Internet Governance, which both highlight the need for businesses to promote transparency and to grant people more control over their data.  Of course, being transparent about what you do with the data and providing people with that power over the file that has been used and shared is not only a legal requirement in many jurisdiction around the globe, but it's successful to build the trust in a digital economy.  So we believe at MasterCard that there is a need for law that promote meaningful protections for people, but also allow businesses to apply globally use data for responsible innovation.  Today we have a patchwork of different standards across the globe and that is bad for everyone, for consumers, business and society.  We believe it is crucial to have the global interoperability between all those standards.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Thank you so much, Caroline.  I see that the themes about data and data control, could even say digital self‑determination, and we are starting in Switzerland, also reverberate in your comments.  Thank you so much, Caroline.  Now, the turn is for Nick.  Nick will now present the case study illustrating OceanMind creates a better understanding of what is happening in the ocean, so that seafood industry can make sustainable choices.  Nick, the floor is yours.  I hope you can make it in 8 minutes.  Thank you.
>> NICK WISE: Thank you.  I hope so too.  I'll speak quickly.  Over 80 percent of all life on earth dwells in the ocean.  It produces over half of the planet's oxygen.  3 billion people derive their protein from seafood, and one in eight people depend on the sea to earn their livelihood.  The ocean is crucial to the global carbon cycle and regulates our weather and our climate.  For these reasons, and many more, human well‑being is directly linked to the health of the ocean.
OceanMind is a nonprofit organization, whose purpose is to power marine enforcement and compliance to protect the ocean's ability to provide for human well‑being.  We work with governments to help them enforce their regulations more effectively, and work with the seafood industry to help them source more responsibly.
OceanMind, we bring together all data needed to understand maritime human activity on the ocean and impact on ocean health.  We use tracking information on vessels of all shapes and sizes, commercial, governmental, proprietary.  We use satellite observations from a wide variety of sensors, including optical imagery, radar from space and infrared detections.  We use data from buoys, sensors.  We use licensing databases and collect local information from ports and authorities.  We codify laws and rules that regulate human maritime activity.  We bring the data together in the Microsoft cloud and use our customized machine learning algorithms to highlight suspected noncompliant activity.
We refined our machine learning over time to understand the human activity, for example, fishing.  Initially, algorithms could detect generic fishing activity with reasonable accuracy.  But now it can spot the different phases of fishing really well, setting fishing gear, soaking or towing the gear and recovering gear with high accuracy.  This means we can now use data to estimate the amount of work a crew might have to do, and whether labor laws and rest periods are being followed.  We can go further.  With deep knowledge of the phases of fishing, we combine this with other factors and we can estimate the sustainability of the activity.  For example, most caught by a fishing technique, a massive net looped around a school of fish, tightened at the bottom like a purse and the entire school, hundreds of tons of fish are scooped from the ocean.  The fishing industry developed techniques to make this process more efficient, they drop a large object into the ocean and leave it to float for a while and then return.
Many fish will have aggregated under this device, called a fish aggregating device or fad, for shelter, shade and security.  The person comes and scoops not just the target species but everything else sheltering there, such as sharks, turtles, juveniles and other species.  Using fad increases catch and affects biodiversity and reduces sustainability.  Conversely, free swimming has less by catch, less impact on other species and as a result is more responsible.  Working with markets in the UK, OceanMind analyzes catch data provided by suppliers in combination with other sources available.  Using this information we detect whether a catch supplied was caught fad free as claimed, or potentially made use of the fad.  The key to making this determination is the combination of advanced technology and deep experience in fisheries that allows us to understand and interpret the information identified by the algorithms.  The benefits of cloud computing, big data techniques and machine learning are that this approach is not limited to fad fishing.  We can scale our analysis to other suppliers and situations.  The independent third party validation is important to Sainsbury to provide transparency and assurance on their commitments to sustainability and biodiversity.  This in turn translates into consumer trust and confidence and establishes brand leadership.
While Sainsbury was the first mover, they are far from alone in wanting verification of the catch they purchase.  For many species and locations around the world, OceanMind provides validation information to more than 20 seafood organizations around the world to ensure regulatory compliance with import regulations and to support sustainability and biodiversity commitments, which in turn increase brand credibility and consumer confidence.
The availability of modern technology allows retailers to do something they never could before.  They can look inside their own supply chains from afar and validate the information that they are told.  Instead of taking on trust that the fish were caught correctly because a piece of paper said so, they can now cross‑reference different data sources to check.  This is powerful and brings a new dimension to regulatory compliance and sustainability commitments.
This doesn't just benefit the retailer.  With the ability to check deeper issues such as labor law compliance against modern slavery commitments, the whole supply chain can benefit right down to the worker.  Transparency allows new insights and transparency, technology allows new insights and transparency and supply chains which will drive more responsible sourcing practices.  Technology is helping us understand our impact on the planet and transparency is driving real change for the better.
This leads to the youth digital sustainability recommendations, which are a great set of principles that can be applied to help organizations actually meet those strives for change, change for better.  There are a wide range of different recommendations to suit different types of businesses, some broadly applicable.  Number 4 in particular is something that is very close to our hearts, that is everyone on our team, not just the C suite but everyone across the organization is committed to sustainability, environment, and indeed diversity, equity and inclusion.
Everything about the work that we do is driven by people who are passionate about this field.  But the recommendations help to set businesses up to make change, just from small changes within their own practices.  I'm very pleased to see them, and hope that they can be widely adopted.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Thanks so much, Nick, fascinating how you use technology to track the seafood supply chain, to validate supply chains related to trusting ability how you are really using or implementing the advances in technology to analyze data and to empower supermarkets and with them the customers to do that.  Thanks very much.
I think we can go now over to Matt from Amazon and take all the questions I'm seeing piling up in the Q&A pod at the end of this presentations.  So Matt, now you can introduce to us the Climate Pledge Fund and more in detail and how it works.  So if you could do this in also about 8 minutes, and so we leave a bit of time for the questions.
>> MATT PETERSON: Sure.  Hopefully my previous comment, I gave a good overview of what the Climate Pledge Fund was.  More specifically now, I can talk about what we look to invest in and examples of those companies.
We looked to invest in six different areas, transportation, energy, buildings, manufacturing, circular economy and food and agriculture, all of these are areas that are important to Amazon and important to organizations.  We invest in a fair number of, large number of investments in the earlier stage, so these are companies that are early in their involvement, they have just had a product that is potentially ready to be sold, but they have not yet scaled that up to customers.  We make a lot of investments there, but also make investments later in the company's growth as well.  That is more the Rivian type of investment where we put more money to work, but at the same time we have a clear view of how these companies can work with Amazon around decarbonization.
Taking a quick tour through the companies we invested in so far, the ones we announced publicly, Rivian is our largest investment.  We first led a 700 million‑dollar investment in Rivian in early 2019, and subsequently ordered 100,000 of their delivery vans to electrify our last mile.  That is a ongoing relationship, where we are going to start putting some of those trucks on the road next year.  We announced, unveiled what the trucks look like a month ago.  And they are being built purposely and custom‑made for Amazon with the idea of they can eventually be used for others as well.  I described earlier, we are trying to push forward development of commercial vehicles, and as a result of that we are pushing forward the mass electrification of charging stations for our facilities and working with local governments and municipalities to increase electrification and charging infrastructure across the United States and eventually in the world as well.
I should mention we have agreement with Mercedes to buy electric vehicles from them, to start the electrification process in Europe.  Rivian is in the United States, but we are going internationally with this initiative, with the goal of having a entire fleet electrified within ten years.
That is Rivian, and that is our largest investment and the one most widely known.
Other investments we have announced recently include CarbonCure, a manufacturer of low carbon cement.  Most people don't know, but cement production and concrete production is 12 percent of the world's emissions.  It is a industry that is unfortunately slow to adapt and one whereby meaningful change is hard to come by, by the incredible demand for concrete and building materials, but also it's difficult industry to carbonize because of processes that are used.  CarbonCure has invented a technology that allows cement to be used, to be created with significantly less carbon involved in it.  It allows the concrete to be constructed with less cement as well.
But at the same time, the amount, the strength of the cement is the same as traditional cement.  It allows buildings and other structures to be constructed without as much cement as they would otherwise, thereby lowering their carbon footprint.
It turned out Amazon is the biggest customer of CarbonCure, in that all our buildings are going forward, many buildings are being used or being built with their product.  Our headquarters HQ2 is being built with CarbonCure cement.  The fact that we are already their biggest customer gave us a good signal that this is a company we should invest in, if their product works for our needs and our buildings, chances are they work for many others.  This is echoing a theme that I mentioned earlier around how Amazon is a good indicator of a company's product for other uses too.
The company is based in Canada, and has raised around with us moving into Asia rapidly.  In terms of the impact that this could have on the global carbon emissions we are looking at as a step to try to address a big process, or big problem with cement and concrete emissions.
Another company we invested in is called Redwood Materials.  This company was founded by the CTO and cofounder of Tesla, by JB Straubel, one of the battery experts in the world.  And this company is anticipating a world where everything is moving to electrification, vehicles, electricity, everything is going to be, there is going to be a new paradigm around electrification for transportation and many other functions.  As a result, batteries are going to be in greater demand.  But the chemicals or at least the minerals and metals that make up these batteries are typically from the, they are mined in different countries, often in areas of the world where there are human rights violations, and the need to recycle these materials and reuse them is going to be ever more important.
Redwood Materials is a large scale battery recycling company, where they take used batteries, electric vehicles, eWaste, any lithium batteries and reconstitute them into their core minerals and metals, and rebuild them and repurpose them eventually for new batteries and cathode production for the sale to larger companies like Panasonic and others who are, with LG, making the batteries.  We did this as a circular economy play as much as transportation play.  Amazon is a big consumer of batteries.  We see, and user of batteries for our operations, so working with them has given us a opportunity to put our batteries into a reusable, recyclable condition that can be rebuilt for other purposes later.
Another company that we invested in is called Turntide, a company that redesigned the electric motor.  Motors consume 50 percent of the world's electricity.  And in some various fashion, various shapes and forms, what they have done is built a more efficient motor, think about a LED light, compared to incandescent light in terms of it can be retrofitted into existing designs, but at the same time has incredible electricity savings.  This motor is designed in a completely different way that's only made possible by advances in compute power.  It is a software controlled motor, as opposed to a strictly electricity or analog controlled motor.  It is digitally controlled by chips that keep it spinning in a way that provides consistency, but at the same time uses a fraction of the electricity.
The use case that they have identified that is very important to Amazon and others is in HVAC systems, heating and cooling.  These motors can be put to retrofit and replace fans in HVAC units that typically sit on top of buildings, these large air‑conditioning, heating units on top of buildings.  You can go in, take out the old motor, put in the new motor and immediately get 50 percent savings on electricity, because the fan, the spinning of the motor and the fan is something that this new technology is very well‑built for, starting and stopping, getting up to speed and slowing down is what their motors are important for.
We are using these products in our own buildings right now and piloting them in a number of others.  They are getting a lot of attention and growth from a lot of other building construction and other large corporations like Amazon that have a need to retrofit and maybe make their own heating and cooling systems much more efficient.
Finally, the company that we invested in, it's interesting to hear Nick talk about OceanMind because this is a similar company called Pachama, though they operate in a different environment.  It uses remote sensing artificial intelligence satellite data, lidar, people on the ground to evaluate reforestation projects.  They have a presence in the Amazon, in Brazil, in Africa, Asia, and the idea is to monitor, evaluate and verify the efficacy of carbon offset programs.  Carbon offsets are known as a means for companies or others to reduce their net carbon output.  But at the same time, there is a huge variation in quality.  Some of them are invested in projects that may or may not actually be doing what they are intended to do or at least what they are saying they are supposed to do.
Pachama is raising the bar, the quality of these projects by using modern technology and cloud computing and remote sensing to see if these forests, afforestation and reforestation projects are doing what they are supposed to be doing, so they can measure over time the growth or the reforestation capabilities of these projects such that then they can look to sell offsets that are credible and verifiable as opposed to ones that might not have that level of rigor.
That company aligns closely to Amazon's commitment, as I mentioned before, to our own reforestation projects through the climate fund, which is a hundred million dollar investment in projects that are proven by us or at least verified by us to do tangible good and reduce carbon emissions from a natural sequestration perspective.  That fit well into this initiative from Amazon.  As a Climate Pledge Fund investee, it checks those boxes too.  Anyway, those are five companies that we have announced so far.  We have many more to come. I think they will be similar in areas of focus and importance both to Amazon and other companies that could take advantage of their solutions.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Thank you so much, Matt.  These are amazing examples.  I see that there are many same or similar ideas come forward once and again, reduce, reuse, recycle.  This also is a good segue to more standard setting area where Paolo Gemma is active, because they really need to try standard setting organizations like the ITU to look how can we tackle at the macro level climate change and eWaste, also in the end.  Paolo, what do you think are the main barriers for implementing digital technologies to solve environmental problems?  How do you think we can integrate such important sustainable environmental values as ones that are contained also in the principles and recommendations put forward by the youth IGF in technological development, how do you contribute to that in your study groups and in your focus groups in the ITU.  The floor is yours.  I hope the technology is with you too.
>> PAOLO GEMMA:  I hope technology is working, or I make a very bad impression.
>> JORGE CANCIO: I see you.
>> PAOLO GEMMA:  ITU is producing standard, ITU‑T is producing standard and study group 5 is working on environmental climate change.  We provide guidance or implementing energy solution for Telecom side, to help city to improve energy efficiency of equipment, and also to increase their resilience of their infrastructure to different climate conditions.  That is important to be ready to change in the climate.  We give guidance from migrating to a economy, when we speak about sustainability as was recognized, we need to change our model of development to go in a more sustainable way.  One possibility is to go to, moving to a circular economy, not to linear economy.
We are working also on reducing CO2 emission, giving trajectory of idea on how much is it taking to reduce our footprint, and also help other sector to reduce waste footprint.  This is something that we can do.
The problem of barrier, there is a lot of barriers in reality.  Two main barriers of technical challenges that many are facing when implementing, artificial intelligence can help a lot on environmental efficiency.  This is one of the reasons to have this new focus group, to work on artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies, not only artificial intelligence, also, I don't know, big data and so on, from governmental point of view, which is important, artificial intelligence on governmental to have better governmental effort, also which is really the input of artificial intelligence because artificial intelligence needs at the end a computer to work, so we need to be sure that when implement, not only benefit ‑‑ the lack of compatibility of legacy system, mainly mainframe, which make it difficult to integrate new systems, programs of innovation.  This is something we need to express because when we spoke about new technology, fantastic and improve a lot, reduce a lot of CO2 emission, the environment of print, but the realities is that there is a lot of old system equipment in the world so we cannot put all the waste, then we create a problem of waste management and problem of business to implement.  Digitalization is very complex project that involve use of data.  Knowledge of digital system infrastructure application, need to be able to communicate and share data one to the other.  It is far too often that data is seen as the most challenging, communication, data liability, so on, the second big barrier is digital divide.  Today half of the world population remain off‑line.  It is important barrier, this is a big issue.  A challenge in many country, especially developing country, with over half of the world population live in city, to be more sustainable and resilient to deliver a strong response to global challenges including climate change.  This is why UN, UNESCO, commission for Sustainable Development is actually working to connect the other half of the world population, while at the risk of being left behind.  I live in Italy, Italy has lot of small community and we have also problem of connections sometimes, not only in developing country but sometimes also in the developed country, because in city, there is normally a good connection, but not everywhere.  The big challenge in the future is give connection to every people in a very sustainable way.  This is all for me, for my side, Jorge.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Thank you, Paolo.  Nice way of taking us a macro look and connecting it with the connectivity issues, and of course if we are able to connect the rest of humankind in sustainable fashion and at the same time, transit to more sustainable ways of connecting those who are already connected, this will be really a key effort in the coming years.
So I think that we are more or less on time.  But I see that many questions or at least a number of questions have been piling up.  I guess I will ask Barbara to take over the remote moderation of these questions.
>> BARBARA WANNER: All righty.  Can you hear me okay?
>> JORGE CANCIO: Yeah.
>> BARBARA WANNER: Good.  A question for all of our speakers came in first, just as governments have designed a credit system for reducing carbon footprints, is there a similar system of rewards to business for solving macro social problems, are there agencies working in this direction?  Anybody want to take that?
>> PAOLO GEMMA:  ITU, we have a agency, and we are working, as study group 5, we wrote standard, but we are working also to help other countries to implement eWaste management, sometimes in collaboration with other sector of ITU, like the ITU‑D, that is more linked to develop, we create workshop, to talk with people to be aware what is climate change, what is the challenge, and some possibility the case they can implement in their countries.  Also the more sustainable cities is a group managed putting together the idea on how to create more sustainable city.  That is when we start, I don't know, number of years ago with discussion of smart city, at ITU‑T we prefer to speak about smart sustainable city, not only smart.  A city need to be smart but also need to be sustainable.  Definitely there is no possibility to survive for us in this and that is all I can give to this point.
>> BARBARA WANNER: Thank you very much.  Anyone else want to add any thoughts?  Or shall we move on?  I'll move on and if anybody wants to come back and make another point that addresses that question, you can.  This is a question for Matt.  Can you share information about how Amazon is working to ensure that the air pollution caused by Amazon's logistics infrastructure are not disproportionately affecting communities that are affected by environmental racism?
>> MATT PETERSON: Environmental justice is something that is very much a top concern for us, both the sustainability group and the rest of Amazon.  My role in this, we look for innovation in the areas, especially logistics and transportation groups, to reduce pollution and make it better for the communities.  I described we are looking to electrify our entire last mile delivery fleet which would be a huge improvement in air pollution quality or air quality among any community we operate in, the centers and delivery network, and for our middle mile too.  We are looking to use different types of new fuels, electrification, hydrogen, clean fuels that will be far greater in their ability I think to reduce air pollution and in the communities where we are operating now.
It is an important consideration for us, and we are using our ability to find innovative solutions to lower air pollution quality.
>> BARBARA WANNER: For Nick, thanks for the interesting insight of OceanMind.  Is OceanMind mainly working with private companies for regulatory compliance and to implement their sustainability goal, or is the data also made available for better policymaking at national or international levels?
>> NICK WISE: That is a great question.  In actual fact, probably two‑thirds of OceanMind's work is with governments and international authorities.  That work is to focus on the regulatory compliance from a enforcement standpoint, because it's the Governments and authorities who have the power to act against some of these noncompliance events.
Private companies are key elements when we are talking about the technology development and innovation and adoption.  But in reality, they are part of the compliance infrastructure as well.  There is a strong interconnection between how governments work and what the private sector does and in actual fact I'll speak more about that in a moment when we talk about multistakeholder.
>> BARBARA WANNER: Great.  Finally, I open this up to the group.  Do you think we need a new global set of standards more governing digital ecosystem of earth APIs, environmental APIs, who is the right actor to broker this kind of digital API ecosystem for the planet.
>> NICK WISE: I'm happy to take a quick first stab.  As an implementer, standards would be useful, but I expect them to take time to come to development.  In the meantime there will be defacto standards that are used by different groups.  These will in my mind be driven by the cloud platform providers.  For example, Amazon and Microsoft and others are putting these data sets into their cloud platforms and making them available at scale for people to work with, we work with Microsoft's planetary computer concept, but overall, I think all of the platform providers have a similar idea that they want to make these things available and doing their best to make them accessible.
In reality, it will be the different users who work in these different ecosystems that start to demand standards through the use of the different data sets, and I think we will get there over time, from a experimental point of view.
>> BARBARA WANNER: Terrific.  Thank you.
>> CAROLINE LOUVEAUX: If I can echo what was said, as a lawyer I confirm any global standards takes a lot of time to emerge, if any.  We have been looking for global standards on privacy and data and we are far from being there.  It is going to emerge from the industry I think, and from informal conversations, absolutely.
>> PAOLO GEMMA:  I am the guy from standardization, but depend what type of standard.  Security sure will take a very long time.  But I like to remind, standard organization is working with the people that is coming from the industry, so if industry want to have a standard and they go to a standard organization, you can have a standard in short time, have a standard that can help you also to promote your product, you can say my product is following international standard, we agree with other company on how to make this piece of activity.  This is where through standard we change a lot in the future because we are moving for more standardized, I don't know, wide standardize idea is challenging, we are working on some standard in my very long experience, we are moving to standard in three week, in three day, to standard that will work for years, depending.  If people from the organization want to have standard, go to the standard organization, not necessarily ITU but which standard organization do you want and work really to have a standard, then you can have a result in a short time.  This is only standard.  If you want to speak about rule, it will be nightmare really.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Okay.  Thank you so much, Paolo.  If it's okay, I'll take it from you, Barbara, because I think we are running a bit short of time.  But this discussion about standards and I think it's standards in the widest sense, common approaches, has very much to do with the third segment of our workshop, where our panelists will briefly provide their perspectives, how does multistakeholder collaboration, what we are doing here, what we are starting here in the IGF is important to develop meaningful solutions to address environmental challenges.
Here we will need to be very strict on time.  I'll ask you to stick to two minutes, if it's possible.  Matt, you are the first.  You have those two minutes sharp.  Thank you.
>> MATT PETERSON: I appreciate it.  It's interesting to talk about standards in the context of the Climate Pledge Fund, because the climate pledge as I mentioned at the top of this discussion is an effort by Amazon to get other companies as well as Amazon itself be net zero carbon by 2040.  Since we announced that program, we had other companies cosigned it with us and agreed to be part of the Coalition and international Coalition.  You have Verizon, Infosys, Mercedes, Best Buy, Siemens Snyder Electric and a number of others who committed to the same goal.  In terms of standards, you can have governmental and corporate standards.  We are trying to be a leader in providing corporate standards so others can join and be part of the same effort to get to where we need to be as quickly as possible from a emissions perspective.
The Climate Pledge Fund has been established to aid in that transition, to help those companies as well as any other company frankly to have access to these types of solutions that don't exist today, but are necessary to get to where we need to be in 20 years or less than 20 years now if not sooner.  I do believe that having a multilateral approach with different corporations all committing to the same goals and being held accountable to those goals is really important and it's very complementary to what governmental and international organizations can do in terms of setting additional guidelines and support systems to help everybody involved reach those goals.
>> PAOLO:  George, microphone.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Ha Ha, thank you.  I forgot.  I was saying that it's perfect, thank you so much, Matt, for sticking to the allotted time.  Now Nick, the floor is yours.  What is your two minutes take about multistakeholder collaboration in this field?
>> NICK WISE: Thank you.  OceanMind's approach is around multistakeholder engagement and collaboration to protect the ocean.  Governments are central as they set and agree regulations and international treaties and are responsible for enforcing the rules.  In each country there are already existing partnerships between governments and NGOs, so local NGOs are essential for engaging governments and understanding the local culture and concerns and complexities.  Each country's industry has many different needs and concerns, and directly are affected by regulators' decisions, their livelihoods could be at risk.  There is international markets with complex international rules, regulations and agreements are overlaid with their own supply and demand signals.  International NGOs and advocacy groups also bring different perspectives and demands, but it requires all of these groups to work in harmony in a culture of compliance, for effective enforcement and compliance to be possible, and to give the impacts of conservation and sustainability.  Taking Thailand as an example, we work with the Government to help increase their enforcement capacity but we also work with the seafood industry to make it easier to comply with the rules and provide recommendations for improvement.
We work with local environmental and human rights NGOs for on the ground knowledge and support, and work with large international NGOs to leverage and facilitate discussion.  We work with the international supply chains and buyers who import produce from Thailand into western markets who need to be confident import regulations around legality and human rights are met.  If any stakeholders are not at the table representing their needs and working together to drive change, the work wouldn't be successful.
Given the complexity of the issues facing the planet, I believe that multistakeholder engagement is a minimum requirement.
>> JORGE CANCIO: I think we can write that on our flags, that multistakeholder is a minimum requirement, that is a good standard to begin with.  Caroline, you have two minutes.  What is your view, what is MasterCard's view?
>> CAROLINE LOUVEAUX: We already demonstrated that the partnerships are key to our model, to a Coalition.  MasterCard makes a difference in this conversation.  We place the individual at the center of what we do.  When it comes to your data, we believe you own it, you control it, you should benefit from it, and we protect it.  Those are consumer principles that guide all of the practices of MasterCard.  In the context of the green transition, our commitment to privacy as being standard to help people understand and control their environmental impact and empower them to make helpful changes.  We partner with a Swedish Fintech which allow mobile users to understand and reduce their carbon footprint for every day purchases, so they understand how consumption impacts the environment.  Only with that transparency, that control can we empower people to make powerful changes and to have a impact on the environment.  There is more, and if I have one moment, I want to connect to what Nick was saying how we can leverage data and technology to help solve problems including climate change.  It is true, AI and machine learning can make a difference, as they can extract valuable data, but for people and society, if this is not done properly, it can bring risks for people, for privacy and for human rights.  That is how MasterCard has pioneered the new Anonymization solutions where we anonymize data in a way that fully protects people's privacy and human rights.  These are at core keeping the individual at the center is key to get it right.  Obviously we are always looking for new partnerships.  If you are interested, please knock on our door.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Excellent points.  Thank you so much, Caroline.  I think this is a moment where partnerships may be blossoming or may be starting.  I see the topic of data, data governance, control by the user as a basis for trust.  This is also macro topic here at the IGF this year.  It's great that you made those points, Caroline.  Paolo, coming from Huawei and working at ITU in those study groups, what is your view on what we can do on these issues for multistakeholder solutions?
>> PAOLO GEMMA:  We think of it multistakeholder approach is very important to have climate action for driving sustainable city and community.  Multistakeholder approach allow policymaker and other members to come together on something, to better look at resource.  Normally we need both public and private sector to take into consideration we need a lot of different stakeholder.  The project can deliver change more efficiently, provide efficiency in policy and elevate local best practice at international level.  We have a focus group, this is global open to anyone without any fee to pay, to raise the impact of artificial intelligence, 5G and other technology.  We work on the focus group, is open to all people that want to come, all stakeholder, we are working on 14 deliverables, led by industry leader, innovator, and more.  We are member of more sustainable city, which is a nation initiative but to provide a global path to support transition to more sustainable city using ICT.  One of the big projects, very important project is more sustainable cities, a key performance indicator for sustainable city project, 19 indicators that smart and sustainable city based on three dimensions, these are environment, economic and social and cultural.  API can be applied to the city and give guidance on how to move the city to be more smarter.  We are working now on a guide but this is something just published now but contain implementation work to become a circular city on all environmental aspects.  The last is we are working on a city transformation, digital technology in city and connect city action to SDGs.  We are working on that with all our stakeholder now.  We need really a multistakeholder approach.  We failed, we are not able to work on only one or two people on these topics.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Thank you so much, Paolo.  I think the invitation is open to everyone attending here to contribute to work of ITU, the study group, very interesting invitation to put resources at that work.  We are quickly arriving at the end of this workshop.  We still have one final fourth segment which is final wrap up with short take‑aways from our panelists, where they may also share their commitments to the IGF, you know that this year within this framework and evolution to an IGF plus within the UN Secretary‑General's roadmap, it's also time to say what's your commitment to the IGF, whatever it may be.
Let's reverse order and let's start with Paolo, I see you taking pictures.  But you have one minute.
>> PAOLO GEMMA:  On what?
>> JORGE CANCIO: Your tweet.
>> PAOLO GEMMA:  As ITU‑T we said always together, we can work together and write something to help the young generation ‑‑ I am not so young ‑‑ to have a better world.  As we said sometimes, we cannot change the past but we can build the future.  And this is very important, but all stakeholders together all the people are working in some way together to find the solution and to agree as a minimum set of solution.  We want to build the best solution ‑‑ I'm optimistic for my nation and company can work together to highlight this goal.  It's interesting to know what Amazon is making, sustainable world is another big point or good step to move together on Sustainable Development for the future generation.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Thanks for that optimistic take away.  Caroline, you have one minute.
>> CAROLINE LOUVEAUX: Thank you, Jorge.  Quickly, I looked at the UN digital cooperation roadmap, for pledge today, and many initiatives are extremely interesting, to continue the work of the UN on this is important, but something that is close to my heart and my work, and that I could commit to continue to do, is to promote trust, security and human rights in the digital era, including for the global collaboration that is needed, we have been discussing today, in the context of artificial intelligence, data and technology.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Okay, thank you so much, Caroline.  I think we can agree on those points.  Nick, what would be your take away in one minute?
>> NICK WISE: OceanMind, it's the technology does not just have the potential to solve environmental problems, but it's a essential ingredient of the solution.  Without technology we wouldn't be able to look at the problem at sufficient scale to truly have impact, and that is why it's core part of the strategy.  For us, we are committed to improving the health of the ocean using technology.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Thanks so much, Nick, very practical, very concrete.  Finally, Matt, what is your one minute golden nugget?
>> MATT PETERSON: It's reinforcing what everybody has been saying, that the IGF is doing important work here, and it's something that we want to continue to support in any way we can.  With the Climate Pledge Fund in particular we would love to give a update as we invest in more companies, find more solutions.  Hopefully what I've described today around some of the companies that we have invested in resonates with a lot of the audience, and they understand the importance of what they are building and maybe how they can employ them in their own walks of life or their own businesses or governments could use as well.  Maybe in preparation for next year's IGF we can be involved in implementing some of or at least incorporating some of our learnings and our findings with the companies that we are working with to help form an additional support for this initiative.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Great, thank you so much, Matt.  And I think we will have some kind of intersessional work here in the IGF coming up, where we are seeing what shape or form, but I think we are one minute over the time, so let me very warmly thank the panel, the organizers, the technical support, and everyone involved in organizing this workshop, especially all those who have stayed here and listened to the discussion and taken part in it.  A report of the session prepared by my colleague Livia Walpen will be posted shortly on the IGF Web site.  I enjoyed very much this session, I hope you did as well.  I don't know if Barbara, you want to say a final word.
>> BARBARA WANNER: No.  I would commend all of our speakers for generously sharing their expertise and contributing to this body of work.  We are grateful that you could, I know this takes time and focus and we are so grateful that you could share all this with the IGF community.  Thank you.
>> JORGE CANCIO: Thank you so much, Barbara, thanks again to everyone involved, especially to Matt, Caroline, Nick and Paolo.  Bye‑bye.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-8-%E2%80%93-ws73-dns-over-https-doh-human-rights-markets-and-governance^^

 
     >>  And the U.N. rules of regulations. Thank you. The moderator, can you take over?
 
     >> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Thank you, secretariat. Welcome, everybody, to workshop number 73 at DNS over HTTPS, Human Rights, Markets and governance. My name is Brenden Kuerbis. We have a long record of fostering dialogue among stakeholders at the IGF and elsewhere on important emerging internet governance topics. 
This workshop brings together a panel to discuss the implications of a fairly new protocol, DNS over secure hypertext transfer protocol which is a modification intended to improve the integrity and confidentiality of DNS queries. Encrypted DNS presents a challenging tech policy issue that's institutionally complex and involves numerous economic and political interests and has the potential to be governed in multiple ways. 
Many parties have written extensively on the issue, but to date the dialogue about implementing it has largely been centered on potential impacts on ISPs, network and enterprise security and government legal policy regimes in western countries. 
Less explored is the trans national context and the role of markets and users in other countries. For example, the confidentiality of DNS query, data and availability of information can be especially important to individuals in countries where a government or a state‑controlled ISP might conduct surveillance or censor websites or information. We see a negative relationship between countries that score lower on freedom of expression indices and higher use of open DNS resolvers. 
While correlation is not causation that relationship has strengthened.
It is an indicator of growing demand for less restrictive DNS resolution. There are legitimate concerns about the centralization of data and DNS services in the lands of big global platforms and questions about how users, networks and applications will discover and select resolvers. We need to distinguish concerns of technology centralization and the risks it can present from a broader understanding of the risks of market concentration which incorporates the notion of firms competing to provide DNS resolution as well as complementary products and services 
DoH and how it is implemented is a means of extracting part of the market which until now has been captured by local ISPs. From a governance perspective as DNS data becomes encrypted and shifts to different actors impacts on domestic regulatory compliance and extraterritorial effects of policies. Encrypted DNS brings into view differences of how stakeholders may view censorship, data retention and access as well as other areas. The decisions made about how the protocol is deployed will have dramatic impacts on stakeholders. 
To better understand all of these issues our discussion today brings together experts and regional perspectives to discuss and hopefully interact with the audience on broader human rights, market and governance impacts of DoH development and deployment. 
I will now briefly introduce our panelists and we will hear from each of them. Then we will follow this by panelist reactions and interactions prompted by questions from myself.
We'll follow it with Q&A from the audience. 
I encourage the audience to use the chat to discuss as we move along. Please put questions you may have in the Q&A box we are monitoring. First up, I would like to introduce Barry Leiba the IETF director for the area groups that developed DoH and a member of the security and stability advisory committee at ICAN. Barry, take it away. 
>> BARRY LEIBA: Hi. While I'm getting my screen shared, my first slide is going to show where I'm coming from. I'm the area director responsible for the working groups that worked on DoH and are working on follow‑on protocols such as discovering, supporting, resolvers and that sort of thing. 
I'm also the security and stability advisory member who chaired the work on the document that SSAC did giving an analysis of DoH. You might be interested in reading that. 
On the screen you should be seeing a link to that report. What I'm going to say are my personal thoughts not as representative of the IETF or S‑SAC or anything like that. 
Let's start with basics. I want to look at how things used to work, how things work very briefly and talk about what changed. So DNS resolution without DoH, browser, for example, and it could be any application, but we'll talk about a browser here. Wants to go to the intgovforum web page and needs the IP address. 
The request goes to a service on the user's computer which we call a stub resolver, usually part of the operating system. But it doesn't have to be. It's always been the case that the application could do this itself. Most didn't. Most used the stub resolver. 
That service contacts something called a recursive resolver that runs around the internet, collects the information and returns the result, what the IP address is. The recursive resolver is usually configured in the user's computer by the internet service provider or the enterprise that the user is within. But it doesn't have to be. 
The user can change the configuration and applications have always been able to make a choice of recursive resolvers. They generally haven't. Usually this is the ISP's resolver. 
The recursive resolver does its work. There is a defined protocol for how that works and it returns the internet protocol address for intgovforum.org. It should be spelled correctly, but it is not. 
The communication between the user's computer and the recursive resolver is over UDP or TCP which have existed for years and that's not encrypted. 
When we go to DoH, same thing. The browser wants intgovforum.org, needs the IP address. It goes to the service on the user's computer which can be a stub resolver or built into the browser. 
That service contacts a known recursive resolver. The recursive resolver finds the IP address. There is no change in any of that. 
The communication between the user's computer and the recursive resolver is over HTTPS, encrypted HTTP encrypted by TLS and it is encrypted. So it is immune to being sniffed, snooped on by somebody that's monitoring internet traffic. 
So what's changed? What hasn't changed? The underlying DNS request and response doesn't change. The protocol is the same. The mechanism for doing the resolution is the same. It is the data transfer protocol, the pipe changes. The pipe over which the data is sent is now encrypted. The stub resolver is still there and it can support DoH. 
Over time, we are going to see more stub resolvers supporting DoH in the different operating systems. The browser can still use the stub resolver. The browser could have always done this itself without using the stub resolver even before DoH. None of that has changed. The only change that the protocol does is gives us encryption. 
If not much has changed why are we here and discussing this? It's a question of implementation and deployment rather than protocol. 
Browsers and other apps have generally not done their own DNS resolution. They have used the stub because that was the convenient way to do it. 
DoH makes roll your own more attractive for the browsers because DoH uses HTTPS. The browsers already know how to use HTTPS, so they can build it into their programs where they already have support for that. They might want to because DoH is new and many of the recursive resolvers that the stub is going to connect to lack support for it. 
Without discovery of whether DoH is supported or not there is no way to know whether it is without trying it. You make a DNS request and it fails. That wastes time. For browsers, they differentiate themselves partly based on speed. Speed is very important. Even a small number of milliseconds makes a difference in the user perception of how well the browser works. 
Now, the reason this was put in was for privacy issues. You can't snoop on the requests being made. There is always the issue that DNS information is public information. There is no reason that it needs to be private. 
But the question is that the pattern of queries that you make is where the privacy concerns come in. The data isn't private, but the fact that you are looking for that data is the privacy issue. The problem also is introducing that privacy issue raises a lot of other privacy issues.
 
I'll also point out DoH is one piece of the DNS privacy solution that's being developed in the IETF. There are other protocol changes, other operational changes that are being recommended to increase privacy as well. 
So what are the issues that come up? Having applications choose the resolver changes things. Who decides which resolver to trust? Previously you used whatever your ISP came in. Some people say you can't trust your ISP but you can trust other companies who put out privacy statements and assurances and that sort of thing. That's a debate. Who gets to make that decision? 
Who gets the information about the queries which can be very important information that can be monetized and used for advertising, can be used for a lot of other purposes, and that can be requested by governmental entities perhaps with warrants and the sort. So who get that information? 
Where can the filtering be done? We'll get to that on the next slide. What happens when different applications choose different resolvers. 
Split resolution like on a VPN and some things are resolved through the VPN and some are resolved elsewhere. If a browser is contacting the same resolver, how is that handled? We'll see some of those. 
Encrypted DNS is here. It is expanding. The IETF produced a best current practice document a few years ago after the Snowden situation came out. That pervasive monitoring is an attack. It is indistinguishable from an attack on the internet, so we have to consider it one and shut it down. 
One way we are shutting it down is by recommending increased encryption. We are seeing that rolled out. 
So we are going to see DNS over QUIC, being a new transport protocol being developed. We have to figure out how to do what we have been doing with encrypted DNS coming. 
Again, here is the SSAC document, the implications of DNS over DNS protocols published in March. 
One of the things that will tie into this panel discussion is it looks at issues from the various stakeholder points of view. Some of the stakeholders it calls out are entities like parents, schools, libraries and the sort interested in using DNS‑based blocking of objectionable content, for instance, to keep pornography away from children and that sort of thing. 
Corporations, municipalities and that sort of thing worried about network control and management as well as the inappropriate content for work. 
ISPs are concerned about doing network management and the ability to comply with government regulations that require them to do filtering which they are currently doing through DNS. If we are not using their resolvers they have no control of that. They have to find a different way. 
Protesters and activists concerned with privacy and avoidance of tracking and retaliation by government and other entities are concerned about this. 
We'll hear a discussion of those issues in this panel. And I believe I'm done. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Perfect. Thank you, Barry, for that helpful background information. 
Next we'll turn to Andrei Robachevsky, senior director of technical programs at the Internet Society. Andrei? 
>> ANDREI ROBACHEVSKY: Hello, everyone. Let me put my only slide to share and here we go. 
I have to say up front that the internet society doesn't have an official position on DoH. Those opinions are my own. But we need more developments in this space and appreciate the value DoH can bring to security and privacy. 
At the same time we understand in some deployments there may be operational challenges for ISPs. Before I cut to the meat of DoH let me explain a bit where we are coming from to add a bit of context. 
Recently the Internet Society launched a so‑called internet impact assessment toolkit. That's what you see on the screen. A tool aimed at helping ourselves ‑‑ policy makers, internet advocates to assess various developments from regulatory proposals to technological evolution like the one we are discussing here today. When developing this framework with questions, what makes the internet the internet? What defines its success and what needs to be preserved. 
There have been several technology inventions that started the successful trajectory like packet switching or the architecture of the module, building blocks that enabled innovation at the edge without the need to coordinate or ask permission from underlying networks. 
Or the fact that technology is a general purpose meaning it is not tailored to a specific application but can support all of them. And the internet owes its success not only to the technology but also to the way it operates and evolves. The way independent networks interconnect and operate forming high performance resilient infrastructure without the grand plan, designed blueprint or operations center. 
The way the building blocks are being designed and deployed based on wide community participation needs of users and benefits it brings. 
This is what we at the Internet Society call the internet way of networking. This is the starting point of our analysis of DoH, its benefits and implications. 
As I already said, DoH is a great billing block that can improve privacy of users, but as with any power tool there are case where is the benefits are not as clear or trade‑offs become significant and need to be considered. 
The cases are mostly confined to particular deployment model. I have to say up front the centralized deployment of DoH especially when it is deployed by default. 
Let me look at some of the facets of this issue. Take decentralized management for example. This is one of the critical properties on the slide. 
The network can decide and optimize designed based on local conditions via the interconnection internal to apology, basic services it offers to users or the policy. 
This is the foundation of the agility and resilience of the internet. The point is that the benefits of DoH depend on the particular risk assessment and the threat model which are not the same across the board. Protection of the channel between the trusted resolver and the client is a clear benefit especially when DNS SAC is deployed. Privacy aspects are nuanced. 
For example, using the centralized DoH model brings privacy benefits with regard to the potential expense of disclosing the information to a third party or maybe in a different jurisdiction with different privacy requirements. 
For an ISP on enterprise network the choice of using a proxy resolver may not be susceptible. It could be additional service or so policy requirements the ISP provides to users. 
As a result, the policy imposed may be in conflict be the local policy of the user or an ISP. Jurisdiction ‑‑ this order of magnitude or corresponding policies. Centralized DoH changes the number to less than a dozen. This is a significant shift that we need to analyze further. 
Ideally the user has the ultimate choice. Which internet or DNS provider to choose but if the user doesn't care maybe the ISP is the next in line. If ISP has no preference then I think centralized DoH is a viable solution. 
When it comes to technology building blocks, a DoH is a great case in point because DoH is based on HTPS which is built from building blocks like HTTP, TLS, IEP, so from that point of view it's a perfect example how this critical property can manifest itself. 
When it comes to the way the DoH is used, deployment model things with less clear. The centralized model may set a trend of reducing the number of cooperating players in the provisioning of DNS and therefore reducing incentive for wide collaboration. 
The DoH may move into application back end protocol which reuses is building blocks but is essentially proprietary. Since only agreement with a few parties is required. 
We may end up in a situation of embrace and extent leading to what happened before. Finally, this trend can threaten the very DNS as a global and consistent naming system. There is a potential of erosion of the global and consistent mapping of names to addresses for the DNS into application of service provider specific world governance. The governance of the space could change dramatically putting control in the hands of vendors instead of the technical community. 
Now, I appreciate there is a lot of speculation in presenting these scenarios. They are risks, not the current state of affairs. Some good is under way to put the safeguards for not allowing this to happen. 
One of the examples is Mozilla that allows ISP signal whether deployment of DoH is acceptable. 
Google Chrome uses a procedure that tasks the local environment suggesting using DoH. Barry explained a very important work by the ITF and working group that allows discovery and selection of DNS resolvers in a variety of environments. I think we need to monitor the space and make sure DoH continues to bring benefits and continues to be involved in the healthy way. Thank you. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Thank you, Andrei. Next we'll hear from Olga Makarova. Olga? 
>> OLGA MAKAROVA: Yes. Just a moment. Okay. Thank you. The main difference between carriers and providers is all carriers have to act under the system but all providers do not. DoH has a lot in common with services. DoH can be provided by either party on any level of any carrier to any users anywhere in the world. 
Any new global service significantly heightens tension between the system and ‑‑ the system does not provide for the transition to cross border relations. Alas, no one in the world is ready for this system. Thus, no service but a reckless deployment of services may be the main reason why the variables can be varied under the system. The GDPR did not go beyond the Westphalian system. China for example must adopt a Chinese ‑‑ to protect Chinese users. 
But it seems that DoH is not so much about the global service as about a new round in the net neutrality history. Its main goal and prize are not just protection of personal data. This looks like a great and very smart marketing ploy by both providers. In an attempt to attract ISP customers and market share for some of the internet services. 
Let's remember such cases ‑‑ internet freedom. Let's pretend Netflix has become a DoH provider, for example, for customers. Will customers be able to have the reasonable network management to DoH network services under the law? The service quality if it thinks Netflix DoH service is making its network unstable. 
It seems we will see a lot of very interesting new battles within DoH providers and ISPs in the U.S. soon. It is a surprise the contrast of one over the other with provider networks. This is very useful document and I like to say many thanks to all the authors. 
So we are waiting for future development in the U.S. to gain the experience we need. About the DoH deployment in our region, we highlight global and local. As you know, our state is a part of the Westphalian system. As such, global DoH vendors will have to comply with local laws. Compliance with local laws means we need to agree with the state on the rules. It is not so easy. 
Any attempt to enter our market bypassing the local law can lead to the blocking of service by the state in an attempt to block service even if it succeeds by half greatly reduced the chance of providers for market share. 
The lack of Russian language support from global DoH providers will limit the use, potential interest in these services from a wide range of our customers. Therefore, we see no reason to get our market share by global DoH vendors in the time frame. We look forward to buying time to finally ‑‑ significant increase in the internet traffic due to the pandemic. 
At the same time, we will get an opportunity to study the most interesting cases for example in the new year. We believe that we need to be more attentive to details. 
For example, consumption in mobile. We tend to believe that deploying not DoH will be for us. We plan to return to this issue after the pandemic. 
In August, we conducted an experiment with DoT in the European part of Russia. 5 million mobile consumers could use our dot servers at the same time. The share of dot requests was 13%. The experiment showed the request traffic doubled. The CPU load tripled. This was not a surprise. The server had to look for data and act as traffic encryption. The experiment showed we need to change the infrastructure of DNS resolvers for DoT. Now, each server works independently from each other. Requests are evenly distributed among all web. 
Most likely, the main reason for doubling the request traffic and tripling the CPU load was the fact that the traffic from the devices was evenly distributed among the service and the connection was re‑established. 
We need to make a separate attempt that will terminate on themselves and as far as possible hold it for some times for reuse within the customer's presence. 
We understand that any attempt to stop technology is always wrong. But deployment of any service might be fatal to stable internet. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Thank you, Olga. I appreciate that background on the technical challenges of DoH and some of the challenges of over‑the‑top services and the interaction with the state. 
So now we are going to move on to Amod Malviya, a cofounder of the Indian company Udan. 
>> AMOD MALVIYA: Thanks. Hi, everyone. I must clarify that imam speaking in an individual capacity as a person who spent his career in this space. So that's where I would be approaching the discussion from. 
I feel there are two principles of the internet that I want to bring out to the forefront of this discussion. 
Andrei already touched upon one of them which is decentralization. The decentralized approach to the internet's architecture has given us resiliency and longevity to the internet. 
Whichever way we think about the future or the internet's governing protocols, we need to think about how we continue to maintain that spirit. 
The second that I want to bring out about the internet is obstructions that have largely allowed different operating layers. You've got the network layers, the application layer and things in between. 
DNS has been particularly contentious because of the fact that it's very leaky obstruction. That fact will become, you know, important in a few minutes. What that has meant is it simultaneously is something that's needed at the infrastructure layer, but it is also something that immediately reveals what the network layer is being used for. 
I mean this not just from privacy concerns. I also mean this from just, you know, market operating principles perspective. 
The world has changed significantly in the past 20 years. Two decades back we had the standardized desk top operating systems and everything. Those were the layers that were mediating the network layer and the application layer. The obstruction that got created here became helpful in development and that led to its own success creating a lot of economic value for countries around the world. 
We need to think about technology from the perspective of as an economic value creation first which is where the neutrality of technology that Andrei talked about earlier becomes particularly important. We need to approach all of the discussion we need to be having first from the perspective of how do we structure the internet in a way that it continues to be resilient, continues to have a goal of decentralization and continues to make data obstructions. 
Coming to the change that's happened in the last two decades the world has shifted to the smartphone era where the applications are in a very gated fashion by organizations that have absolutely no responsibility towards the internet principles. 
Obviously today they can be great internet netizens, but from an architecture perspective we need to make decisions which help retain these principles instead of relying on the benevolence of organizations. 
DNS has moved to the control of the operating system in a way that the user is lesser in control of things. Yes, I agree that users rarely use these settings but it is less the frequent of when it is used. It is far more important to understand where the power of control lies between the network and the application layer. 
Today we have technologies like web assembly coming in which essentially is making browsers almost the operating system of the internet. In this future world, bearing in mind this possibility how do we make sure DNS doesn't shift completely off the domain of the browser which is where the applications are being developed. If I as an app developer want to retain control of how my app reaches it, it actually creates centralization. 
In the known area there is a default centralization that's happening. To counter it we need to make sure the infrastructure services exist in the upper layers where the application development is happening which is where something like DoH fits in very nicely. Because I strongly suspect that as things evolve over time the smartphone operating systems will be more and more controlling about the protocols that can be used and may not be used. At a minimum they would start creating warnings that if you as an application developer are using anything more than HTTPS you need to gain additional permission from the user, which is why it's very important that at the HTTPS layer we have a lot of controls of critical services even if the obstruction remains leaky in the sense that both layers, we need to make sure there is some scope for the application to play around with it. Otherwise we are essentially concluding in a very firm way that this is a network layer thing which leads to more centralization because of the increased prevalence of those systems. That's the point I wanted to talk about.
Thank you. 
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Thanks, Amod. Brenden has dropped off. I think he's facing network issues. That's a really interesting perspective. Amod, we'll come back for questions on this. 
Next is Joey. Joey, do you want to take this forward? 
>> JOEY SALAZAR: Yes. One moment. Thank you, everybody. Representing article 19 and part of civil society, our position is that DoH is key not only to privacy and censorship circumvention but is a key issue. We think of the way different types of censorship may affect their way to express themselves but not to receive information or the other way around. That's why we believe that censorship remains a key issue concerning freedom of expression and access to information. Especially considering that the DNS was designed unencrypted in order to preserve network and system privileges and control over the DNS traffic they manage. Regulating bodies have consistently deployed different techniques over the years in order to filter, control, and regulate internet traffic through the DNS. 
Although mechanisms are being developed in order to inform users when and why content is blocked through the DNS and whether this content isn't available or if it has been censored or blocked heavy oppressions are held in place through manipulation of encrypted DNS data. 
That's why encryption of the DNS data not only protects users privacy and anonymity but is a technical advance necessary in order to circumvent censorship and protect user's fundamental rights of freedom of expression and rights to freedom of information. 
Here's the thing. As with many new technologies and especially new technologies that pose significant changes in the control and power in the systems they represent, there are lots of concerns around the adoption of DoH particularly regarding limitations for the implementation and deployment, applications on data protection and regulatory frameworks and of course the fundamental concern of centralization and the consolidation of power it could pose. 
We believe these are all valid concerns. Although we believe each of those concerns are valid and of course there are more, we also think they can be addressed by implementing DoH with considerations. 
Here's where we think a multi stakeholder approach is vital in order to be able to first define clear mechanisms for implementation, for measurement and deployment and then for the access to content through strong legal protections that enabled users' freedom of expression and freedom of access to information and that protect their data across different regulatory frameworks. 
We think that by working together towards this goal, we will also in turn tackle the last issue I mentioned, consolidation. Since by working together to resolve those things we'll enable providers to develop a list of services and platforms both in browsers and operating systems which, in turn, would make DoH less centralized and would help address the concern of the consolidated power. 
This is pretty much our perspective. We really believe as long as there is ‑‑ similar to what Barry said at the beginning, as long as there are safeguards mechanisms to understand the points of risk under key human rights and policy considerations article 19 and myself are of opinion that DoH is an improvement over the current system and a step towards a more private and safe internet for all. Thank you. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Great. Thank you, Joey. I had a few issues of connection, but I seem to be back on via my mobile device now. 
Okay. So since we have had so much conversation and heard so many things about centralization concerns we have Alissa Starzak from a DoH provider. 
>> ALISSA STARZAK: Thanks, Brenden. I'm head of public policy at Cloud Flare which runs a global network for reliability services online. More than 25 million domains use our services in more than 200 locations and in more than a hundred countries. 
1.1.1 is a server with privacy in mind. The goal was give people an opportunity to choose control over DNS information. The things that the resolver included were things like privacy by demand including support not just for DoH and dot but query minimization and aggressive negative answers and not providing EDNS header information in queries. 
We also wanted to be transparent about what we did with information which we thought was lacking in the industry. We wanted to make sure we were held accountable to standards we brought into place. We put out information about what we collected and how we used it. We brought in a third party audit firm to talk about our commitments and make sure we were standing by them. 
As I mentioned, the idea for us in putting this resolver out and putting the recursive resolver out was about choice which I think was lacking in this area. This is something we should talk about a lot. One of the things that comes up in a lot of debates is the question of defaults. What is the standard that people use as the default? 
I think what we often don't think about is the longstanding default has been that a lot of people have access to information about your browsing history. That's something users should have a choice to determine. Is that the right choice for them? It should be something that users have the information to evaluate and information about exactly how their information is used is relevant to it. Our sense had been that it was lacking. 
As I mentioned we made commitments about our use of the resolver data and said, for example, we wouldn't share client access or other personal data. The upside is they would use only what's asked and not who is asking. We made commitments about logs which didn't include personal data that they would be purged within 25 hours. 
We made a point of saying we wouldn't sell data or use it for targeting ads. The idea was really to put a resolver together with a set of standards on a bunch of issues people didn't talk about it. 
I want to go back to that. If you're like me on the policy side rather than the technical side you never thought about the information that might be available to others when you browse online. 
If someone were designed the internet now saying they could see what people are browsing by virtue of the DNS data would be probably a nonstarter. I think the users of the internet it was something they never thought about. There are questions of default. You have to appreciate the default we have had. It's not just a question of where we go but what we have had and what's acceptable generally. For us launching a privacy oriented resolver put light on that and helped push the conversation we are having about who has access to DNS data and who has control over it including access to user information and for what purpose. We think those are incredible conversations to be had.
There were references to the partnership with Mozilla as well. 
After we launched the public resolver we partnered with them who shared our view about the privacy of DNS data. We are now part of their trusted recursive resolver program designed to provide a minimum set of policy standards recursive resolver must satisfy. We are not the only member of that program, but we are one. 
I know we are a little behind, so I'll stop there so we can turn to questions. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Thank you very much for that very informative presentation. So we have reached ‑‑ we have background. Different panelist perspectives. We have reached the portion of the workshop where we'll have basically an open discussion. It was originally a roundtable. It's challenging in the online setting. But we are going to go for it and see how this turns out. We have organized questions in the three areas ‑‑ human rights, markets, and governance. 
I'm going to go ahead and pose questions ‑‑ three questions. I would invite the panelists to go ahead and just jump in to the conversation. I'll have to ask for you to kind of help move the conversation along since I have a limited screen here. I can't see people's faces. I can't see everybody's face. So I'm not going to be able to tell if you want to get into the conversation. 
Here we go. Human rights and the demand for privacy. Privacy is trending upward in protocols. We see the rapid adoption of HTTPS, encrypted DNS development. We see it in applications and the growth of security end to end chat, messaging and in policies with extraterritorial reach governing data privacy and access like GDPR and the cloud act one and two. The encrypted DNS genie is out of the bottle. But DNS message data is monitored extensively by network operators, network security services, and enterprises to secure infrastructure, filter malicious content and protect user. 
Should DNS query data remain a lever by which organizational and public policy is implemented? Related, if actors gain or lose power to use the DNS data as a tool for security and policy enforcement are there alternatives? And is governing DoH to meet requirements of national DNS blocking regimes the least invasive method in the face of other options like laws restricting DoH entirely which we have seen or requiring technologies like exceptional access. 
>> JOEY SALAZAR: I think those are very interesting questions. From my perspective mostly as an engineer we have exploited the vulnerability in the networks and particularly in the DNS, we have exploited it for too long. Think that needs to change. The concerns that come around regarding the control and the administrative privileges, it's kind of a trade‑off. But I think it will all advance together as a whole. 
As the protocol matures, so does the tools and mechanisms that are used around it as well. 
So there definitely needs to remain some administrative and management privileges at some point but the DNS system needs to become stronger. The real benefits of privacy and security measures should not be endangered or postponed just because of what we perceive is a basis of potential threats to how things currently are. What do you think? 
>> BARRY LEIBA: This is Barry Leiba. Filtering things using DNS for what some people would call protection and others call censorship has always been fragile. You can get around it and I think it is ill advised for governments to try to legislate how software should work. We need to look at network management, policy issues, reporting issues and those sorts of things and figure out the right ways to do those things that are not so fragile and don't interfere with how the internet is deployed. 
>> JOEY SALAZAR: Hopefully also bringing those considerations to the table and deployments will also help raise the bar on what has been acceptable to be controlled and blocked so far and what doesn't need to be and what shouldn't. 
>> ANDREI ROBACHEVSKY: If I can jump in, Andrei here. While again these are the two things we are considering DoH as a protocol. From my perspective it's undisputed that it has a lot of value. It protects the privacy, the last mile that hasn't been protected so far between the client and the user. 
But I think DoH ‑‑ and when we are discussing DoH and deployment model particularly we are actually discussing why the issue is not related to DoH, right? Centralization of DNS has happened before. Public DNS resolvers existed for years. Many ISPs are outsourcing this service to public DNS resolvers and that's a fact. 
In fact, that's another trade‑off. Proper deployment of centralized DNS can make DNS better. For instance, Cloudflare, what Alissa mentioned, implements good measures like creating minimization or DNS that can push those technologies very quickly. 
Now, that's the positive side. There was also a down side because Cloudflare has a policy even if the policy is not oh to have any policy. 
That's a concern where local policy may clash with the policy imposed by a trusted resolver. Another thing is fragmentation. Again, fragmentation happening in DNS space not because of DoH specifically but some implementation of DNS. 
I heard Netflix implements their own DNS resolution. That's not DoH. It's just DNS. That's another issue not per se done by DoH. 
DoH brings all this together. It's concentrated in DoH while the issues existed and continued to exist regardless of whether DoH was deployed or not. 
>> OLGA MAKAROVA: Okay. We need to decide in the system or a little outside it. If we are a little outside it, we should or could wait, for example, changes GDPR to protect the personal data of users. The Russian GDPR and others. In this case, I have some doubts. 
If we are within the system we must examine the experience of each country separately. 
>> ALISSA STARZAK: Some interesting questions in privacy come up in the chat. In the GDPR context we are seeing a question of who has access to data in a way that's related to sovereignty. 
For example, if you are thinking about data that looks like DNS or browsing data and it is unencrypted is that, itself, a potential challenge under GDPR? I would flip the question around to some of the questions in the chat which is to say that if you have an obligation to protect information that might be private information so that it is sovereign in a way, so there is an element of sovereignty to many privacy laws what is the responsibility for entities who do not protect the information which means it can be sniffed on a wire by other entities. 
It's not just whether they protect the information which is an element of privacy law but a question of what external protections they have from other people looking at the data. One of the challenges referenced in the chat, we see something we see a lot in the post Schrems world but to make sure excess parties don't have things in their possession. What does it look like in the context of DNS, for the privacy issues Olga raised. There is a set of issues that tie privacy and sovereignty together in part because often what you have are governments that want to make sure other governments don't have access to their citizens' data. 
To me, the questions of sovereignty and privacy in many ways go together. What you are seeing in the GDPR or Europe context is a recognition in the post Snowden world that maybe other people shouldn't have access to their data and other governments. I would challenge those who question that the U.S. component of that. To also ask why they are not applying it to European providers who have an obligation under GDPR to make sure there isn't unauthorized access which includes from my vantage point sniffing. I think these issues are tied together in interesting ways from a privacy angle. They raise complicated questions about what laws apply to certain kinds of data and what it means. 
But they are ones we can't suggest all fall on one side of the ledger. 
>> AMOD MALVIYA: Just one small comment from me. I think it is best for us to sort of read the layering separately from policy enforcement. DNS has their own layer. You know, in this stack to actually be used for policy enforcement. Obviously there are legitimate reasons for them to be doing it. But it needs to be ‑‑ if the door of DNS gets closed to enforce some of those things that data is always available. We shouldn't conclude prematurely that it is a DNS or a DoH concern for these policy enforcement pieces. Absolutely not. We should be making these decisions primarily on the merit of the technical principles. I think governments always have a ton of levers. But to solve for DNS in the correct way, there is not so many levers available. We should be solving for that first and leave the policy solutioning for a different layer in the internet stack. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Others? I would just add to Amod's comment that some of the most recent research has shown that DNS‑based censorship is still possible on encrypted DNS traffic. Network operators and others that are currently ‑‑ may need to look at encrypted DNS traffic. So next in about ‑‑ yeah. I think Joey brings up a good question here. Joey? 
>> JOEY SALAZAR: I didn't want to put anybody on the spot. I heard information about a Cloud Act and the Earn It act being discussed in the states. I was wondering how those interact. 
>> ALISSA STARZAK: I'm not sure those are in the DoH context. The cloud act, for folks not aware of the various pieces, it is intentionally ‑‑ intended to get at the question of cross‑border access to data from a law enforcement angle. So for those who don't follow the issue, the idea is now that we have cloud services data can be stored anywhere. There is a well-known case in the U.S. that went up to the Supreme Court before getting dismissed because of the cloud act where Microsoft had information stored in Ireland and the question was whether the U.S. government could access it. The cloud act resolved that question by saying the U.S. government could access certain data but by providing rights for foreign governments. 
For example, the U.S. can enter into foreign agreements with ‑‑ they have done this with the UK which is to say they can then ask for information from UK providers as well and there is reciprocity in how to access information that doesn't depend on the location of the data. 
I'm not sure that's necessarily relevant to DoH. The question is if you haven't entered into one of those arrangements GDPR is a blocking statute so you have a conflict of law. 
I think it does get into the question of sovereignty though which is who should be entitled to have access to the information? That is ‑‑ you were saying U.S. government. You shouldn't have access to information about Europeans unless we say it's okay. Encryption is an important part of the piece because you can't potentially restrict U.S. government from getting access if the information can be potentially sniffed.
Thinking of how the pieces fit together is interesting. 
Earn it is intermediate liability, an exception to section 230 which is another conversation. I don't necessarily see how it relates to DoH. But happy to expand that conversation out. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Thank you for the clarification, Alissa. 
Let's move on into technological and market change questions. There are shifts occurring where DNS query response functions reside. We see the flattening of the application OS layer. We see movement of network functions like DNS management once performed by the ISP to cloud service providers in many cases. We hear concerns about concentration of DoH resolution in, I believe a dozen providers were thrown out. 
Where is the market for providing DNS query response, plain or encrypted activity concentrated now? Is it in ISPs or the cloud environment? How tightly integrated is DNS in different types of networks? For instance, mobile. And for what reasons? What does the dominant role of apps on the mobile platforms mean for DoH potentially? 
>> AMOD MALVIYA: Let me go first on that. It is related to the point I was raising earlier. I think it is important to understand where the computers are actually headed toward. Far more developers develop applications for smartphones than for, you know, the earlier kind of internet model we had seen. 
As we get into more control of the platforms being demonstrated for the right reasons. Say for example Apple says you can't change the DNS setting as a user. So the only way to do it is by installing applications. Remember, if it requires far more user intervention. You know, than what was needed in the earlier operating system where you need to change settings, install DNS modification or VPN app. Users are less likely to actually be doing that more and more which increases the chance of centralization. 
The point is as you make the world headed in this direction you will leave open some doors at least for DNS possibilities to exist outside of this tightly controlled gate of the smartphone vendors or do we want to just completely close the door and leaf no options whatsoever. 
For me, it is about duty, how frequently do users change the settings? I saw one question from Mark saying that configuring settings in the operating system reduces user ‑‑ absolutely, it does. But do we want to allow this for some future form of doh ‑‑ DNS to be emerging in the browser as a complete machine that we are probably headed towards. 
We need to make sure our choices today are dictated by some of the possibilities of where the world is headed than just based on what we have seen in the immediate past. 
Tomorrow there is a high likelihood of the browsers actually emerging as proper independent virtual machines. There is already a lot of work happening in that direction with things like that, et cetera. We need to make sure some of the controls are available in that layer instead of closing that door completely. 
>> ALISSA STARZAK: I want to jump in here as well. One of the interesting questions to me and, again, going back to the commentary I had about our recursive resolver, I think that we have to do a better job talking about exactly what happens in this space. I think what's happened often to date is that people don't have any understanding of exactly how information flows, where their DNS information is going and how it is used. To me when you get into the application space that's compounded more because imagine a normal user with a cell phone where they could have lots of different data going a lot of different directions. They don't necessarily have a way to think through what that means. 
Thinking about what we can do in our world of people who can translate that information, think about how users can get more information, be more transparent about how those pieces work is important. 
There's been traditionally a huge gap between the standard end user and someone who is in the technical space. One thing we can do that would assist in that part is to help bridge the technical gap, explain what's happening, where it is happening, who has access to what. There is a huge benefit potentially down the road on transparency. 
I want to go back to the chat. It's not relevant to your question, Brenden, so I won't do it now. I would like to talk about some surveillance questions in the chat. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Let's hit those in the governance section coming up soon. Thank you. I agree there needs to be a nuanced understanding of the market concentration question in general. In reality it consists of multiple markets. Whether it's software at the stub resolver and how many queries of different types are happening with that software and the number of firms providing that software or the number of firms operating resolver operators and services of different types and how many responses their market share. 
As well as the number of firms offering can complementary services that rely on DNS query data. We need to understand the interaction between those three markets to get a better grasp on market concentration questions. 
>> JOEY SALAZAR: There is a good opportunity now for increased transparency and accountability for people providing services. I think that comes together with some of the things Alissa was saying of helping inform people, helping them make informed decisions for them to know where it is happening. It presents the opportunity for transparency and accountability for people providing those services as well. 
>> ANDREI ROBACHEVSKY: If I can jump in I would like to talk about what Amod said about closing the doors. For me, any restriction on the use of technology be it by sort of browser vendors dictating something by default or the government blocking some of the technology is a bad thing. 
One size rarely fits all. For instance, there is a possibility with centralized deployment certain avenues will be locked and we can get locked into a browser vertical and therefore all the world by Ed working group, no one can access this. I know there is a lot of work in open software development space to enable resolvers software to support DoH but you need the discovery mechanism, the certain openness that user or operating system on application can decide and make informed decisions based on local conditions. 
I would like to stress this point. I think we need to ensure especially this early phase of the deployment. Let's be honest. DoH is relatively a new, young protocol. So different deployment models can compete and be tried out. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Thank you, Andrei. If there aren't any other panelists who want to chime in we could move on to our next area of focus ‑‑ the governance challenges and the interplay intentions between organizational, national, and extraterritorial policy influence. 
Alissa mentioned earlier in her remarks of the contractual arrangements. One question is what kind of arrangements between DoH actors are emerging and is there variability in how they are implemented. Who benefits and why? 
I want to follow up a little bit on the ADD work, adaptive DNS discovery work occurring at the ITF. How does the design work hinder user, operator or national policy choices and who potentially benefits from that? 
Also, are there potential long‑term effects of the shifts ‑‑ this was mentioned by Andrei earlier ‑‑ in the production of encrypted DNS. What are they and are they risks we need to be concerned about and to what extent? 
Also, I would like to circle back. Alissa wanted to get back into some of the trans national privacy issues. So maybe we'll start with Alissa and move on to the three questions. 
>> ALISSA STARZAK: Since you started from the back I will start there as well ‑‑ or the last for the end. I wanted to touch on that question that came up in the chat on GDPR and section 702 and a bunch of pieces. I think it's really relevant to the DoH discussion. 
So one of the questions that came up in chat is under GDPR parlance is recursive resolver a processor or a controller? I think one of the interesting questions about DoH is when the information is not encrypted the information is open for sniffing. 
In that same question, I guess you can put it back to every single ‑‑ it's not a U.S. question anymore. It's not a U.S. company question anymore. If you believe that information should be private, what protections does any entity have, any telco have, for example, to make sure someone is not sniffing that information? Does it matter whether it's legal process which is the sort of authorities referenced in the chat or whether someone can get access without legal process because it is not encrypted. We don't talk about those enough when we get into the DoH. What the DoH piece means is access to the data is actually harder to get, not easier. Regardless of who the company is. There are fewer people who have access to it. 
I think we sort of misconstrued some of the privacy debates. We talk about them from a U.S. company standpoint because of access to information but fail to recognize when information is encrypted it is available to any intelligence service sniffing the wire. It's not just the U.S. It's anyone who might be on the wire. 
What I would say to folks in the chat is what do you do to make sure U.S. intelligence agencies don't have access to the data if you are concerned about the DNS data potentially transmitting the data not encrypted. I would pose that back. 
On the contractual side one of the big pieces for us is something I referenced in my comments at the beginning which is that I think we can actually do a lot contractually with transparency and privacy. We can make comments, for example, in a contractual way that talk about exactly what we are doing with data. Is the data used for advertising sort of a core piece? How is the data kept? Is the data retained? Do you actually eliminate the personal data which is what we do on the DNS query side. Thinking of what you can put out there from a transparency side gives people insight into how the data is used.
Because it is contractual, it is something that as long as you make it trans parent is something people can use to evaluate services 
To me there is a huge potential role in the contractual basis on the transparency side. It enables you to have a discussion about what's happening with the data and it is potentially enforceable. The reason the Mozilla contractual components are interesting is they had a set of minimum requirements that were then public so people knew how the data was being used and what was happening to it. 
As Andrei said this is young. We are still at early deployment stage, not that far along in these discussions. I think there is an interesting opportunity on both the transparency and privacy sides in those contractual arrangements. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Thank you. Can I follow up? Would you agree that there is the opportunity for a lot of variability in DoH resolver services? I bring it up given the diversity of filtering that was brought up very early on. One can see the emergence of competition in content filtering. My question is, you know, can global DoH providers support that activity? 
>> ALISSA STARZAK: Absolutely. Those are questions of demand. You want to make sure there is diversity in supply of DNS providers. Sort of avoiding centralization. There are larger questions. The reality is if the demand is there the product will develop. You can have filtering with the DoH resolver. It just depends on what you are seeking to do in that space. 
So we for example have filtered resolvers that are compatible with DoH. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Great. The next question is how does encrypted DNS protocol design work support or hinder user operator or national policy choices. I guess I wanted to get into the ADD work in that are we ‑‑ maybe Barry wants to jump in here. Are we moving toward standardizing what they call same provider auto update as the default behavior in applications? And does that mean that ISPs and network operators and national jurisdictions will retain potentially more control over DNS resolution and data? 
>> BARRY LEIBA: Hmm. I think the answer to the last question is no. I don't think the trend is to give governments more or less control. The trend is to provide more options. 
The ADD working group is just getting started on adopting documents and deciding what it is going to standardize. Anything that you are seeing now is too early to say what's going to come out of the working group as a standard. So the flexibility is what we are looking for. Can you find the information you need in a flexible way? How you use it is a deployment policy. Clearly government regulations and public policy will influence provider policies. 
I guess that's the best I can say on that. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Thank you. That was very helpful. Anyone else want to chime in? 
>> ANDREI ROBACHEVSKY: I can just repeat myself. I think that's important work. That's the building block, the founding principle of the internet. Whether the building blocks are used or not and in what circumstances. 
The thing is someone said no one can design the internet. That's very true. Even the IETF can't design the internet. It can design certain building blocks but who could have thought that DNS can be used as a policy tool ‑‑ well, it wasn't designed to have policy tools at all, right? 
So that's one thing. Another is to Alissa's point, I think while the internet society is an advocate of encryption, encryption of traffic between the client and DNS resolver is a must. 
If you deploy DNS your last mile is ‑‑ that's insane. On a wireless network you connect to a secure wireless network although it's like that's my access point. Why do I need to encrypt my traffic? That's very important. Other issues are at play. The trade‑offs are sometimes ‑‑ I think it is difficult to say a definite answer, that's the way it should go. Circumstances vary and deployment models also vary. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Great. Okay. So we are at ten minutes left in the workshop. My colleague has been monitoring the Q&A. I thought maybe we'd take a couple of questions from the audience. I realize we have been taking some earlier throughout, but maybe there are a couple more. 
>> BARRY LEIBA: Brenden, can I interject first? DNS sec was mentioned particularly by Andrei. We often get the question that with DoH do you need DNS SAC. The two things solve different problems. 
DoH is intended to solve the privacy issue and the confidentiality of the queries. DNS sec is addressing the integrity of the response data. So, yes, it is still absolutely necessary to do DNS sec even if you have DoH. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Thanks for the clarification. Do you want to provide any of the questions that have come up Jyoti? 
>> JYOTI PANDAY: First is if my resolver is switched from a European service to a U.S. one using DoH my personal data shifts outside of GDPR. I guess it goes back to the point Alissa touched upon. If there is something that any other panelist would like to add to that or, Alissa, do you want to clarify more on this? It seems to be coming up in the chat as well.
 
>> ALISSA STARZAK: Generally GDPR follows you as a person. It is a personal selection. You still retain your privacy protections. The question is what happens if a government requests it. Forget the U.S. for a minute. Take it outside of those contexts. If it goes somewhere else can the U.S. government request it and what does the provider do? This has been a big issue in the privacy space generally. Our position as a company which I think other entities provided as well is that it is essentially a conflict of law question. Because it is a conflict of law question it is not something we would provide to law enforcement. We think we would be legally prohibited from providing it in the GDPR context. If GDPR prohibits us from providing that information to a law enforcement entity we would have to go to court and evaluate that and have a court evaluate that concept of law. 
I think the outstanding questions on these conflicts which encryption gets to is the question of ‑‑ goes back to the sovereignty question. What are we trying to do with the information? What does it look like? Who has access? 
The other piece I would flag in that space is, again, going back to the point that I made before. If it is not encrypted why would you think those entities don't have access? We are coming from the default world where the information has been available. We are now entering a world where there is a potential for more privacy and evaluating what that should look like. That's a conversation we need to have because they are interrelated. If you have a country for example proposing to prohibit DoH why do you think they are proposing to prohibit DoH? What are they looking for? What's that relationship? How do we get transparency on those questions in the human rights context about who has access and when they have gotten it. 
>> JYOTI PANDAY: Another question that's come up which is related to this point is what is the impact of DoH on law enforcement especially when they are investigating crimes. One example that's been cited is if somebody is under investigation is it possible to remove DoH protection without the user knowing? And if this is possible would it be appropriate? Would anybody want to take that on? 
>> AMOD MALVIYA: I would reply to that. DoH, we should be looking in this context as the last mile protection. Disabling, unlikely. But the more centralized the DoH providers, that much more likely that the user is more easily tracked whether they are under investigation or not, that's more of the legality to it. I won't speak to that. The more important point is that DoH certainly provides last mile protection so people can't sniff out. That's an important point Alissa was making. We shouldn't think that the actions of the DoH are a secure data. An equally important concern is the more centralized DoH providers. That much more likely trackability. 
>> JYOTI PANDAY: We have less than five minutes left. That's probably all the time we have for the questions if we want to leave time for the panelists to give closing statements. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Great. Thank you. I appreciate that. 
With that, I'll ask our panelists if they have any quick closing remarks. 
>> AMOD MALVIYA: At the risk of repeating myself I'll just sort of leave the forum on this note. I think there are different layers in the internet stacks solve for different problems. Mixing policy concerns with important decisions that determine the longevity and resiliency for the future. We should prioritize things appropriately. 
The first concern in thinking about protocols, we should be thinking about longevity, resilience, principles of the internet. These sectors. Once those are nailed down we can always figure out how to enforce policy. Premature optimization is the root of all evil as they say in the software engineering world. We would do good to bear that in mind. 
>> JOEY SALAZAR: I would add that I think the current landscape and evolution of this protocol is presenting good opportunities in different areas. We have already spoken about transparency and accountability. Also the enforcement of meaningful user choice that will be attained through the transparency when the user is aware of the policies they are actually requiring contracts with and this type of thing. Then their user choice will be meaningfully enforced and along with other different areas is a great opportunity we need to continue to work on together. 
>> ANDREI ROBACHEVSKY: I just want to add on the general level that DoH is another elephant that different parties are touching and feeling different parts of it. I think it means different things to different entities. That just underscores the importance of the dialogue we are having here and we should continue. 
>> ALISSA STARZAK: I would echo that point. This is an incredibly important dialogue to have. Bubbling it up to a nontechnical audience is a really important piece as well. So I'm really glad to have the conversation today. I hope these types of conversations continue. 
>> OLGA MAKAROVA: We need to learn to live in these and adapt services. 
>> BRENDEN KUERBIS: Great. Any other last remarks? No? Okay. Well, with that, I think I'll echo Andrei and say the elephant is in the room. So we will be paying attention to this topic. I want to thank my panelists for providing such a lively and engaging discussion and also the audience for providing good questions and engaging throughout the discussion, too. 
With that, thanks, everybody. Enjoy the rest of your IGF. 
>> BARRY LEIBA: Bye. 
>> JOEY SALAZAR: Thank you, Brenden, for hosting. 
>> OLGA MAKAROVA: Thank you. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-main-session-digital-cooperation^^

 
>> Okay. I guess it is now time. Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, good morning, good afternoon, good evening. Thank you all so much for your flexibility to join us today. We sincerely hope that you and your families are in the best of health at this time and stand in solidarity with everyone who has an affected by the global pandemic. 
Our conversation today could not be more timely or relevant. We are honored to be joined by a distinguished panel. We will have four segments of the conversation starting off with an opening and introduction by Fabrizio Hochschild continued by a high level panel followed by then a segment and discussion with distinguished experts before we move on to the closing segment. 
So without further ado, allow me to turn over to his excellency under‑Secretary‑General Fabrizio Hochschild who is special adviser to Secretary‑General of the United Nations for his opening remarks. 
>> Thank you so much, Hana. It is a pleasure to see so many familiar faces. I would also like to reiterate the hope expressed by Hana that everybody is in good health and their loved ones also. 
Welcome to this IGF main session on Global Digital Cooperation. It is a pleasure to be among you. Many of you read and provided input to the roadmap on digital cooperation we launched in June. The reactions have been favorable and indicate to me that what we brought together in the roadmap really represents a convergence of views of what needs to be done across stakeholder groups and regions. 
I was further encouraged that in September member states formally recognized the need for global digital cooperation with a paragraph in the high level declaration on the commemoration of the 75th anniversary of the United Nations. That paragraph calls for the U.N. to be a platform for all actors together to steer global digital technologies better towards serving the SDGs. 
The challenge before us now does not appear so much to be what to do. We know we need to overcome digital divides.
We know we need to find ways to make online access safer, more useful, more secure while respecting human rights. 
What is not so clear is not so much the what as the how and while many efforts point to the how, there are already efforts ongoing that are very valuable, but they are not to scale and they are not always very well coordinated. 
One example of that is the multiple efforts that are under way to include ‑‑ to make the access to the internet more inclusive especially of women and girls and despite the many outstanding efforts the statistics indicate we are going in the reverse direction that, in fact, in terms of connectivity the gender gap is growing rather than declining on the internet. 
What we do know on the how is that whatever we do needs to be done through a multi stakeholder effort. 
Although there may be different strongly held views, a multi stakeholder approach is essential and the IGF in that sense is a tremendous platform. Indeed, we have seen this week as the sessions so far have been timely and insightful. We are very fortunate to have all of you here now for this session, a truly multi‑stakeholder representation. 
This session takes place as we consider how best to implement the Secretary‑General's roadmap, recommendations pertaining to the digital cooperation architecture. 
In addition to the IGF sessions that have covered specific themes like cybersecurity and digital connectivity, here we will discuss how to strengthen the IGF itself advancing toward an IGF plus. 
Many of you provided inputs that are reflected in the excellent options paper prepared by the governments of Germany and the UAE. 
A number of you also participated in the IGF working group on strategy and strengthening which provided a very useful response paper with further analysis and suggestions. 
In this session, we will consider several key policy areas that have emerged pertaining to global digital cooperation, namely inclusion, broader participation, accelerated cooperation, outcomes, high level engagement, and communications and financing. Each of these will be essential in ensuring a more impactful IGF or IGF plus and a more robust digital cooperation system. 
We are very fortunate to have several distinguished high level speakers here with us. I would like to start with the topic of accelerated cooperation with a question for his excellency Omar sultan Al Olama minister of state for, artificial intelligence digital government and remote work of the UAE. How do you think we can strengthen cooperation between stakeholder organization processes and foras. 
>> Thank you. It is a pleasure and honor to be with you all today. It is a privilege that we are able to continue to meet together through digital means and aspire change across different geographies. 
It is a very important question you pose. I would like to be pragmatic and try to answer in the best way possible. I think in a world where we want to see accelerated change where we are constantly distracted by notifications, where we are gratified by specific actions and specific pop‑ups that come to us on these digital platforms, we need to ensure the strategies and the roadmaps are appealing to that kind of audience. 
We tend to like to go through discussions or put very ambitious goals that seem too far off. Unfortunately as impact and momentum slows down people get less motivated whether it's countries, companies, or even individuals, to continue the efforts. 
It would be important for us to break down grand visions and also big goals into smaller chunks and actually create incentives for people to go through everything by step and milestone the same way they use social media or specific digital platforms. 
The second is it is also very important and imperative that we ensure that the goals are goals that are multi‑generational. Sometimes we talk to one generation over the other. With climate change is that because it is a multi‑generational issue and the young people are as involved as the older generation, we are seeing today an exclusion of action across the world and activism trying to solve this important issue. 
So I do hope able to put things in this perspective. I also do hope you're able to leverage both technology and the architecture of technology that's being built to put the right roadmap for us moving forward. 
>> Excellency, thank you so much. The points you emphasized about having achievable goals and not being overambitious and thus setting ourselves up for failure. And secondly, ensuring that we have a generational approach that doesn't exclude anyone are two very important points that we will all try to bear better in mind. 
I would like to now turn to his excellency David Sengeh of Sierra Leone. You are acutely aware of the digital divide, minister. You know while most of the developed world enjoys connectivity rates of 80 to 95% in the least developed countries connectivity is for the most part under 20%. 
How could we have the most impact in improving representation of least developed countries in global digital cooperation? 
>> Thank you, Fabrizio, and other distinguished members on the call.
There are two ways to address it. One from what we are doing in Sierra Leone and an opportunity that exists and how we can take advantage of 
You rightly mention that connectivity, access to internet or internet use in a place like Sierra Leone is around 20% in many places. Mobile connectivity is above 80%. The opportunity here is many of these communities are going from 0G to 4G directly. Oh our mobile tech companies aren't building 1G, 2G, 3G. They are going directly from a space with no tower to 4G. 
So you have hundreds of thousands of people in communities going from never having been connected to having the opportunity and capacity to use data, high speed internet. We saw this and we knew this would happen which is why to address this inclusion and opportunity because inclusion is also bringing people who are excluded from opportunity from everybody else and we have an approach through our national innovation and digital strategy called Mobile First. Mobile First and Hybrid Technology Systems. We are taking a mobile first approach that means how do we build solutions, applications, solve problems that everybody can have access to a phone and now many will have cheaper phones and it becomes a question of not just connectivity but how do we make devices available? How do we have $50 devices and not every device has to be $500. How do you go from a $500 device that's a computer to a $50 device that can allow people to buy goods, access health facilities, be able to check up on the education learning. 
When we have mobile first approaches it means then we are able to include people not just able to use data but also USSD and SMS. Then we'll really take advantage of the percent of people who are connected. 
In Sierra Leone we build apps that work offline, online, on the web, on mobile, and also SMS and USSD. A lot of solutions work with everybody using USSD and that's no cost. To go from not just low cost but low cost use of government services. 
Within the digital public goods system as well as one of the founding members, one of our solutions just got added to the digital public goods registry which is for how we do batch payments from governments in a safe and secure with mobile money. 
These hybrid solutions and mobile technology which might seem like it is already excluding actually have a huge opportunity to include the most amount of people to be able to get services because ultimately what we need is access to services. That comes about when we think about connectivity and access in an expansive way. Thank you. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you very much. I think sharing with us those innovative approaches that you are adopting was valuable. I think there is a lot of learning we can do from such examples. 
I would like now to turn to Lisa Fuhr the director general of ETNO. I would like to discuss the issue of accelerated cooperation. You say in your view what is a framework, a model that serves as a best practice for multi‑stakeholder cross‑country cooperation. 
>> Well, I think there are many ways we can build a framework around multi‑stakeholder cooperation. 
I think there is an important point first and foremost to find a way to bring discussions and implementable solutions to actions. I think here it's important that we bring in all the different stakeholder groups. 
I think IGF now is already leading the way in bringing all the players around the table. So that's a very good framework. At this core you have the multi‑stakeholder model and the beauty of this is actually the bottom‑up, the all-inclusive model. 
But the next step if we are to bridge a gap and make sure all stakeholder groups are present and not only present. We need them also to be engaged and we need to be sure that every voice the heard here. Sometimes we have big companies that might speak louder than others. But it's important that we engage and have every voice heard in these discussions. 
I think there is a very important engagement from institutions here, too. We see already increasing participation from parliamentarians. We need to see even more involvement around the world. It's important they go back to their countries with the IGF discussions to bring them alive in their organizations and also I think it's important that the national or regional internet governance fora that are all around the world.
Tools to bring these discussions around the world, but also to make them implementable. Also at ETNO we find it is important to find a strong European voice to bring European values in the worldwide discussions and I think it is important we do that through the EU institutions and also through the stakeholders 
So what is the implemented solutions? To what end can we implement those solutions? ETNO represents the telcos of Europe. While thinking about this question, I asked myself, why do we as Etno come to IGF year after year? And why does ETNO and the members prioritize being here? We come exactly for this. We come for an informed discussion and informed exchange of views from all the people and all the groups that actually matters in this. 
We think that IGF has served very successfully as a laboratory of an exchange, of a discussion, of a dissemination of best practices of technical expertise, of capacity building initiatives along these stakeholder groups. I think the IGF is a good institution and this is where dialogue is happening where it is a result of who's here, who is in the room, who is at the table or as is the case this year on a virtual conference. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you very much. Think your point on ensuring inclusion is not just tokenistic but makes voices heard that otherwise are not heard and taking those ‑‑ giving weight to what is really important. 
I would like to continue a bit with the same topic and turn to Joseph hall who is senior vice president for strong internet at the Internet Society which has long been a strong supporter of the IGF and actively engaged in follow up to the high level panel and roadmap. 
Joseph, how do you think the IGF can be better connected with other forums and processes which consider related matters? 
>> Thank you. What an honor to be on this panel. In order to bridge the gap between discussions and implementable solutions, I think it is important ‑‑ at The Internet Society we would say we need to share a common understanding of what the internet is. This goes without saying but the internet is a complex system at least half of the planet benefits from. 
However, like any eco‑system we must understand what makes it such a platform for communication, creation, innovation. We also have to preserve the essential elements in core regulatory aspects of how it functions. 
I was thinking about this earlier and a quick analogy is to the, quote/unquote, scientific forestry employed in Germany where complex forests were replaced with monocultural, linear tree farms that were more easily tended to from a centralized way with limited knowledge. 
The first yields of the mathematical timber, so to speak, were very high. Within about a century those trees were small and weak reflecting the interdependencies that exist in creating a truly magnificent sustainable eco‑system. If with think about that, though only decades old the internet is like an old growth forest in the depth, ability to survive attacks, disasters and continually reinvent itself. It is a network of networks. The value is the interrelationship of different devices, applications and uses linked by a common set of protocols. 
The management is not centralized. Intelligence is at the edges in the hands of those running local networks. The internet is increasing the value for all. It's not just the technology or its services and use that define the internet. It is how we network which the Internet Society called the internet way of networking that also matters. We have to understand what the internet is and honor the DNA when we decide to make changes to it. That's a really key core thread to what we are doing here. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you so much, Joseph. I think this notion of maintaining the decentralized character of the internet, the diversity of the internet is a key point. 
A little known and totally irrelevant fact but you provoked me to share it is that I am actually a forester by training and I spent ‑‑ 
>> Cool! 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: ‑‑ part of my training in Germany. Your analogy is good. But to be fair to German forestry of today, they have long left behind a passion for monocultures and now do plant forests that are not linear and are multi mixed species. I like the analogy and I will use it. 
Also, like foresters thinking not just whatever economic gains or social impacts or political impact we'll have today, but foresters think 50, 80, 120 years from now. There is a legacy issue around the internet that we also say deserves greater attention. You have provoked me, but I'll shut up. 
Next to Olga Cavalli, academic director at the South School on Internet Governance. I would like to go back to inclusion and participation. In what ways can we improve meaningful participation of academia in global digital cooperation, especially to the extent possible academia from developing countries. 
>> Thank you. I want to congratulate the staff for organizing this great IGF. I know how difficult it is to move from a face‑to‑face large meeting like IGF to a virtual meeting. I think it is going very well. I'm happy it spread all over so I can participate in more workshops and sessions before. So I commend you for that. 
We learned in the IGF that we needed in Latin America stronger leadership. We realize the leadership participation in IGF was low or not informed. We started with the School of Internet Governance creating a space especially with multi-disciplinary perspectives. 
So those who were trained in law could learn from technology. Those trained in technology like myself could learn about regulations and human rights and privacy and security and other things. 
There is still a gap in between universities and all that we are doing in the IGF. It's up to us to bridge that gap. Many of us ‑‑ I'm a teacher at the University of Buenos Aires. Let me tell you, I am the only one in a very big university. The largest English speaking language in South America and I am the only one following the IGF. I talk about it with my colleagues and students. Many of them have gotten engaged after I have been in touch with them to give them information and developments of the IGF. I think we still have a gap, especially in developing countries. We could partner with universities to have more active hubs. The hubs are there but we should have more active engagement with universities from developing economies. As I said before we believe a stronger leadership in developing economies is relevant for achieving the goals that we need for development. We need to work to make that gap smaller. Thank you for inviting me. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you, Olga. Yes. We have to recognize that gap and be aware of it. Thank you for your efforts in trying to reduce it. 
We are also joined by Miranda Sissons. From your perspective what do you see as one of the greatest challenges in digital cooperation and what role do you see for the IGF in better addressing it? 
>> Thank you very much indeed. I'm delighted to be here today. As‑salamu alaykum. I would like to say that actually in the roadmap roundtables we participated in it was itself a great example of the practical benefits of a multi‑stakeholder approach. 
That multi‑stakeholder approach is essential to what we need to do to drive global digital cooperation moving forward. 
Let me echo other speakers. We do see the IGF as an extremely valuable forum because it is uniquely democratic. It has a vital role in helping drive the vitality and connectedness of this crucial conversation which is how we work to ensure this messy network of networks, the internet, remains open, inclusive, secure and responsive to the needs of our time. 
From my perspective and that of the human rights team at the company I work for, in terms of a challenge to global digital cooperation one of the fundamental challenges is that the internet no longer has novelty value to many of us. Many of us are taking its economic developmental and human rights benefits for granted. But we shouldn't. 
The internet's development isn't linear and neither is the governance development. It is not going to continue to act towards open exchange of information, innovation, expression, unless we work hard to make it so. That's particularly important this year. It is particularly important for this IGF because the realities of fragmentation are increasing rapidly. They are caused by the efforts of some governments to segregate their internet, deploy arbitrary surveillance, weaken encrypted chat platforms or enforce coercive sovereignty regimes. There are also many other centrifugal forces in play. But these changes are accelerating now and they do present a real threat to the open internet. 
So the Secretary‑General's roadmap is a good start because it recognizes that human rights exist online as they do offline. In your connect, protect and respect framework I would call attention to whatever we do now we do have to give very strong attention to the idea that global human rights have to be protected and respected in full. That rights regime is our strongest and most developed framework for promoting and protecting the best of our digital world and mitigating the worst. 
To this audience I want to remind you of article 19 of the ICCPR, freedom of expression. Article two, nondiscrimination. Article 17, privacy from arbitrary government interference. 
So I spend and many of the teams I work with, many of the entities I work with spend many hours in practical work daily to defend those rights. We hope that the increased due diligence and transparency will be a rich vein of insight and accountability for all. 
We want to say we think the meaningful global cooperation this year and in the years beyond depend on a bottom‑up transparent multi‑stakeholder process. We see the soon‑to‑be appointed as potentially playing a really important role in making that process a reality. Thank you. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you so much, Miranda. It was very helpful to remind us that we should not take this great creation for granted but work to conserve it. It reminds me of something my former boss Louise Arbor, a Supreme Court justice in Canada, head of the high commission for human rights, liked to emphasize that the opposite of freedom is not the rule of law. The opposite of freedom is tyranny. In the absence of the rule of law, that's where tyranny can easily prevail. The paradox of the internet, an instrument built on very libertarian ideals, is to conserve its inclusiveness, conserve its free nature, conserve its human rights aligned character will require a greater rule of law precisely to protect that. That's something we are beginning to understand better. But of course it has to be, as you said a bottom‑up, multi‑stakeholder approach. 
With that, I would like to return to his excellency sultan Al Olama. The roadmap is to create a strategic and empowered multi‑stakeholder high level body as part of the IGF which can strengthen its responsiveness and relevance. 
What role do you see for this body to support global digital cooperation? 
>> Thank you. It's very exciting hearing inputs from the different panelists. I do echo everything that was raised. I would like to add one more important factor we need to factor in when thinking about the IGF and access for all. Sometimes we think generically and expect that everyone understands where we need to go. As was proposed, certain companies are leapfrogging specific issues. The adoption rates are quite high. In the challenges and the issues are not linear in a sense. They are very sporadic when it comes to developing infrastructure and putting policies and comparison between the countries. 
First and foremost we need to not look at all countries on one map equally. When it comes to technical capabilities there are, for example, very finite but help is determined who is advanced versus who is still a lagger. 
But if you look at the citizens and adoptions and policies as well, everyone has a chance to have an open discussion rather than a very generic proposal. 
I also think we need to be pushing a universal basic tech infrastructure that's global in nature. We hear the private sector when it comes to Facebook and Google and other companies looking at providing internet for all using certain means and technologies, but it is not just about internet for all. There are so many other technology requirements from infrastructure perspective. We don't need to wait for the private sector to monetize it. Sometimes it requires for governments and NGOs. It is putting a basic tech infrastructure that allows for everyone to become a part of this world and make sure no one is left behind. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you so much. We admire the leadership you have shown and UAE has shown precisely for those ends. I would like to go back to Minister Sengeh of Sierra Leone. How would you like to see the IGF better bridge the gap between discussions and concrete solutions? 
>> I think it comes down to partnerships. A criticism that existed really of these consortiums and conferences, meetings and forums before was that it didn't lead to the outcomes we spoke and. But since the launch of the activities this summer with you and the Secretary‑General on digital we have seen at every engagement it leads to more partnerships. And more specifically actually with UAE and I remember maybe three, four, five months ago that conversation led to bilateral meetings between Sierra Leone and UAE and collaborations now in building tangible experiences between our countries. 
These things are just a hypothetical with the government of Norway. I think I have a meeting with the minister of international development of Norway next week, again, which happened along the sidelines of these compositions we are having. 
With UNICEF, the incoming new activities that will be announced soon all into these digital public goods. It's really that the right people. I think somebody mentioned having the right people in the room, the right people having a conversation. 
So not just the right people but people who are technical, people who can be policy makers. And who understand the problems they are going to resolve. That link between the problems, the understanding of the technology and the opportunity that exists can be the leverage we need and the opportunity that exists for us to take advantage of the U.N. network and this global partnership and the globalization really, the digitization and the internet enhances. It comes down to the right partnerships and demonstrating something with the right ideas. Good ideas. We can't overtheorize good ideas. We have to test them. And the way to get results is by testing them and we learn from them we have the humility to test our pilots what we can modify, improve and do them. Then share that with the rest of the world. There are good ideas and good pilots that are never shared in this opportunity. It is the right partnership generosity to share is what we need. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: I like that ‑‑ generosity to share. Partnerships that are giving is critical. 
I would like to now move and talk a bit about communications and financing. I would like to come back to Lise. Tell me what outreach and financing should be considered for the IGF. 
>> I think the beauty of this question and I agree this is a really important question. I think it is part of a virtual circle. If we get the people and groups that matter to join the IGF in this room we will actually have the discussions that are needed. The fruitful discussions that are important for all the stakeholders. 
It is important we have the policy makers, civil society. We need the companies, technical communities. We need them to take those messages and discussions home. We need them to be inspired and to implement them because that's when you realize the value of coming to IGF. I think the visibility and the support of the IGF really rests on the participation and participants. 
Another important element for me is that IGF should not be something that happens once a year. We need the discussion to continue between the IGFs. We don't want more than one meeting a year, but we need to have our members involved also between the meetings. There are other foras where you can bring those discussions. ETNO and our members have been involved in EURO‑dig and C‑dig and we think those are important for us to continue those discussions. If we build on an ongoing discussion at the international, at the regional and also at the national level that we attract relevant stakeholders and this is how we remain attractive and continue to get support that's needed for IGF to thrive. I think that's important. The discussion isn't just a one‑off. It is an ongoing discussion that needs to be here in IGF and also percolated out into the member states or the states, sorry. Thank you. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you. Your points about getting the funding required because people see usefulness in the exercise and secondly the point of the IGF not being a one‑off annual event but an ongoing process and discussion not necessarily with multiplicity of meetings but very important. 
I would like to come back to Joseph now. I would like to ask you what additional methods for concrete policy recommendations you would like to see at the IGF. 
>> Thanks. So I think it is important to recognize the value of the discursive forum and not discount it and understand that the value IGF brings as a discursive form is really important. While we are thinking of potential different ways to have concrete outcomes or policy recommendations I don't want to lose track that talking in a well moderated forum with a good level of accessibility is something there is just not a lot of places like that despite the fact that we haven't penetrated everyone's brain as Olga said. 
I think it's pretty easy to pick a few genres of outcomes and try to create forums within IGF where folks that participate in those forums are on notice that this isn't purely discursive. For example, you could imagine by entering this aspect of IGF discussion you are committing to take part in a pilot project to commit funds to fund additional research that may be informed by the discussion that happens. So I don't think that's hard. I think we have to come together and think about what are the outcomes that the multi‑stakeholder environment particularly values or wants to see more of. Do you want to see novel forms of networks out there? This is what we do. I'm sorry to be a one‑note thing. 
What are those? We have feelings or that but having a session to talk about how to set up the rules in different IGF forums to focus and let people know we are expecting you to make changes to business operations by spending time with us. I'm sorry so speak so fast. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: No, no, Joseph. Thank you. Your emphasis on not disregarding the value of the IGF is very valuable and important. 
I think we also have to beware not to establish the dichotomy between either a discursive form or one with outcomes. Hopefully we can combine both. I don't think it is contrary to maintaining the discursive character of the IGF. 
Olga, if I could turn to you, in addition to the creation of the multi stakeholder body how could the IGF boost high level engagement and hopefully through that impact. 
>> Very good question. It's been the source for so many interesting activities like the schools of internet governance, regional IGF, national IGF. I still think there is a gap Wu with regional and other activities that do not address exactly what the IGF is doing. 
So the MAG and the high level body could find ways to contribute with content and I like what Lise said about doing activities between the different IGFs. Not only one time a year activity but it is a process along the year. So the Mag and this high level group could partner and be in touch with regional and national activities and then send some documents, input, perhaps partner with experts that can participate. Now that we have learned that distance doesn't exist for participation, we organized the school virtual last month and had many experts from all over the world and students. We now know we can count on experience and knowledge from all over the world and from all over the experts. So let's profit on that and let's profit from what we have learned with this pandemic that participation is not limited. 
Now we have learned. Let's do that with exchanging the IGF experience into other existing processes, schools, regional IGF, national IGF, government activities, government meetings, technical meetings. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you so much, Olga. It's good to have a reminder of what the IGF has led to coming into being through its activities. 
Miranda, final question. What type of outcomes would you like to see from the IGF in the future? 
>> Oh, that's a big question. I think what from my perspective would be extremely valuable is to take this discursive frame and absolutely run with the idea that the goal should be to make it easier for stakeholders with limited budgets, power, expertise to make their voices heard in this valuable discursive process and that the IGF should be convened in various regions taking place outside of Europe and that there should be an active process, a thoughtful process of considering the value of examples of multi‑stakeholder initiatives such as the global network initiative which, in our experience, has developed into a valuable and impactful resource for many kinds of stakeholders. 
So not diminishing at all the discursive value of the program and the process but thinking how do we design in this multi‑stakeholder sharing of knowledge in an intentional way. The freedom house, freedom on the net report in 2020 argued the best way to stave off the rise of cybersovereignty is to restore confidence in the legitimacy and efficacy of the existing multi‑stakeholder model. 
We look to see practical steps for people to rally to see how to architect, how to develop the capacity and resources to bring together the various important conversations on digital cooperation so that there is more capacity for the IGF to become a central node for many of those conversations. 
We appreciate the fact that some governments have shown a strong interest in strengthening the IGF and that the Secretary‑General's roadmap also points in that direction. We'd look to see as part of this broader and more practical stakeholder linkage and participation that there is linking to other parts of the U.N. or OECD this is developing internet and other important policy principles and to multi stakeholder fora. 
I would also like to harken back to Joseph and give him plus one. What happens if we seek to also adapt the IGF toolset. An experiment with becoming agile in some way to meet these challenges. If we can rally multi stakeholder focus to define a problem to solve using the tech to understand, codesign, create, iterate, what experiment could we run to provide rapid value now for this unprecedented time of COVID and this unprecedented moment of regulatory action. I'll stop there. Those are thoughts rather than comments. I hope they are useful. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: A lot of interesting thoughts about how to use the technology to try to informalize an experiment and in particular to add more road grip with this multi‑stakeholder approach. I think those are valuable ideas and I hope we can. I think we all hope we can move in that direction. 
I would like to thank all of you that spoke for the brevity and outstanding input. I think it's been a rich discussion. This concludes this segment of our discussion. 
I would like now to turn over to a member of the multi stakeholder advisory group Rudolf Gridl. He will moderate a dialogue now on these key areas. Over to you. 
>> Thank you so much. Good evening, good morning, good afternoon to everybody. Distinguished guests, speakers and panelists. I am also very honored to be the moderator of this expert session. We have already had a good discussion on questions concerning the way forward in the architecture of the internet governance. I'm very pleased to continue this with renowned experts. 
My first question would go to his excellency Thomas Schneider, director of the international affairs at the Swiss federal office of communications. He has been around in the internet governance scene for quite some time. I would say from the very outset. At least from the forum. 
Thomas, for you the question from your experience and all the networks that you have been in and you are still in, how can we manage this aim of an accelerated cooperation? How can these different stakeholder group organizations come together to break the silos and work together? 
>> Thank you. Can you hear me? 
>> Yes. 
>> Excellent. It's good to see you all at least virtually, if not physically. I hope everybody is fine and healthy. With regard to your question, indeed one of the key issues of breaking the silos is bridging the gaps between the discussions and pragmatic solutions so when it comes to IGF as a process this will work. Switzerland has a clear vision that the IGF needs to evolve into what many call IGF plus to become a keynote for digital governance. 
The IGF over the years has already repeatedly demonstrated its value for identifying emerging topics and for sharing policy discussions. Its rich multi‑stakeholder community has always offered fertile ground for further development and evolution. 
In our eyes the IGF is predestined to be the place in the future to shape policies for the digital world and to use an expression used in the high level panel the IGF, in our view, can be and should be the kitchen where many of the dishes can be prepared that are needed to address the challenges in our digital present. However, excellent discussions and brilliant ideas and insightful approaches to solutions developed at the IGF run the risk of fading away unheard and unheeded if they do not reach the halls of decision‑making institutions and fora. We need to build strong bridges between the actors. Especially between the discussions and insights of experts like here at the IGF and the decision‑makers including high level decision‑makers among all stakeholder groups. 
The U.N. SG's road map and options paper prepared by the cochampions I hear the UAE and Germany for roundtable 5A and B and the office of Fabrizio contain ways and means to make it happen. We think these things should be implemented. First by boosting the relevance of the policy networks and outputs as already was mentioned. 
For instance, by covering politically relevant topics like the issue of digital self‑determination or the intersection between digitization and climate change. And by connecting these policy networks with the decision‑making levels through linking these network discussions with the high level segment of the multi‑stakeholder high level body through relaying these policy networks and IGF outputs to all other fora directly through their engagement and at a high level through the multi‑stakeholder high level body. 
Second by effectively and timely addressing urgent issues with an empowered IGF. Third, by increasing the ownership of the IGF way of doing things in decision‑making levels through the high level segment parliamentarian track we have seen growing in Berlin and the rotating membership of the multi‑stakeholder high level board. 
Finally, by strengthening our valuable secretariat of the IGF and also its funding in order to allow it to more effectively liase with others and creating the future. Funding is key there. With no funding you are not present even in virtual meetings. 
Finally by strengthening the links and synergies between the IGF and existing observatories, help desks, active in offering capacity building and quality information in the field of digital governance like the Geneva internet platform and various schools of internet governance mentioned already. 
In addition to improve the inclusiveness of IGF plus by including voices and views of ordinary citizens, particularly from the global south through digital styles that have been tested this year. With such evolutions we just need to implement them. We are convinced the IGF will be in a position of playing the role of a major multi‑stakeholder node in the network of digital policy shaping and making fit to answer the challenges of our interdependent digital world. Thank you. 
>> Thank you, Thomas, for this concrete and actionable ideas. Some of these ideas are already being tested in the European dialogue on internet governance. I'm happy and pleased to have Sandra Hoferichter here. She is a very knowledgeable internet governance expert. Sandra, the issue that also Thomas raised of actionable outcomes, what can we do concretely to have more outcomes that are relevant for people outside the IGF community? What's your experience? 
>> Good morning, good afternoon, good evening. Thank you very much for inviting me to this session. 
I would like to redirect your question in a little bit different direction. I would say what can be done to make the outcomes of the IGF more relevant to decision‑makers. You know, as an organizer of the regional forum I'm advocating that we have quite a number of good outcomes and I would like to see them become more influential and thinking about what can be produced in addition. 
Let me quickly name what I consider to be an output of the multi‑stakeholder discussions. I will be brief. Many things have been said already by the other distinguished speakers. 
Messages, reports, papers from the sessions, workshops, plenaries and best practice foras and dynamic coalitions are the main outcome produced in all IGF initiatives. A lot of effort even was invested in transparent reporting methodologies including comment phases by involving all stakeholders. 
We know these outcomes aren't negotiated but built on consensus. That makes them strong and weak at the same time. Depending from which perspective you look at them. They are strong because the substance has broad support from multi‑stakeholders and they can be weak because it is sometimes a group could agree on. Sometimes even the group agrees to disagree and I think this is a message, too, because it points to the direction in which a discussion has to be continued. 
If you would call for more papers to be produced, I wonder what it would envision other than resolutions or declarations. Then we are giving up on the unique selling point of the IGF and ignoring the mandate IGF has. A second is the input. That's underestimated. To give you an idea what could be achieved when a legislator understands the technical basis before adopting a law or when they understand the implications such a law might have in practice. 
On the other side it helps when someone from the technical community understands the constraints of an elected legislator and the relationship between code and law. This could be achieved at the IGF. The third output is the global societal debate. We need to have this debate on risk challenges, opportunities, in order to build a sustainable digital future. Without broad consensus we risk to damage and fragment our network. 
A fourth outcome is transcript, videos, records, messages. There is meanwhile a huge repository of knowledge and many Ph.D. students and researchers are referring to these sources, analyzing for research and I think that's also highly underestimated. 
Fifth involvement of young people, I think we did well in this regard. Youth programs are always on the agenda of many IGFs and many youngsters got started in such a program became high level experts later on. 
The sixth is the tremendous growth of national and regional IGFs that can be considered at one of the most significant outcomes of the IGF mandate. 
To give you a number as of 2019 there were more than 120 initiatives located in all five regions of the world. This proves there is a desire for multi‑stakeholder discussion in all parts of the world.
This all happened with limited resources on a voluntary basis. We need to place these in order to add more building blocks in the future. The question is within IGF model what can such building blocks entail? I understand that many of the things I have just mentioned of the outcomes cannot be measured and I'm also as the organizer of a regional IGF constantly thinking what can be done from our side to become more visible and relevant. 
First and foremost, I think we can improve on the communication on our outcomes. Just look at how it is reported on the world economic forum or on climate summits. We have to get there. It is possible. 
We currently don't have the resources to do so. Secondly, make sure our messages, our reports are really understood and I'm saying nothing new here. Capacity building is key and Olga elaborated already. A lot of why these things are important and what is in place already. 
Third, we have to narrow the gap between the level of discussions and the decision‑making level. It's just started with the involvement of parliamentarians. We must win this group as a constant contributor to the IGF and we can help them to connect with each other to exchange on their experiences. They just reiterated on Tuesday and it is our task to guide them through our sometimes complicated participation process. 
>> Sandra, we have to look a little bit to the clock. 
>> Okay. I'll summarize what I consider the most urgent action items for the IGF and all national and regional initiatives improve the communications and make sure our outcomes from really understood. Thank you. 
>> Thank you so much, Sandra for these great insights. I'm now turning to a commissioner and advocate specialist Bocar Ba focused on infrastructure extension and investment through collaboration and multi‑stakeholder partnership in the region. Also the CEO of the telecommunications council and has several high ranking tasks within the ITU. For 29 years he's been a professional with experience in the telecoms industry. 
With all your experience and knowledge and what we have heard today, do you have any ideas that you could share with us about inclusion that is so vital and so crucial for the development of internet and internet governance? It would be great to hear insights from your experience. 
>> Thank you very much. Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, from Dubai. It is a pleasure to be here today in this important session which aims to enhance stakeholder inclusion as mentioned by Rudolf, and enable broader participation on this IGF platform. As has been identified the world is at a critical inflection point concerning multiple issues and challenge abound. These need be addressed. We have heard that earlier from my colleague. Everyone heard equally to ensure we can develop cooperative ways of overcoming issues and challenges and remain aligned on sustainable goals and reap the positives of the digital revolution. Now the option papers spells out very clearly where we need to improve our efforts to include the developing nations. Inclusivity has been identified as one of the biggest challenges and the most important pillars for supporting improved cooperation especially in the digital space. We all require sharing information and experience and I would like to repeat again on an equal footing. To help ourselves and those with policy making powers to push actions based on informed decisions. This can truly enable thoughtful discussions and dissemination of best practices for the express purpose of enabling more countries ‑‑ and this is important ‑‑ to realize the economic and societal benefits of digital transformation that we are talking about globally. In this regard, the IGF informs and inspires those with policy‑making power in both public and private sector. 
Given the tremendous potential that the platform IGF carries and drawing inspiration from it, there are multiple ways we can further inclusion in global digital cooperation and especially from so far let's say underrepresented stakeholders group. 
This can start with incentivizing greater participation within the forum for all stakeholders and countries and create a sense of belonging and someone before me mentioned from the developing nations. 
As an example the preparation for the IGF agenda and priorities must be focused enough to allow for fruitful dialogue and yet be general enough so to remain relevant to both developed and developing nations. One focus is on the sustainable economy for developing and developed nations alike. 
If we can elevate ‑‑ and I will be short, Rudolf ‑‑ the concern of national ICT players as an example, national income operators to be to the highest level of ICF agenda when we are forming it this will enhance the focus to those stakeholders and to the geography they are representing in those countries. Generally, our approach in policy governance and regulation has to be driven by objective. It was listed by Fabrizio at the beginning. 
So the objective is leave no one behind. In conclusion, the stakeholders in developing nations are keen on pursuing collaboration in order to make progress on both national ICT visions as well as global commitments. Given that the internet is undergoing fundamental changes it is inevitable that the world will learn to cooperate better and all nations will have to strive toward achieving and facilitating inclusiveness. The IGF has a well-defined much needed role to play in helping nations embrace these challenges we are talking about. Thank you very much. 
>> Thank you so much, Bocar. Our next expert is one out of three of my bosses or former bosses now on this expert call. She has been for many years the CEO of the Internet Society and then she was the chair of the Mag and in this capacity she was my boss. I was a humble, ordinary member. Lynn St.‑Amour. We have already many discussions, Lynn, about the question of financing of the IGF and the communications. 
With all your experience, what are your insights and ideas about this very crucial and critical topic which has already been raised several times this evening. 
>> Thank you. One of the pluses of being part of a multi‑stakeholder process is there are no bosses. We are all in it together as equals. 
I would just come quickly to the point where I support so many of the comments that have been made. In particular Thomas, Sandra and Bocar's comments with respect to things we could do to improve the IGF's attractiveness, if you will. 
The IGF community has been working on these problems and issues for a long time, since its first days, in fact. So many elements are prepositioned. We have a great idea what needs to be done, good ideas of how they could be done and who we would reach out to. Partnerships are central to much of what we do. 
The one thing we lack still consistently is finances to support the resources to do this. We have lots of outputs and they could be strengthened and improved primarily, I think, in how they are communicated and how they are aggregated and then ultimately shared. But, again, we lack the resources to do that. Most of you will have heard me say this before. The IGF gets a tremendous amount of support from a very small number of governments and even smaller number of private sector companies. 
To some extent there is not a great enough appreciation of the benefits of the dialogues. The problems we are grappling with are complex, nuanced, differ by societal and cultural and geographic. It takes time to really understand and pull apart those key components. I think that's not recognized well enough. Maybe it's coming more to that point even for the Stanford deliberative processes. A lot of what the IGF has done and is trying to do. We really need to break the back of the financing problem. I think there are elements to do that. The IGF mag had a working group on financing. We are restricted somewhat by the U.N. affiliation and our own financing requirements. Transparency helps. Putting the mag in charge in terms of reference of any pilot or project that might be funded from external money or sources. 
Making it a central part of the IGF's policy activities at any point in time. All those things would bring more attention, funding, outcomes. There are ways to do that that would not endanger any kind of U.N. rules or protocols would ensure they weren't captured by any specific special interest. Again, transparency. Putting the mag in very significant responsibility position would help that. The world economic forum has some models that I think would need to be adapted for the IGF but also are good learning experiences for how we can bring in more support, more resources and more funding. 
I know we're short on time. So I will stop there. But the number one problem we all need to fix is resources and financing. That starts with all of us doing everything we can to advocate for the IGF to pull in participation, to pull in acknowledgment of outputs to put them into our workstreams as well so there continues to be a greater awareness. Here, I think the U.N. could play a significant role. Honestly have not always been as present as we might have expected them to be given Kofi Annan's leadership and vision so many years ago. 
I will stop there and hope it was concrete enough and to some degree helpful. Thank you. 
>> Thank you, Lynn. It was very concrete and very helpful, of course. So now to hear from the private sector. Mr. Radoslaw Kedzai from Huawei. What is your idea to have high level engagement to have more high level participation and perhaps also outreach within the system. Do you have views on that? 
>> Thank you. Thank you for having me. I'm very impressed by my predecessors' points of view. It is a very good question. I think we should start with several points. I have put them down to some extent to make my thinking stream more systematic. 
First of all, the pandemic has accelerated the digital and intelligent transformation and reminded us that we are in urgent need of innovation and cooperation to ensure the effect that technology has on society and individuals is positive, balanced and inclusive. 
We would like to share our practices as well as commitment to innovation, equal opportunities, diversity, that inclusion globally with a focus on collaborating with them to create better society for every person, family, and organization. 
Digital technologies have unleashed a new age of computing, information mobility and communication. My predecessors don't talk about laptops or computers. They talk about mobile phones. This is the reality. 
With the pandemic situation mobile communication plays a much more important role in our daily life work and other activities. 
The digitalization has become a global trend that could bring profound changes to life and economies. Therefore there needs to be a global multi‑stakeholder efforts and global inclusive standards that apply for all. The time the U.S. saw dominance and has been the greatest driver and beneficiary of technology, innovation and also a vibrant entrepreneurial spirit have passed. Inclusive cooperation in the digital sector across all regions and balanced competition that bring more opportunities have become significant more than ever. 
We are living in a more connected world with boundaries, attempts to undermine global cooperation in the digital sector or exclude stakeholders from the markets should be prevented in order for all of us not to bear the costs of this exclusion. 
We continue to work with partners to build an industrial eco‑system. With a focus on driving progress toward the U.N. sustainable development as we create the digital and intelligent work together we are bringing the benefits to more homes, individuals and organizations. Today we need to accelerate this global digital cooperation seizing on the opportunities that are presented by technology while mitigating the risks so that the progress toward achieving goals by 2030 can be made collectively. 
Huawei is ready to help the countries, societies and partners around the globe to harness the power of technology and innovation. We welcome the cooperation with all the stakeholders and they are committed to fight exclusion around the globe. 
My predecessors talked about the differences between the developed and developing markets. This is torrent important to keep in mind there are different ways of looking at the importance of digitization in different parts of the world but we have to come together and harness them, looking at them from a different point of view. 
I think this is one of the opportunities for IGF to play the role of having a global view and including everyone in its organization to address the challenges that come from a different angle and different dimension. 
What I also wanted to mention is that, you know, hearing my former speakers, that the existing digital cooperation architecture has become highly complex and diffused but not necessarily effective. Global processes are often not inclusive enough. 
This situation is exacerbated by the lack of common standards and rules for the global digital architecture which makes it especially hard for developing countries, small and medium‑sized enterprises, groups with hard hit economics by the pandemic, limited budgets and expertise to make their voice heard. 
Also in those difficult times you see we are all embracing the fact that we can communicate between each other without being very close to each other. It became part of our life. Whether this is in forums like IGF, in our work, in learning, where Netherlands, this kind of communication becomes a new normal. 
We have to have standards, how to make it simple for the organizations to adapt to the technological baseline that will allow everyone to use this technology in the unified manner. 
My predecessors talked about the governance which doesn't mean limitation. Governance means setting up the standards and basic rules that everyone can follow. For example, certification of certain technologies. Or a set of recommendations. How to prepare the technologies in certain areas regardless if it's an economic area, education, geographical area to be used in the same way. I was about to finish actually. Thank you for having me. 
>> Thank you so much. I'm very sorry. I also want to apologize to the next speakers that I have to ask them now to be concise and short. The birthday child of the day, Anriette. You are somebody who has been working on internet governance issues for a very long time. You are one of the most outstanding experts in Africa, southern Africa and in the internet hall of fame. 
My question would be coming from the multi‑stakeholder community and being in this community, what do you think about this idea of high level engagement of new high level ideas you would perhaps need in the internet governance forum that's been on the table for some months now? Thank you. 
>> Thank you very much, Rudolf. I want to talk just briefly before I talk specifically about the particular multi‑stakeholder high level body. Just a little bit about the challenges of digital cooperation. Because I think it's not easy and we need to take that into account. 
Firstly the scope of cooperation. The internet and digital technologies don't exist in a parallel universe. So the challenges that we need to address are more than digital challenges. They involve working with more than just people in the digital sphere. So that makes it complex. The scope of cooperation first. 
Secondly the quality of cooperation. I think we know already from 20 years of working through this process trying to find solutions that meaningful cooperation and partnership is not easy. We heard this from previous speakers as well. Multi‑stakeholder engagement takes up more than just putting people from different backgrounds around the table. It needs revealing differences, dealing with interest, working through these interests to build lasting partnerships. 
Thirdly, inclusivity. We just heard the previous speaker talk about this as well. We talk a lot about cooperation and being inclusive. I think we use it quite loosely. 
How do we develop the kind of targeted inclusivity if you're dealing with hate speech, how do you make sure people that are impacted by hate speech, the people that perpetrate hate speech, they are facilitated together. This is complex. 
Fourthly, sustaining cooperation takes time. It takes institutional capacity and we have heard that from previous speaker as well. 
To talk about the multi‑stakeholder community I think the IGF needs to evolve and connecting more effectively with leaders is part of what we need to do. I think this body can help to achieve that. But I think we also need to keep in mind that the IGF needs to connect effectively with two other groups as well that I think we are not connecting with effectively enough. That's people, communities, end users, people impacted by the issues we talk about but that are not yet in the process itself. That don't come to the IGF that are not part of NRIs. 
A second group, implementers, the small businesses, people that build the network, that run the infrastructure on the ground. The local government officials, technocrats. We need them in the IGF as well. I think when we invest in this multi‑stakeholder high level body we need to invest in it in a way that strengthens the credibility, legitimacy of the IGF. But not in a way that effects that strength of the IGF, the primary strength of the IGF which is its bottom‑up nature. We need to continue to invest in that at the very same time as we invest in better interinstitutional leadership relationships. 
>> Thank you. That's a very important point. I want to go directly to the next speaker, my actual director in the ministry for economic affairs in Germany, Daniela Bronstrup. She was cochair of the mag last year and is responsible for the telecommunications for the G7 and the multi‑stakeholder process amongst others. Daniela, we heard that we need to focus on the multi‑stakeholders and the bottom‑up aspect of the IGF. On the other hand we want outcomes that are actionable and outcomes that are relevant for the outside world. What is your view on this challenge? 
>> Thank you so much for the question. Hello, everybody. I'm delighted that at least we can meet each other virtually and I can see you on screen today. 
Yes, coming to the question, what I would like to echo with Fabrizio Hochschild, he mentioned we need policy recommendations on one man and on the other hand that doesn't mean we do not need discussions on the contrary. Good policy recommendations are built on discussions and I think the IGF plus should stay a discussion body. 
Nevertheless, we should ‑‑ like, for example, someone said to focus on recommendations or outcomes that really help in changing the world. So in my view we have already made considerable progress during the last years. I remind you of the Geneva messages. We should try to make them even more action‑oriented and as concrete as possible. 
I think there is significant demand for stronger common orientation on digital cooperation and there have been proposals for strong leadership enjoying wide support and deserves particular attention. This is especially the high level group as a part of the IGF. Similar to executive committee and in addition to the mag which could continue to focus on organizational tasks. The high level group would have a limited number of members to ensure effectiveness and operability, feature multi‑stakeholder representation and create links to other fora. 
This suggestion would correspond to the strategic and empowered multi stakeholder high level body mentioned in the Secretary‑General's road map for digital cooperation. 
While the group would not be a decision‑making body they would support bringing outcomes to decision‑makers. 
In my view the high level body needs to be interlinked. The chair needs to be a born member of the high level body. And the high level body should be a transmission gear between discussions at the IGF and the decision‑making bodies. 
Last year we invited parliamentarians to Berlin to make sure the outcomes of the IGF are transmitted to the political process. I think that was very successful. I heard that yesterday the parliamentarian session at the IGF 2020 was very successful as well. I think we should follow on that path. Thank you. 
>> Thank you so much, Daniela. Last but not least from the Civil Society we have the coordinator of the internet caucus in Brazilia Bruna Santos. What are your views and insights? Could you share them with us, please? 
>> Thank you very much. It is an honor and a pleasure to participate in the session today with so many esteemed colleagues. On behalf of the internet governance caucus and organizations very much welcome this opportunity to address this IGF session on furthering digital cooperation. 
It is already mentioned organizations actively taking part in the digital cooperation process from its inception committed to supporting the implementation of the roadmap in which all stakeholders play a part in a safer more equitable world, one which leads to a brighter and more prosperous future for all. 
In terms of outcomes and suggestions we commend the discussions on improving and strengthening the IGF both in the context of roundtable 5A and B, the mag working group and strengthening and strategy. 
When it comes to enhancing the IGF mission we agree that it is key for this to facilitate a greater range of outcomes and promote a broader range of discussions with all approaches. 
Additionally we commend and welcome the call for voluntary commitments. But jumping onto our recommendation, I think I would highlight three. 
First of all, the need for stronger links between the IGF secretariat and the office of the U.N. SG and the IGF as well to ensure higher visibility for the forum and coordination with various U.N. processes and projects. We likewise agree the appointment and eventual office and work of the envoy should be grounded in principles of multi stakeholder dialogue and transparency. 
Any possible discussions should take into consideration existing structures through improved documentation process, coalitions as well as a national and regional IGF in order for outcomes and more inclusivity in the parliamentarian track already mentioned here. 
We would like to see improved communication of the final messages to parliaments and the community as a whole. 
Last but not least, we'd like to point out this process should not create or avoid creating duplications with the mag or the processes that are already under way. We should retain the primary role as a multi stakeholder body. 
Just to finalize my intervention I would say that the IGF should remain inclusive, open, gender responsive and keep the multi‑stakeholder nature of which has been its hallmark over 15 years. Thank you very much. 
>> Thank you so much. We are already five minutes over time. So that leaves me with nothing else but giving back to you, Fabrizio and thanking you all for valuable contributions. Thank you. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you. I was listening to the discussion with great interest and many important points shared there. 
I'll be brief. But I have to mention something within the time constraints and I hope the person concerned won't get upset with me. If I'm not mistaken today, in fact, is an important day not just because of this discussion but even more so because I think it is Anriette's birthday. I think we are all fans and I'm not sure if we might actually scare her away if we tried to sing together, but I know we join in wishing her the best and a wonderful year ahead. 
As we conclude, I would like to invite each of the high level speakers we had at the beginning to make a quick 15‑second commitment on how they will contribute to global digital cooperation including a stronger IGF or IGF plus. Sadly his excellency minister Al‑Alama had to leave us. I would go to minister Sengeh. 
>> For me because I sit at minister of education and chief innovation officer my commitment is clear to support what the U.N. is doing with these digital assets and particularly with the digital public goods. I remain committed as one of the digital public goods alliance institutions and our government units for ensuring that we can use data, technology that we can share and engage with to transform national development. These have to be open and used for driving impacts in our countries. In Sierra Leone we are focused on human capital development which is education, security, and health. That's what we are committed to do. Thank you. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you so much. If I could go to Lise now. 
>> Thank you. I think this dialogue showed it is extremely important to discuss the future of the global digital cooperation, the two panels showed a high level of engagement and there were many commonalities including we talked about inclusion, dialogue and also defining the differences in the different stakeholders which I think it's important, but the underlying point from my side is there is a strong commitment actually to the internet and to the multi stakeholder model. 
We at ETNO think it is important all those involved and it is a vital dialogue. We think this year showed the need for resilient internet. It took a greater importance than ever. We will continue to come together as part of the global community to ensure a robust open, secure, resilient and accessible internet for everyone. We are here to continue the dialogue not only with IGF but also with EURO‑dig, C‑dig on the national levels, too. We are a strong supporter. We think the dialogue must continue. Thank you. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you. Thank you for your contribution to make that dialogue continue. Joseph, over to you. 
>> At the Internet Society we can commit to working through our community, we have chapters in over 120 countries including recently Bosnia and Herzogovina. But to make sure we fund things and have a stronger, bigger internet that's more inclusive and fundamentally through our projects which include ‑‑ I won't bore you about them. Please check out the Internet Society. End to end encryption and the global encryption coalition and where those issues overlap we are happy to bring resources and connections to experts and things like that to improve the work and make sure everyone has the kinds of information they need to make the decisions and the capacity to go out and do things like connect the rest of the world that's unconnected. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you, Joseph. We hugely appreciate. Olga? 
>> Thank you. I think we are facing challenging times. Economies will suffer. Technology will become very important for developing economies for the global south. Count on our huge network of thousands of fellows and experts from all stakeholders to continue this dialogue and enhance what the IGF is today and will be in the future. Thank you for inviting me. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Thank you, Olga. Miranda, the last word. 
>> Thank you and thank you everyone. As you know safeguarding an open, free and unfragmented internet is more important than ever. The responsibility lies with all of us and we at Facebook and I and my team are committed to preserving an open and secure internet that allows for information to flow freely and that enables an environment for sustainable innovation, economic development, freedom of expression and association that creates a more connected and cooperative world. We are doing that every hour of every day. Thank you. 
>> FABRIZIO HOCHSCHILD: Excellent. Thank you. Inspiring words. 
Now if I could go back to where we started, my dear friend Hana Alhashimi for the final word. I'll say good‑bye. Please stay safe. I look forward to working together to realize the vision so many articulated and where there is a strong convergence of views. 
>> Thank you very much, your excellency. Thank you all and thank you to all speakers for insightful and rich discussion. Given that we have already gone over time we thank you so much for your patience and for making the time. I know for some it is 3:00 or 4:00 in the morning in the east. In other cases the middle of the day. 
This has been an important step in moving forward in this discussion that's started in some ways although back in Geneva and Tunis and other ways in the realm of digital cooperation in 2016, 2017, and we are privileged to have been able to work under your leadership under the Secretary‑General and under the leadership of the Secretary‑General on digital cooperation. 
All that is left building on what the panelists said is encourage all to join the Secretary‑General's call to connect, respect, and protect in the digital age and to note that this is not just an event but really a steppingstone towards the next steps on digital cooperation on a digital future we can all be proud of for both present and future generations. 
If I may, allow me to thank all of the coorganizers together with my cofacilitators, mag members for the session. I would like to thank Rudolf as well for his moderation and in addition, of course, to yourself, Fabrizio Hochschild. I would like to thank the participants and give you a little bit of homework which is, of course, to continue your work in supporting the IGF plus and in supporting global digital cooperation in your respective domains. This is not something any one stakeholder group or any one country or person can do by themselves. We very much rely on all of you to be part of this mission going forward. Thank you so very much. See you on the internet. Take care.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-ws125-how-do-you-embed-trust-and-confidence-in-ai^^

 
>> MODERATOR:  Welcome, everyone.  Thank you to much for joining us today. I'm Catherine Kummer, Global Deputy Vice Chair of Public Policy at EY.  We have a great group of speakers for this panel, all of whom have deep experience with emerging policy issues surrounding technology, the Internet and AI.  We have a diverse group representing perspectives from intergovernmental organisations, technical and standards associations, business, NGOs and think tanks.  I will let them each introduce themselves in a moment.
But first, we all know that the rapid adoption of AI is having a tremendous impact on business and society.  Like all technological change this creates opportunities as well as risks.  We see this firsthand in EY's business as well as request clients.  With AI, one significant risk is trust.  Trust that outcomes are accurate and unbiased, trust that data is protected from unauthorized access, trust that technology is used ethically.  EY and the future society did a study on bridging the AI trust gap, we surveyed policy makers and those in industry and found significant differences in how the two groups think about AI, trust, ethics and governance.
For example, our survey found that the biggest absolute gap in ethical priorities between the private and public sectors concerns fairness and avoiding bias.  In seven of 12 use cases policy makers placed this among the three most important principles, but companies did not.
The second largest gap was around innovation.  Not surprisingly, industry prioritized innovation more strongly across the board.  This could suggest the companies may not be fully assessing ethical risks during their R and D process or at least not in a way that meets expectations of policy makers and the public.  Poor alignment diminishes public trust in AI which in turn slows innovation and the adoption of critical applications.
Our view is that strong governance and appropriate consistent regulations can lead to ethical trust of AI.  If AI is fair, transparent and explainable, this will increase public trust, facilitating further adoption.  Focus multi‑stakeholder discussions like the one we are having today will help further the debate on what governance could be implemented to strengthen trust and confidence in the use of AI.  Closing the AI trust gap is a top priority.  So let's get the discussion started.
We are going to begin by having panelists introduce themselves and make a few opening remarks, then we will move into a moderated discussion followed by audience Q and A.  So please send in questions as we go through the discussion at any point.
So first let me turn to Dr. Koene.  Dr. Koene is one of my public policy administrators who serves as a global ethics and regulatory leader.
>> ANSGAR KOENE:  It's great to be back at IGF.  Let me talk about what my role is at global ethics leader.  Part of this engaging the global public policy team to help with supporting the way in which public policy in this space is being developed by providing insights from the kinds of information that EY is getting through its internal work and also through engagement with clients.  Another important aspect of my work is working internally in helping to shape our own governance frameworks around AI to ensure that any types 6 of AI projects we are developing internally will adhere to best practices around the use of AI to make sure that it doesn't cause unintended harms, does not run afoul of any kinds of regulatory requirements, but also thinking about the ethical and societal implications of the kinds of projects we are working with.  A third aspect of my work within EY is to support the teams that are doing, developing our trusted AI framework, which is one of the offerings within our consulting side work that is helping business community in thinking through the implications of introducing AI systems.
So my thinking actually and my engagement with the work around trust in AI is actually predated even my joining of EY.  It was even part of my work at the University of Nottingham in the academic space on two projects that were really focusing on the impact of digital technologies on society engaging with how do people experience their engagement with these kinds of technologies, what are the issues that they feel are problematic.
One of these kinds of issues, for instance, being questions around fundamental understanding of how do these systems work?  Why do they collect certain types of data about me in order to do this kind of processing?  Am I retaining sufficient control over the direction in which these things are going?
Part of the work we were doing in the academic space was that we really wanted to translate this into, you know, take it out of the academic bubble and translate it into the whole technical and business and also policy space, which is one of the ways in which I started to engage with the IEEE.  So as part of my work with the IEEE I'm Chairing one of their standards Working Groups to develop standard algorithm considerations.  I'm also engaging with NGOs and foundations around the rights of young people online, so really trying to look at a broad perspective how are using these technologies, impacting society, how can we make sure that there is justified trust in these systems.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks, Ansgar.  Next is Dr. Clara Neppel.
>> CLARA NEPPEL:  Thank you for the invitation.  It is a pleasure being here and thank you, Ansgar for the collaboration through all of these years.  My name is Clara Neppel I'm the Senior Director of IEEE Europe.  Ansgar mentioned it briefly.  We are if you want, the world's largest technical organisation in the world.  We have around 400,000 members worldwide in almost every country in the world, and our members are just as Ansgar involved in different phases of technology development and standardization, so from research and development to deployment.
And also I think what is interesting when talking about technology, it is from electrical engineering, which is in our name, two of the Es, and up to quantum computing, Blockchain and obviously AI.
So the reason why I'm here is because IEEE also is a technical community started quite early on, I would say with this effort on recognizing the responsibility of the technical community for the impact of the technology that they are creating that was 2015 with initiative which is called the global initiative of autonomous systems and since this then this initiative created quite a lot of outcomes or maybe the most important one being the report on ethical AI design where engineers together with different stakeholders from civil society try to identify the issues around this autonomous intelligent systems and also to come up with recommendations on how to address this.
Some of these recommendations being for us the technical community, but a lot of them being also addressed to policy makers and since then we are engaging with a lot of international organisations.  We are part of the OCD on AI group, the Council of Europe, similar initiative of the European Union and so on.
We are also engaging in standard setting since we are a standard setting organisation, probably all of you use now our most popular standard, WiFi standard but we are also now engaging in other kinds of standards that I'm going to talk about in a minute.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks care La.  Our next panelist is Dr. Yohko Hatada, CEO of founder of Evolution of Mind, Life, Society Research Institute.
>> YOHKO HATADA:  Thank you very much for having to invite me for this exciting and timely event and discussion.  As Catherine introduced I am founder and Director and CEO of EMLSRI.  Before I was academics in particularly as a whole industry in the question of evolution and development of life.
So I was working a bit longer time span, 4.5 billion years of how the global ecosystem evolved, and now, and after then actually from 2010, actually I was a little bit involved in Japanese politics.  Opposition party got the power and I was excited at the time, and two years there in Japan.  I actually experienced Fukushima nuclear disaster and how the products of democracy could be easily, you know, kind of a disaster moment if the democracy is not founded very deep in society.
And I saw the moment at once overnight actually.  And I fought there, but I left to go to Paris.  So I came back to Britain back, and then EMSRI, actually the integrity of society is dependent on democracy system which actually we are seeing a transformation of the American side.  It is very much related to this AI system issue as well.
And also the gradual so much from Snowden, degradation to Britain also Brexit and American election.  So very much looking at this technology issue in terms of societal and democratic domain and civilizational development, struggle towards global civilization to develop.  So because of my background in academics was developmental neuroscience and also about neuropsychology and very much I'm interested in brain, how we process information related to the other external input, how we eat the information and how we create and construct our mind, and then how we become or develop as agency, and then act on back to the society itself, and how we create information and then at this moment, I think as whole civilization, I think we are trying to construct the global society because already Internet is connected to the world, but we are still in the process, and hopefully we can bring to the positive side because we know Stephen Hawking, he was very worried about how technology can destroy the human civilization.  We are the last generation could be, he is talking on.  And I hope this actually we can avoid and actually more constructive positive flourishing civilization to build.
And this meeting, I think, we hope we can contribute something.  Thank you very much.
>> MODERATOR:  I think folks will hear throughout the session today such an important aspect when it comes to trust in AI so thanks Yohko.  Next we have Parminder Jeet Singh, Executive Director of IT for Change.
>> PARMINDER JEET SINGH:  Thank you for inviting me to this panel, maybe the most important question, perhaps, most important content question about how we regulate, ensure the so called behavior of the, what is the most strong, not only economic but social culture, of course, around that.  I come from IT for Change, which is an organisation which has been around for about 15 years which deals with the intersection of the digital with social change.
We have been involved with, we do practical work in the field also, but a lot with regulatory questions about who goes on the Internet, what is the just Internet.  We have a global coalition called Just Net Coalition and we have to look at just AI aspect.  What are the concepts of justice.  We tried to bring these concepts from traditional, theoretical and basis of practice, because justice does not change.  Equity, these concepts don't change, but they have to be now applied to a completely different arena.
So how does the application take place is the kind of questions we raise and try to deal with.  For example, it's much before AI came, there is this element that ICTs or technical systems or digital systems can get lost in rules embedded in them.  And once you have embedded rules into technical architecture, you never, perhaps, need those rules to, you know, make actors comply.
And now those rules and laws would get embedded into AI systems and what their implication is and how do societies take control on their democratic rule making processes.  These are the kinds of questions we bring to AI governance.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks Parminder.  Last but not least we have Abdul‑Hakeem Ajijola, Chair of the African Union cybersecurity expert group.
>> ABDUL-HAKEEM AJIJOLA:  Thank you very much for inviting the African Union.  I happen to be a stand in so I can just do my best.  I will start with a disclaimer, the views that I may express are mine and not necessarily those of the African Union so that people in the African Union won't be saying oh, my God what has he said.  But let me just mention a couple of things.  First of all, there is an African proverb that says tomorrow belongs to those who prepare today.
And interestingly, many of us ‑‑ thank you.  So many of us are knowingly using AI systems in our daily lives.  For example, our Smart Phones with their smart assistants, like Google Assistant, Alexa, Siri or Bixby, sometimes we use our phone, phone cameras in the portrait mode like I noticed Parminder was doing.
We also use AI systems in, you know, smart cars and drones.  And we all know about Tesla cars, but maybe not as many of us know about robotics in South Africa that is helping farmers with drones and data powered by AI, even in Kenya, the wildlife service is using drones with AI to catch wildlife poachers.  There is a company in Rwanda called zip line when is using AI and drones to deliver blood to remote locations.  Indeed, in my country, AI supported drones are used in Hollywood to make movies.
We also see the use of AI extensively across the continent in social media feeds.  We are beginning to see media streaming services.  We have our Spotify and Netflix and YouTube, Africa Magic, Euro TV.  They are all beginning to rely on these things.
A lot of Africans are getting into the online video gaming.  In fact, I have been asked to be a patron of the E‑sports association, which is getting registered.  Certainly when we see the online ads on our social networks, these are all on the line and driven by AI.  Some of us, again, across Africa, we use navigation and travel tools such as Google or Apple maps for calling an Uber or booking a flight tick ticket.  Certainly African banking and finance are using AI driven mechanisms for customer service, fraud protection, investment and more.
Some of us may be fortunate enough across Africa to have smart home devices.  It's a growing area, and many devices including smart electricity meters are somehow tied into AI and certainly those areas of security and surveillance object recognition, facial recognition, including door openers that we are beginning to see across the continent.
Sadly, AI, especially in the developed world is also being used to develop killing machines and new machines of war.  And frankly, almost all advanced nations are working on some kind of, you know, autonomous systems from smart missiles and drones to tanks, guns, and even a new generation of smart bullets that can actually go around corners.
So, you know, we must ask ourselves who bears responsibility for the mistakes of AI developed in one part of the world, but applied in another place that may have different very environment, and I mean different environment in the broad sense, social, economic, not just physical environment.  It is interesting to know that about only, I think, 28 out of 157 UN countries of the UN are currently seeking to prohibit full autonomous weapons under the Convention on global conventional weapons and sadly notably countries like the United States, Russia, Israel, Australia and South Korea are not willing to support such negotiations for legally binding set of instruments that would ensure meaningful human control over these critical functions of these weapon systems.
So I really ask myself and I hope we will touch on as we go through, where does Africa feature in some of these discussions, at least in these conversations?  Where do we feature in moving some of these things positively forward, constructively forward, because at the end of the day, once these systems are in place, all Africans, the underserved, the unserved, the unborn are going to have to live with the precedence, are going to have to live with the results, are going to have to live with the effects, positive or otherwise of Artificial Intelligence‑driven systems.
Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks Abdul‑Hakeem Ajijola, and you had warned us that your connection is not great where you are, so we do appreciate you joining us, we lost audio, but at least we can still hear you so thanks so much.
>> ABDUL-HAKEEM AJIJOLA:  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  As the audience can hear, you have now seen the great panel that we have, so please feel free to send in questions.  Like I said, we will start with moderated discussion, but I'm happy to address any audience questions as well.
So I wanted to start out with trust and trustworthiness are so fundamental to functioning society including the adoption of innovative tools and services such as those for which AI is being used.  So from your perspectives what are the key attributes of a trusted AI systems and outcomes?  And Parminder, why don't we start with you?
>> PARMINDER JEET SINGH:  Okay.  So it was twofold, the few attributes of what we call AI as which we have to keep in mind.  One is that they are ubiquitous.  If they are not, they would be ubiquitous.  You are getting an appointment with your barber would have AI element in it, what Abdul was saying weapons would have AI.  So it's kind of a systematic brain which is running all aspects of our life, all aspects means all aspects.
There would be Artificial Intelligence in home equipment, everywhere.  So one is that it's everywhere.  Second, it is extremely powerful.  I think it is easy to see that of any system, it's the brain or the controlling and coordinating part which is most powerful, and AI would be the brain of the weapon systems, of your organisation and all.  So it is most powerful and ubiquitous.  We have not seen a thing like this before.  So this is the first part.
And, therefore, our, when we see its accountability or trustworthiness, we need to be able to see at many levels.  It's at the level of an individual, as at the level of a Committee, a level of a national system.  Within organisations who produce IT, the ethical behavior would be of the person, the worker, it will be of an organisation, there would be industrywide, you know, self‑regulation rules, but then there are larger social regulatory governance and political.
So it's on all of these levels, our governance and ethical systems apply.  So it's all across.  We can now work or focus on some or the other and that will need to be done especially for organizational, it takes community ethics, politics deals with powerful systems, but they need to be separately seen but also need though be synced.
So the systems need to have enough governance and ethical systems at all levels.  It could be personal ethics right up to the political system.  I would, when I talk today, I would largely, and that's the work IT for Change does focus on the Government systems and the political tool regulatory level, and system design level which comes in the form of a regulation.
And I think two principles are key.  The first is the political aspect of it.  The systems are so strong and they can almost control your life to that extent that it's the trust but verify principle.  Finally people may be good, organisations may be good, but this is the kind of thing which I need to know who governs the system, who owns the system, what kind of actual control I have over them through somebody I may trust.  Who is a representative of me, a representative of the Democratic system and organizational representative system.
So those political systems become very important and I come back to it later because we would be making while governing these powerful systems tradeoffs between efficiency and their trustworthiness, accountability, explain ability.  The tradeoff is going to stair in our face again and again.  We can say we can manage to not take certain degree of efficiency, but we need to make the system complex, but it should be explainable.  So political tradeoffs of this kind of done at a little level.
We get together as a community, we have Democratic systems, but first of all we need to understand that it is at a Democratic and political level that the largest decisions will be taken.  It will not be enough to trust some people's goodness.  I will later on discuss the open AI organisation which does start in certain manner but has faced criticism because you can't really just go by a set of do‑gooders, and I myself is an NGO and a do‑gooder, so I am not running them down, but people need to be able to trust people and that is whom you trust, is generally the people who represent them.
The second part of it is the basic system design which should be behind how AI develops after the first level.  I think we in the first phase, it is a demo phase.  We have seen what is AI.  What is it it's power, how can it govern system and in a few years we would have seen it all.  But before things go out of hand and systems by default become scattered as code is law and architecture is policy, before that we need to intervene to give some directions about systemic manner in which AI systems are developed.
For me the example of financial systems come to my mind.  You know, finance is something which is very, very powerful and there is extreme accountability.  That is why in our day‑to‑day life, the organizational systems, the financial systems are extremely complicated.  Everything has to produce a receipt, it could have a double entry, you know.  Everything is copied over a few times.
Why?  It could have been made much, much more efficient that people just go and do something, and there is a transaction and somebody gives money, the other guy takes money and its richer.  But things are copied many times over.  I think that's a good example, AI systems should have systematically integrated these kind of copying, record keeping systems across all systems, a generic design which would be fine-tuned to specific context in designs.  So I think one principle of political regulation and other principle of architectural regulation.  So at this point I will stop.
>> MODERATOR:  Yohko, your thoughts on some of the key attributes.
>> YOHKO HATADA:  When I saw this title, the confidence and trust, how we can gain in the system, I have a little bit of changing questions, I mean, it is the confidence and trust, this relationship between, it's actually first of all very much ‑‑ I'm trying to, I'm trying to speak from the regulatory form or aspect even politically how we can systematically as a function try to consolidate and then build up.  And it is actually really important.  And actually at the end, policy maker or leader, as each individual would have to participate, and citizens also.
It's not like some are victims, some are governor.  It's not.  Actually everybody has to create because we don't have yet, I think.  And when I think about this relation between confidence and trust, first of all, we have to understand who we are.  And quite often, we are asking who we are at the end using this system, we have to, you know, answer to this question.
But I would like to ask that question first, who we are.  Unless we understand actually self, we respond on the system wrongly, and that's actually sometimes someone can actually abuse the system.  So we have to have self‑understanding.  And if you deeply understand, then, of course, you have to understand the world, and then when you understand the world, then you can have capacity over confidence within yourself.
And then confidence, many are fake and which one to trust, which one is not trustworthy, that kind of judgment moment to moment is done by the individual, and the policy maker, how to, we should make a system?  Should we, integration, we are not actually promoting everybody's discussion.  All of those kinds, the confidence is I think when we understand, when we are really, in relation to self actually that has meaning.  Without proper understanding, even you have confidence, it's just confidence, and it doesn't make any positive development.
So you have to understand how much we are understanding in judgment to self, the confidence, is it right or not?  Those are actually when we interact, we see the consequence.  And then sometimes actually overconfidence is lost by response from what has happened in the world.
So the right level of confidence and then if we understand, if your understanding is this level of what needs to be done, then actually regardless of environment, the confidence is built in within the system also.  Then where to tackle.  Then we can become kind of a user, which means trustworthy system, the user, but actually the trust is first of all, self‑understanding and then built on the self‑understanding we have confidence and then with proper confidence, we make a trustworthy system.
So basically what I think about what is right kind of question to ask, and what kind of system to build because if society itself, we are not having a proper democratic society yet, then actually when we are trying to build democratic system, the judgment from a different sector, multi‑stakeholder actually very difficult to come to the conclusion same line and then it is difficult to go ahead, for example, in the world, different regimes, we are trying to make some kind of a, you know, development together, and how can we make it?
That's ideally, we have to understand how we can, what kind of future society we are trying to make.  Because if you have to compromise to let's say make some kind of a deal, then actually what we are losing by that?  And something we cannot do at all, then how can we make the international global kind of rule.
Actually we are now under this krona crisis, krona crisis is actually giving us some kind of window, because talking about finance, many corporations are struggling and Government is really bringing a lot of money, and I think it's even before taxation it was so difficult to implement, but now suddenly some, you know, halfway almost transformational is required otherwise we cannot tackle the krona pandemic because it's global.
>> MODERATOR:  Yes.  Great.
>> YOHKO HATADA:  I think all together, it's the confidence we have to build from our own self‑understanding.
>> MODERATOR:  Yes.  Great points.  Thanks so much, Yohko.  Abdul‑Hakeem Ajijola.  Your thoughts?
>> ABDUL-HAKEEM AJIJOLA:  I think there is a question by somebody or a comment, forgive me for butchering the name, but I think the key take away from their observation which I will reiterate here is the need for a high level of transparency.  What you find is that in too much of the value chain of AI development, there is a lot of opaqueness, and so it's back to the issues that Parminder had mentioned about governance.
Who really determines at the end of the day what the boundaries, what should the boundaries be?  Bearing in mind that even though Parminder had indicated Government and, yes, Government must have a strong say, but what you usually find is that Governments and especially legislation are too inflexible to keep up with rapidly evolving sectors such as Artificial Intelligence and the like.
So we must have mechanisms that are a bit more responsive, and probably we could look at situations where Governments can devolve some of their powers to regulators, to the technology community probably to some kind of multi‑stakeholder platform so that those boundaries can be adjusted as the technology evolves.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks Abdul‑Hakeem Ajijola.  Next question, and if we can ask the panelists, there is so much to talk about in these areas, I know we could have a half-day session on this, but if we can try and keep responses to about a minute.  The first question clearly when we talk about key attributes just covers all sorts of realms so we did cover lots of territory there.  So I think that was great.  The remaining ones get a little more granular, so maybe if people can give a minute or so of their thoughts, that would be great.
One thing we wanted to talk about and we touched on a little bit, lack of accountability is cited as a cause of irresponsible behavior with clear allocation of accountability in organisations seen as providing really the backbone for high quality outcomes.  So who do you think is accountable when something goes wrong in an AI system?  Ansgar, why don't we turn it to you.
>> ANSGAR KOENE:  Yes, as you pointed out, there is a strong question about the question about accountability and key attributes around trust.  We see accountability frequently mentioned among the high level principles for AI, and, for instance, if we are thinking about the way in which to build trustworthy systems within an organisation, it is important to have clear lines of accountability to know who it is within the team who is taking responsibility and will be held responsible for the levels of performance, be it the accuracy, the reliability, the robustness of the system, but also understanding and anticipating the way in which the system is going to be impacting on different kinds of stakeholders.
So accountability is a very important aspect.  The challenge, and accountability, of course, is always a key aspect for trust, be it AI or other kinds of technologies.  The new challenge that arises when we are using AI is especially in systems that are using machine learning that it can blur the lines as to who really is responsible for the ultimate behavior of the system.
Can the party who is building the tool hold complete responsibility for performance if that performance is going to be impacted by the kinds of data that it experiences throughout the time of use.  There is also the large practice of using third party tools, using libraries in order to build these systems, which can make it more difficult to understand where exactly, which component has contributed to something.
So in order, but in order to be able to establish clear trust in the system, it is important that we will be establishing clear lines of accountability, that may include the requirements around, for instance, the use of standards, contractual requirements around that if you are going to use a third party system, that third party has to provide certain levels of continued monitoring, perhaps, so there is accountability is a key element, and we will need to have clear guidelines around how to allocate and clearly communicate who is taking responsibility for which component of the system's performance.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks Ansgar and Clara, we haven't heard from you yet, what are your thoughts on accountability?
>> CLARA NEPPEL:  Thank you, so I agree with Ansgar that accountability is closely linked to responsibility.  I have often also to liability.  So actually, that's maybe, of course, it's important, but it is important to take out, so in order to arrive to trustworthy systems which is the basis for having trust in these systems, it would be important to take it out from this corner of liability and to make it let's say positive challenge in the sense that if you are engaging in responsible AI development, there is also an incentive, a social and maybe also possibly an economic incentive to aim back on this journey.
And so, of course, traditionally accountability when we talk about products and services, it's the entity who puts that product and services into the market, but, of course, as Ansgar mentioned, this is more difficult in self‑learning system because they might change the output throughout the time, and or I think it's also important, order is also important.  They are also very specific on the context that they are being used.
For instance, you cannot use a companion robot which was designed for elderly people to child care, for instance.  So the question is, of course, who is liable also, not only putting it on the market but also how you use the systems.  And I would just like, I know I don't have too much time, but I think there are two things we need to take into account, namely the line of responsibility that was mentioned that is inside the organisation, and also what do we need to do to draft an ecosystem of trust because we are now having systems that interact with each other and are integrated.  So just within organisation, I would just like to echo the position of the engineer.  So I'm also myself a computer scientist, and we had several sessions with our members, and also to see where they see their responsibilities as the developers of these systems.
And I think that one outcome is that although engineers clearly see an individual responsibility for ethical dilemmas, they also, it is clear that they are within hierarchy of power in an organisation.  So there is always also a tradeoff, also within let's say creating a culture of a no blame culture, let's say, so that engineers are encouraged to address ethical dilemmas if you want, and of course to have certain consequences.
It's important to have as you just mentioned the structures and hierarchy so that they know with whom to discuss if they encounter ethical dilemmas.  So this is just a little bit I wanted to say about with issues within organisations.  But as regards the ecosystem of trust that we are starting to build, we have now object recognition systems which are embedded into transport, which are used in manufacturing, or public services that are using speech generation, GPD3 for instance that was just mentioned before.
So I think that here when you have citizens who will require, already require, of course, these public services to be fair and transparent, and it will be important then for organisations to integrate solutions to be informed so we have something that can inform trust.  And one way to do this is, of course, to make your internal measures public.  So if you have only internal measures like ethics, that may not be sufficient because then the others don't know what you actually mean by being transparent.
So as was mentioned, measures to do this would be through audit certification and standards.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Great.  Thanks.
Abdul‑Hakeem Ajijola, you kind of addressed this lack of accountability question previously, but anything to add to that?
>> ABDUL-HAKEEM AJIJOLA:  Yes.  My understanding of the major cause of AI mistakes is actually bias.  And so the quick answer is that it depends.  For example, if you have flaws in the models and algorithms arising from the limitations of the developers, then arguably you would hold developers accountable.
However, if the data used to train the AI systems is either flawed or partial due to lack of, for example, African developers and African oriented data, then, you know, there is an onus on the developers and the AI trainers.  But if you have faults arising from the misapplication or, you know, endeavoring to adapt AI systems to processes that they were not designed for, then arguably, you know, you could lay the blame at the feet of the original equipment manufacturers and particularly the vendors.
And, of course, there are errors that arise from the end user misuse or misuse by the end user of these AI platforms, and so, you know, you would lay it at the feet of the developers.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks.  Good point.  I want to go to some audience questions now.
The first one I think, Ansgar, it would be good for you to address.  And the question is isn't it helpful to assess and determine human bias against AI systems which trying to implement those systems in a healthy way?  In different geographies, different requirements and principles maybe might be adopted respective to the society's approaches too those AI‑supported systems as a whole.  Your thoughts?
>> ANSGAR KOENE:  I think this is a very good question because it touches on a number of aspects around bias which would be the reasons why it's such a difficult issue to ultimately resolve.  In a sense, Abdul‑Hakeem touched on this, there is the question about we have cultural kinds of differences and in need for developers to understand the kinds of cultural context in which the system is being used.
I think Yohko also already talked on an important aspect regarding self‑understanding amongst the people who are developing the system.  So within, for instance, the algorithmic bias consideration standard we are developing within IEEE, are sort of a guiding concept around our work is the need for the people who are developing and deploying the systems to really consciously engage with the kinds of decisions that are being made when developing the system.
Why did we choose this particular optimization target?  Why did we select this data set to train the system to add a data system?  And not just internally why did we do this, but do we have a clear set of justifications that we would be able to present to the stakeholders who will be impacted by the system, and would in fact be willing to engage in a dialogue to explain why we consider these to be the appropriate justifications for our choices that went into the system.
There is a slightly, a potential flip side also to the way in which the question was formulated around bias within people, and the way in which they engage with using AI systems.  And so that is also an interesting kind of question which particularly gets at, for instance, the potential of loss of benefits by not using an AI system, simply because of a lack of trust in it.
So, for instance, medical diagnostic systems could potentially, automated systems could potentially be better than the available medical personnel doing certain radiological image assessments and those kinds of things.  So I think that gets in a sense back to one of the things that Yohko was mentioning around confidence, the need for people to be able to glean sufficient confidence in how these systems operate in order to make that kind of judgment as to whether we should be trusting these systems.  So that's where things like training not just of the technical people involved in the system, but the wider population becomes an important aspect.
>> MODERATOR:  Great.  Thanks.  Ansgar.  We have another audience question that Parminder, I think, it would be great for you to address.  So the question is it how do we neutrals navigate trust in AI from the perspective of the China U.S. digital cold war, because really who on what side of the differ vied do we trust between these juggernauts?
>> PARMINDER JEET SINGH:  That's a high level question and that is what I was talking about earlier about relativity that people trust with all of the flaws of our democracies and nation‑based global systems, we tend to trust the people we have in power and you don't trust colonial masters which, like polar world of China and U.S. would control much of the intelligence.
And I go back to the example I was earlier talking, you have an appointment with your barber that will be mediated through AI located in one of these two centers.  And they become like brains of everything which happens in the rest of the world.  So this is actually a challenge, and we need to, therefore, go back to, you know, there is a principle of subsidiary in these courses of democracy and Governments that something which can be decided at a lower level in an effective manner should not be decided at an upper level.
So the intelligence systems of our world should be made in a manner that I have hand over things which affect me, and generally people have a handle over things vis‑a‑vis circles which they can influence.  So intelligence has this tendency to hyper concentrate and that's why we have a polar world and this hyper concentration and its technical and economic propensity has to be by human effort to deacon sent trait decision making.  That's kind of a system design which we have to be consciously thinking.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks Parminder.  I think we have time for one more audience question.  And there was a specific question for Clara.  The audience member asked if you could share more about the interaction between the technical engineers and ethical moral frameworks during R and D phase or assessment and how that relationship can be more solid?
>> CLARA NEPPEL:  Thank you for that question.  So I think that coming back to how to establish trust in this ecosystem, so I agree that one important thing is the design.  And I will just give you the example of now of the contact tracing apps that we are all talking about, and that we would so much desperately need in this second wave of the Coronavirus.  Still it's not used too much, and the question is why?
Definitely it's a question of trust.  It is an individual trust, so stakeholders in my view were not involved sufficiently.  So it's maybe, you know, the designers can take into account one parameter, namely privacy.  And I think that this was very much, very much respected.
However, if you think now about the contact tracing apps, probably we would need also these contact tracing app for public so they can identify clusters and prevent lockdowns, however, this is not possible with these contact tracing apps first because they were not adopted, and second, they would not even be possible to share this data with healthcare officials.
So my point is if you take into account the end users and also the larger stakeholder groups, then you are able to do these tradeoffs between privacy and also freedom if you want, so freedom of movement now as lockdown, and then you can make this decision which are technical decisions how to best design a system which will bring the most profit, let's say.  So the best tradeoff for the stakeholders.
So the technical community through now standards that we are developing but also through certification and so on, they start or they have to interact with the end user with the stakeholders, and take that into account in the design, and also in the deployment of the systems.  I think that is the key.
>> MODERATOR:  Thanks Clara, and we are running down to the last few minutes, so I did want to give all of the panelists an opportunity to do a lightning round of what you think is, you know, the critical point to drive future action or dialogue or any other key point that you had wanted to make.  We have about 30 seconds or so per panelist, and we will go in the reverse order of introduction.  So Abdul‑Hakeem Ajijola.  Do you want to go first?
>> ABDUL-HAKEEM AJIJOLA:  Yes.  Okay.  Very quickly, from an African perspective, we must thoughtfully consider articulating our own Artificial Intelligence philosophy and I will give you a couple of examples.  The U.S. Western European AI philosophy in the battlefield, for example, is to eliminate false positives, IE, you let some people through or some bad actors through while avoiding killing innocents, whereas arguably in some of the eastern powers, China, Russia, for example, their philosophy is to eliminate false negatives, which means just don't let anybody through, innocent or otherwise.
So it's important for us in Africa to develop, and just to reinforce, trust is the key.  Without trust, no one will use the platform, and we news a serious of confidence‑building measures, some level of predictable, be able to seek clarification, create understanding and the like.  And back to the African situation, I must emphasize, Africa and the rest of the world must factor when looking at these AI and related issues the underserved and the unborn.
Like I said, because they must live with the precedence that we make today.  And frankly, they will not know a non‑AI world, so once it is done, it is done from here on forward.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Great.  Thanks Abdul‑Hakeem.  Parminder.
>> PARMINDER JEET SINGH:  So very quickly, I think the central concept is trust, and it's not the first time civilization or human systems have faced this problem.  Trust is the basic problem is collective living starting with the social contract.  It's a social contract it's a new trust method.
So I think trust directly translates into social systems called institutions.  Institutions are what gives us predictable rule‑based behaviors, and this AI‑based world is going to be very new world.  We need to develop corresponding rule‑based institutions.  And I think institutions is what trust really translated into as social structures and institutions are produced not of technologists but social scientists, politics democracy, and I think the two should be matched.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  I think we have time for one or two sentences from the remaining three, so Yoko, what would you say is key?
>> YOHKO HATADA:  I think we are now on the corner to build a foundation for long‑lasting system as Parminder said is the most important for all of us, citizen, industries, organisations, international, I think we really have to build an international governing system.
>> MODERATOR:  Great.  Thanks.  Clara.
>> CLARA NEPPEL:  Yes.  So I think that it is important to have open and consensus‑based processes involving different stakeholders in order to define the principles, the tradeoffs that we need, but also to define those principles and how to implement and validate them.  I think that's towards what I mentioned before to have this informed trust.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Ansgar, you get the last word.
>> ANSGAR KOENE:  I would like to reiterate the point about we need engagement by all stakeholders and with that I would mean not just the different regions in the world, very important to include Global North and Global South, but also to make sure that we involve not just the policy makers, not just the technical community, but the communities who are going to be impacted by this use, this societal, various societal groups.  So really a broad policy stakeholder approach to this.  Thank you.
>> MODERATOR:  Thank you Ansgar and I want to thank all panelists for a great discussion.  I want to think the Internet Governance Forum for hosting this event and for all of you for participating.  Have a great day, everyone.
 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-ws165-unlocking-the-digital-potential-of-the-dldc-part-ii^^

>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: We are going to start right now.  I would like to say good morning and good evening, everyone listening around the world.  And welcome to the 15th Annual Meeting of the Internet Governance Forum on Internet for Human Resilience and Solidarity.  And to the Africa Information and Communication Technologies Alliance Workshop Number 165 titled: Unlocking a Digital Potential of Developing of the Least Developed Countries Part II.
Let me give you brief about this session.  This workshop will explore the digital potentials of developing, at least Developed Countries, in the post COVID‑19 era.  We are still in the COVID‑19 era which I believe we will overcome.  As one people working together.
The workshop will examine digital cooperation initiatives that encompass the industry technologies and related methods, such as smart manufacturing, environmental sustainability with meaningful connectivity.  The workshop also focus on the requisite of digital skills and tools necessary for sustainable development of the requisite labor and human capacities.
My name is a Jimson Olufuye, your Moderator for this workshop and Cordinator West African Internet Governance Forum also a member of the U.N. Internet Forum Government and Champion of Internet Governance Forum from the Civil Society.
Also supporting me is the Chairman International Center for Emerging Technology in Nigeria and Chairman of Data Analytics Privacy Technology and Board Member for African Technology and Services Alliance.
Also supporting is the AfiCTA Secretariat.  Before we move forward and considering the role that Ms. Marilyn Cade played in the information Internet Governance Forum.  The World Summit on Information Society with engagement the Internet Governance Support Association and the role she played in the establishment of Internet Corporation for Signed Names and Numbers and in the business constituency of ICANN itself, and also inspiration in regards to AfiCTA.  I'd like to call for a mini‑silence in honour of Marilyn Cade.
[ Moment of silence ]
May her soul rest in peace, amen.
>> PARTICIPANTS: Amen.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Once again welcome to Internet Workshop 165, Unlocking the Digital Potential of Developing and Least Developed Countries Part II.  We have a line up of distinguished speakers and in no particular order I will mention their names and profile will be posted in the chat.
We have Hossam Elgamal, the Private Sector of AfiCTA.  We have Melissa Sassi, Technical Community based in the U.S.
We have Dr. Kossi Amessinou, Director Ministry of Planning from the Government African Group.  We also have Jane Coffin, Senior Vice President Internet Group at the Internet Society Technical Community based in U.S.
Also with us is Kulesza Joanna Professor of International Law in Administration University of Lodz, Poland from Academy of Civil Society of Poland.  And we also have with us from Nigeria, Kossi Amessinou, Director and Chief Executive Officer of the (?) Information System representing also Government African Group.  Thank you.  We also have Mark Datysgeld CEO of Governance Primer and newly‑elected ICANN Councilor based in Brazil.  I don't know if (?) so the first part of this workshop took place last year and the report of these databanks available on the website ‑‑ I think the link will be posted so you can reference it permit me to do a recap of recommendations, a suggested way forward on the two policy questions last year.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Mary, if you can hear me please transfer host to Mr. Jalo and let me move ahead.  We have recommendations and the first was that government is encouraged to believe that they do not have all the fix.  They don't have it all to embrace multi‑stakeholder approach in all policy making and implementation effort.  That is the first cooperation among all stakeholders.
So the second point was that ICT sector should not be over taxed.  In essence, multiple taxation should be abolished as a priority.  We also recommended ease of doing business should be to attract direct investment.  It should be flexible, regulatory frameworks and also Number 5, that government should invest everything in the youth and the people in general.  In the policymakers should be well equipped to carry out their responsibilities.
It was also recommended that school curriculum should be revised as a matter of urgency.  Recommendation 7 was that focus be on the development of local solutions because the solution means that it is advised, continuing digital divide and locked digital potentials.  And Developing and Least Developed Countries should consider electricity as a critical infrastructural right for all citizens to guarantee access and relation of this Sustainable Development Goal 2030.  Recommendation 9 that collaborations should be enhanced across all sectors and the last recommendation is that regulatory institutions advised to transform by name and policy to unlock digital potentials for the benefit of their citizens.  For example, Telecommunication Authority can be transformed to Digital Society Authority.  We see this in Nigeria.  That's why Minister of Communication has been transformed to Ministry of Communication and Digital Economy.
Now to Part II of our workshop series.  So COVID‑19 pandemic led to the shutdown of many countries.  Important and ongoing discussion is led to global economy.  In this respect, two policy questions would be addressed.  And the policy questions are Number 1, how do we ensure that all stakeholder groups collaborate, prioritize and invest in the digital infrastructure and skills to mitigate similar challenges in the future?  The second question is, what strategies and policies needed to be in place, articulated and implemented to proactively develop in Least Developed Countries in the case of a similar occurrence and the adverse effect through the supply chain in Digital Economy.  Follow‑up question also in that second part is, how can a Developed and Least Developed Country develop digital initiatives to encompass technologies and related tools such as smart manufacturing, Internet affairs and environmental sustainability for the benefit of our citizens.  And job creation and the economic sustainability.
So we will go in two rounds, three minutes per speaker, so after the rounds we can have ample time for Q&A and get interaction.  It's now my pleasure to invite the Chairman of the Africa ICT Alliance and CEO of ICANN to provide his opening remark.  Please.
>> HOSSAM ELGAMAL: Thank you very much it is the pleasure of all members to organize this second session for IGF.  We are pleased to have all the distinguished speakers and participants with us.  As all of you know, AfiCTA has been established in 2012 and since then with the main founder Dr. Jimson, and now we have members from all over 30 countries from all over Africa representing different business associations and the SMEs and large companies.
It is really very important subject that we are discussing today where we really want to make sure that we are able to provide the best ecosystem and the Best Practices to the EAPs to benefit from the Internet and what we have seen during COVID time showed how much access is very important for everyone to benefit from the use of ICT in different sectors; education, health care, manufacturing, retail, e‑Commerce.
It is certain that countries that were able to capitalize on the investments they have done in Internet access and applications were able to move much better than countries that are still in need for this to happen.
I think it is very important to have such a session where we can discuss the potential of bringing together all the efforts to have a better working environment, to have a better access, to have better policies enabling such access and such application, to have better investment coming in to provide such opportunity, especially as there is a big market where not just the citizen will benefit but the governments will benefit and also businesses will benefit.
I wish all speakers for success in this session and let us move forward.  Thank you Dr. Jimson.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Excellent.  Thank you very much.  That is so key and it's critical.  Let me call on Melissa Sassi.
>> MELISSA SASSI: So, I think a lot of times we come to a variety of U.N. events, or other industry events, and we pontificate and we talk about policy.  And we failed to make it real and talk about how lack of technology skills and lack of access to the Internet is real.  I recently pivoted a lot of my work to not just focus on Melissa as the academic and researching and writing and understanding, to acting.
This year, one of the most exciting actions that I can think of that I personally have worked on with the Secretary of State from Cape Verde, and also saw really nice social media shoutouts from the Prime Minister of Cape Verde and the Vice Prime Minister, including the Secretary of State.  And we created a National Day of Code.  We came together to bring young people in a collaboration between the Private Sector, between the non‑profit sector, Academia, the start of the ecosystem and the entire public sector, as a Call to Action to say, come and figure out what this is all about.  And we brought two famous musicians to come and code with us.  And the whole concept was, come learn with us.  Come create with us.  Come change the world with us.  And what we did is we taught these two musicians the introductory building blocks of learning to code.  Okay maybe they didn't create a mobile application but what they did is they came in and inspired young people to explore the concept that anyone can learn technology.
It doesn't mean everyone will be an engineer but anyone can learn.  I'm in active conversations in Mozambique.  I'm in active conversations in other countries.  I would like to use this as a Call to Action to say, how can we create an International Day of Code?  A National Day of Code in your country.  I work at IBM and I head up Entrepreneur and Student Experience, and IBM will be your partner and help to bring content, curriculum, speakers, a platform, to help enable this because I think that it's not just about how do we reform policy, but how do we bring the tech‑sector together with all stakeholders to truly make a difference and look at it and say, all right, when are we doing this?  So Jimson and Hossam and others with me today, when are we doing this?  Because I'm ready.  If you give me a date, I'm ready to do a National Day of Code in every country across the planet.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Fantastic.  That is great.  Thank you very much for that.  I think we are going to take you up on that.  We will take you up on that.  Great.  Let me talk to Dr. Kossi Amessinou, Director of Minister of Planning in the Dominican Republic.  Dr. Kossi.
>> KOSSI AMESSINOU: Thank you.
[ Unstable Internet connection ]
We know also that every time government ‑‑
[ Unstable Internet connection ]
When we look at Civil Society, we need something private government to support to ‑‑
[ Unstable Internet connection ]
It's important to have support from government.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Very good.  So resources.  Talking about resources quite a challenge and people need to collaborate and cooperate to raise needed resources to be able to implement important development projects.  Thank you very much Dr. Kossi.  We know the Internet is quite challenging there but we tried to get the message.
Let me turn to Jane Coffin, Senior Advisor to the CEO.  Jane, over to you.
>> JANE COFFIN: Thank you very much.  And thank you to our colleagues today and I'm very pleased to be joining everyone here.  What I'm going to focus on are three of the things you mentioned and then weave in something that Melissa mentioned.  Flexible regulatory frameworks, taxation inclusion and real people.
We have seen under COVID, that connectivity, those of us involved in it for a long time in trying to deploy networks for better socioeconomic development, have seen that COVID is keeping us accountable for what we didn't get done.  And it now gives us an opportunity to help connect people faster and faster.  This means that we have got to take a look at these flexible regulatory frameworks and also add innovation and a little bit of agility.
Innovation and agility will help us loosen up licensing and make authorizations go faster.  We seen the need for speed when it comes to putting in fiber in certain cities, getting the authorizations in the rights of way and the trenching for fiber.  It means getting the authorizations for spectrum authorization  and Wi‑Fi ‑‑ maybe unlicensed spectrum.  Also, the old ways of regulatory working from the Teleco era and now into the Internet era, we need to have interconnection of small, medium‑sized networks.  We need financing for small, medium‑sized networks which means on the financing side, changing universal service funds.  This has to change because the old ways, the money is locked up and it's not getting out there to people.  And it's people that we are seeing under COVID who need to work from home, children need to be educated from home and we need to stay in touch with each other.  Seeing all of you gives me hope.  It's great to see you.  I'd love to be there in person but we need that social dynamic as well.
This is putting pressure on governments to get more done.  Taxation, putting strong taxes on equipment to build that Internet to allow people better opportunities only keeps it in jail a bit longer.  We seen equipment sit in customs warehouses for 3‑4 months.  Please urging governments.  This is no longer just a Ministry of Communications and regulatory body conversation.  You have got to have a whole of ministry discussion with the Prime Minister, Ministry of Education, with the customs authorities, because you're now responsible for helping your countries move forward and get connected.
Inclusion bringing business, Civil Society and the Technical Community for consultation.  We use the networks.  We have people like Melissa setting up Day of Code.  If you don't bring in these different perspectives, your innovation might be impacted.  So just to pitch again for more flexible and innovative regulatory frameworks.  We watch Ghana loosen up spectrum and the U.S.
We seen taxation come down on equipment.  Do this to help speed up the deployment of your infrastructure and for the betterment of your people.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Excellent.  Thank you so much.  The need for dynamic regulatory framework.  Very flexible regulatory framework.  Thank you very much for that.  And now to Professor Joanna Kulesza, Professor of International law.  Joanna.
>> JOANNA KULESZA:  Cool, cool thank you.  It's a pleasure to be here.  Apart from being an academic, I'm also involved with ICANN, the platform where we have the opportunity to first meet and start working together.  I appreciate the opportunity to be here because working both as policy activist and as an academic.  I see the silver lining of the pandemic we witnessed and the silver lining is fundamentally that we can no longer argue there isn't a right to Internet access or that Internet access is no longer of value.  What the pandemic has done is it emphasized that we do need cyberspace.  We do need the connectivity now and interventions from previous speakers who have emphasized how important connectivity is.
It is important when it comes to infrastructure and I welcome call toles provide reliable infrastructure and capacity building on the skills that are fundamental to keeping the network operational.  I would like to put a balancing emphasis on end‑users, individuals, humans, if you will, of that equation.  I believe that Developing Countries are in a unique position to prioritize, to humor the NGO perspective of these discussions.  It is a unique opportunity for us to look at the multi‑stakeholder model that is unique for the Internet, unique for cyberspace, and to quickly amend it to better meet our needs.
Now we can do it by approaching this challenge in a number of ways.  The first initial one I referred to is focusing on the individuals.  Now again, there is a body of work that focuses on the rights and obligations of individuals that is clearly something we can use.  But I think that the pandemic made us realize that we need to effectively break the silos.  We have been talking about this for so long and so many wonderful initiatives going on.  I welcome this discussion we are having because this is clearly a way for us to address that challenge.
We need to work together on common goals.  How do we do it?  I welcome the call for a universal day of code.  I think it's a very tangible real initiative we could pursue.  Let me put on the table in the same basket so to speak, an ITU initiative that focuses on balancing gender when is it comes to the on‑line activity.  ITU has a wonderful program called equals.  There are girls in ICT that ITU has been promoting for a while.  Developing Countries have been very active in that respect.  So I would point to that as one of the initiatives.  So make sure that the Internet gets developed where it needs to be introduced, so to speak, is based on this fair balance of genders and interests.
Another issue, and I welcome the reference and the first part of this workshop, the capacity building.  So in another research we might want to explore is capacity building when it comes not just to developing the network, but making sure that it is secure.  So just to give you a buzzword or hashtag, Cyber Security Capacity Building.  Now cybersecurity is quite broad.  It is about maintaining infrastructure secure.  This is where 5G comes in.
The Developing Countries will be able to learn from the lessons of those who need to make difficult choices about 5G infrastructure now.  Again you could see as silver lining.  There will already be a whole body of experience that comes with 5G and the equipment that will be purchased or introduced to provide for high speed networks.
Another element that falls into that is supporting platforms that coordinate regional capacity‑building efforts.  If I was to point to specific solutions, I would call to form a platform that we welcomed during this IGF here as well, that would be the Global Forum on CyberExpertise.  And interesting endeavor that is focused on training those that develop cybersecurity policies.  Again, deriving from experiences we already have in other areas of the world.  But to make sure the Developing Countries do not need to force open doors.  There is expertise to be used and I'm happy to provide more details during the focused session on the Civil Portal.
So I'm a strong believer in capacity building.  I'm a strong believer in looking into interests and balancing those the best that we can.  I believe in infrastructure keeping it secure but also believe in the soft skills.  Regional efforts.  Thank you.  I'll stop here.  Thank you very much.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Thank you very much.  We are going to have a second round and before we get to that second round, we will take this first round and I would like to call on Dr. Jalo. 
>> ISA IBRAHIM JALO: I'm happy to be part of this forum.  My organization I must say, is a success story in terms of administration, technology agency that we have worked over the years to build in terms of building a special digital infrastructure for the institute.  As we all know, Abuja is Africa's new city center as the capital of Nigeria now.  And the government moved in 1991.  And we started the computerization as soon as ‑‑ It's a world city and we succeeded in building the necessary infrastructure that is needed to make world classic and technical infrastructure had to become into the accord because you need the GIAs to be able to manage the city itself.
Now because of this success story all the states in the federation right now have embraced GIAs and technology.  Equally during COVID‑19, we had to change our technology and upgrade from the desktop environment to web‑based system.  And this we did with our Partners in South Africa and using the local stuff that we have, we were able to do this successfully using digital platform.  This is made possible because of the heavy investment of the 3G and 4G infrastructure that has been done and because of also the fiber optic connect activity we have, we were able to do this upgrades.
We did this from desktop because we need to collaborate with other departments and agencies of the FCT.  And we realized through the COVID‑19 that we cannot move physical fights from one location to another.  We had to weigh content.  So because of that, we had to also focus on building the web‑based system which we successfully did.
So the other departments who are able to deliver information through the web‑based system, we had to also establish a connectivity fiber because of limitations and because of that, we became very efficient in terms of the sciences we develop.  And we equally also had to provide services on line to our customers because we are the front end in this administration.
This has also contributed in terms of revenue we collect and we have been able to sustain, which is also very critical for the day‑to‑day management of the city.  And I must say that we are quite successful to the taxation agency in terms of revenue in the cities, government revenue in millions of dollars.
Because we tried to innovate and tried as much as possible to use technology, we have been able to ensure that revenue comes into the coughers of the Federal Government.  And we are hoping by January 1, we are going to go full all services on line and we have to also integrate our back‑end services with the front end.  However, those services have to come forward to be present to deliver.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Let us go to the second question.
>> MARY UDUMA: No questions yet.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: What strategies and policies need to be articulated to approximately prepare developing Least Developed Countries in the case of a similar reoccurrence?  Flexibility for regulation both specifically what area of regulation are we looking at?
>> MELISSA SASSI: I think that the biggest ‑‑ and by the way, my dog says hi.  She is joining us today.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Okay.
>> MELISSA SASSI: The world changed since the last time in Berlin.  My children live in Tunisia and they have sporadically been in school.  Sporadically.  And they are impacted by school closures due to COVID.  And they have been asking me, mom, what can we do?  What can we learn?  I feel like we should learn something.  I don't think I should be on TicToc every day.  I'm thankful my kids come to me and ask me, mom, what can I learn?  What can I do?  Is how can we empower young people with real practical skills, will informal or formal and think about young people at the centre and think about for youth, by youth and with youth.  Especially in Africa, when you think about how many young people make up the population.  And if you look across all of our government entities across the planet, what is the number of ‑‑ the age or number of years of experience?  And what are we all doing to make sure that youth is at the centre?  One of the things that I really enjoy about Internet Society, for example, is their Ambassador program that brings young people together to learn practical skills to, take those back into their communities.
In my role I often have Atlas fellows from an organization called Atlas Core run by Scott Field.  And they identify up‑and‑coming leaders to provide them with experience and working at companies like IBM or Microsoft or others.  And the idea is they come and it's on line or in person and they spend a year to a year and‑a‑half learning practical skills and then taking those skills and bringing them back home so that it's not just about how does Silicon Valley bring something to you, but how are young people in individual countries challenged with looking at what is the problem I'm trying to solve?  Because ultimately when we are talking about technology, it's about problem‑solving, engineering or data science or a developer.  It's all about how are you solving a big wicked problem?  And how are you doing that with technology?  If our young people don't have access to practical skills, it's very difficult for them to make real true meaningful use of the Internet.  I'm talking about also injecting entrepreneurial spirit and critical thinking and problem‑solving, creativity and innovation.  So when we are talking about supply chain or health tech or insure tech, IOT, whatever it is, really putting youth at the centre and thinking about what are those problems they can solve, and giving them opportunities and a real voice, a voice that can drive impact.
I think all of us, collectively need to do a better job of incorporating that concept of design thinking.  How do we bring our audience, how do we bring all people to enable them to have a seat at the table?  And again, do National Days of Code.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Great.  So you already have full support for that.
>> MELISSA SASSI: That was my goal for today, among many other things, but thank you.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Great.  Design thinking.  Thank you very much.  Dr. Kossi, are you there?
>> KOSSI AMESSINOU: Yes, I'm here.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: So what policy framework are you working on to enhance your ability to be able to get funding?
>> KOSSI AMESSINOU: Yes, getting funding is important but when we talk about strategy in SDG area it's important to know that Internet is not programmed for one context.  In Developing Country and poor country, when we are talking about strategy in digital area, we are some dynamic ‑‑ we are going to make something for country.  It's not better every time.  It's not better every time.
When we look at Africa region, for example, we have one big strategy for all of Africa.  Africa Commission put on the table with the aspect on the continent, the African Digital Transformation Strategy, for, 2020‑2030.  That is very big.  Where every African country, every African industry must put hat on and make their job quickly taking in the way one route.  We need to contribute to a development in 2030.
It's not been good to have Africa outside the challenge.  It is important for us to bring all the people to that strategy and work on that in each of our countries.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Great.  Yes, so what you say is that we have strategies in place already like the SDG so we just need to work at it.  And then as a Digital Transformation for Africa we want by 2063, so we should really pay more attention to that.  Thank you for calling our attention to that Kossi.  Jane, over to you.
>> JANE COFFIN: On the topic of strategies and policies and funding has to get better and more agile and be done not just at the high International institution level of billions and millions, but smaller amounts of money that small and medium‑sized enterprises can digest and use for sustainability and get more money but to show that they can move forward.
So again, universal service and change in financing, licensing and more agility on licensing and thinking about authorizations for technology and for development of networks, making it faster so that people can deploy networks more quickly.  Spectrum more innovative use of spectrum.  Shared use, secondary yews and direct allocation that is can be made.  We have to move quickly to try and help get more agile and collaborative and cooperative and community‑based networks out there as well.  So picture community networks.  And if you're talking about supply chain, it's back to your point about clarity and information for businesses.  How to do business the ease of doing business, and just simple information so that businesses can get started and know what to do and where to go in government agencies.  It's really important.  Maybe centralized website.  So that supply chain isn't a question.
Thank you for the shout out to the Ambassadors.  It's so important for us to have youth along with us to inform us, keep us agile and also to learn more and to help us stay fresh.  So I think that is something.  And by the way, I think we can support, we hope, I can't speak for the chapters, but we'll pass along the day of code idea and perhaps you can work with some of our chapters to get that done.
>> MELISSA SASSI: I would love that.  I'm happy to coordinate that.  Before we end, I'll share another opportunity for engagement as well and I got some other exciting stuff too.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Jane, let me follow up with you quickly.  You're talking about infrastructure.  I didn't hear you talk about security.  What are you doing to have security level?
>> JANE COFFIN: We have lots of promotion.  We have a Global Coalition right now on encryption.  So if others want to join us on promoting end‑to‑end encryption, this is highly important.  I'm going to make a shout out to my colleague, Joseph Hall, the other Senior Vice President for our project work and the team have a coalition that anyone can join on end‑to‑end encryption.  We also have mutually‑agreed norms for writing security for the Internet Service Providers out there, content delivery networks and others.  If you would like to join us in the Manners Programs, we would love to have you join us with certain principles based on secure routing.  Secured routing is very important and essential for your country.  So those are two things we can actively have you join.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: So can you post the link in the chat?  If there is.  If not, let us know later.
>> JANE COFFIN: Yes, sir, I'll put it there now.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Yes, I had the privilege of being at the U.N. Working Group that is the Commission for Science and Technology and Development Working Group on Enhanced Cooperation on International Public Policy matters related to the Internet.  And we talk about yes, capacity, but this time around it focused more capacity development, talking about capacity development.  In line with the systemic development goal so they use the term capacity development.  So in line with development goal.  So what do you think about that kind of phrasing?  Is it capacity building, but 2030, is for developing countries mostly.  You think it makes sense to really streamline that kind of transformative language among your innovation?  Please go ahead.
>> KULESZA JOANNA: Thank you.  I believe it is very relevant ‑‑ cool, cool. I believe we better meet the needs of Developing Countries.  So the U.N. and policies surrounded since we are speaking about cybersecurity, there clearly are current efforts both on the intergovernmental and the multi‑stakeholder level that address the need to advance capacity building and form development when it comes to cybersecurity.  However, to be more specific, just to address the concerns you have been talking  about ‑‑ and I welcome all the suggestions and the feedback ‑‑ when we are looking for targeted approaches, addressing the Developing Countries.  I have mentioned the GOC.  I'm going to do it again because they are right now launching a call for research projects that focus on capacity building and cybersecurity.  It might be something you might be interested in and I'm happy to share details.  Wearing the European hat, let me highlight there are big resources being put on the table by the European Commission both on research and capacity building doing Academia would be focused on the Horizon 2020 and the next research program that is just around the corner.
So if there is need for funding in terms of capacity building, I believe that there are office to pursue and Developing Countries would be the usual suspects to funnel that funding in terms of not just infrastructure, but also the soft skills.  I'm going to stop here but I'm happy to specify the details of this.  Thank you very much.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Thank you very much.  We would like to tap into that definitely the project for capacity development.  We look forward to that.  So following up on that, I'm sure the Chairman is ready and grinning.  That is a good one.  They might chip in on that when they are making their summary.  Next will be Dr. Jalo.  Are you working on some specific policy?  What you are doing for sustainability?  And do you plan to begin Internet of Things to play with regards to your record system?
>> ISA IBRAHIM JALO: Jimson, I must say that that is already a policy on the Digital Economy that was developed by the Ministry of Communication and Digital Economy.  And we are leveraging on that.  Equally also, this new spacial data infrastructure that we are rolling out at the moment which will go full blast in 2021, has that interface that will accommodate data from Internet of Things.  Already this year, we are starting working with the pattern of road traffic.  We are doing a study to study the locations of all the traffic lights in the city and we intend to deploy sensors to gather data on traffic, which is very critical as we are aware that traffic management in the city is an issue.
So we also intend to liberate on the 4G technology, wireless technology that is available in the city.  So we can now pick up this data and also use this technology, most of the traffic lights are being powered by solar.  And so we intend to gather this data and then deposit it in our warehouse already, have subscribe to technology platform, we signed with Microsoft so we are hoping we are going to do that.
Equally also, the CCTV's in area security infrastructure we acquired right now will be able to accommodate the deployment of CCTV on the infrastructure as well, so it's just to develop the system and have an integration CCTV.  We already have a pilot in our office and there is also an access in deployment within our Secretariat which we intend to do as a pilot.
Equally, also, we have other areas that we are working in terms of, this is the environment also.  We are also working with the Environmental Agency to be able to see how we can now work together to work on the issue of management and also to be able to deploy environmental sensors that will monitor the environment in the entire city.  This is what we are doing in that direction.
I'm also aware that the Minister of Communication and Digital Economy just recently ‑‑ there was (?) they are working towards establishing the exist expense is identity.  And Chairman I'm sure you're aware of that.  This is something that is ongoing, like I said, we are a key stakeholder.  We are at the centre of the development of the city in which the blueprint was earlier, so two years back, was developed by IBM.
Provided the funding for that development.  And my agency is at the centre of the infrastructure for this city and we are of course on that.  Thank you.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Great.  I can see Melissa grinning there.
>> MELISSA SASSI: I was getting gel when you say he was talking about Microsoft and I was wondering if he was going to start talking about IBM.  So now I'm not jealous anymore.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Leverage on what information is there.  No wonder ICT is going to put in more 10% to Nigeria's GDP.  It's like if things are correctly, we will come about progress which is commendable.  But there is a question in the question room.  So maybe you may take that up when we get to the next slide.
Mark, tell me, do we have everybody uncovered when it comings to banking?  Do we have everybody covered?  We need technology.
>> MARK DATYSGELD: So unfortunately, we don't and the thing was, and this was what was scary, when the pandemic hit and we have an emergency payment was approved to keep people afloat somehow, then you have this situation in which the distribution is being done in agencies and public agencies and people have to crowd in the same space at the same time to receive the stimulus that is supposed to help them not be sick.
It's the situation in which when you look at it, you see how us from the developing world, we still have a lot of catching up to do in terms of how do we protect our own people in a situation like this?  How do we make sure that we have a structure?  We don't need to have the structure the same as a developed country.  We don't.  We can make our own way.  I'm a big believer in that.  But certain things, we need to be on par with them and when I saw that to me, that was the first sign of, okay, we have some ‑‑ somethings are more prior Terry than others.  Because if you look at the situation of how everybody has been affected by this crisis, you will see that of course, the developing world is the one we end up suffering the most in the long run.
There is no way of getting around that.  And how do we compete?  And when I think about that, I think about the work that we have been doing in terms of informing technology companies here in Brazil.  My consultancy, we have been working with small and medium enterprises and trying our best to make them aware of what is going on in terms ever the global technologies.
So we try to bring this information in a way that makes sense, and in a way it is not too technical as well.  Often you are talking to people who are entrepreneurs, not necessarily from the technology area, even though they do technology, which is interesting.  So you have to find ways to make it interesting.
So we are currently working a lot with IOT.  That is the next big subject, I guess in a lot of ways.  And how do you explain that without making it A, boring, B, hard to understand?  So we do a lot of videos, images, we make simulations.  We take the devices themselves to show them to people.  I'm going click this one and it will activate that one.
I think that if we want everyone to catch‑up, we also need to sort of step down from our high horse.  We are all people very involved in tech.  We try to understand this, right?  We really love this.  But not everybody has to be as passionate as us, right?  How do we make it nice for people to understand it and maybe they don't need love it at much as we do.  Maybe just have a fresh look at it.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: It is a challenge.  So we are continuing to make a lot of efforts to bring in everybody to the benefit of the information age.  Thank you very much.  We completed two rounds.  And as we are going to ‑‑
>> MARY UDUMA: There is a question already.
[ Multiple Speakers ]
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Can you read it out, please?
>> MARY UDUMA: This is from (?) it says ‑‑ the future of technology, which I believe rely on digital identity.  The question is, how do Africa and other under Developed Countries handle the issue of lack of digital identity, which I believe is a common challenge to most African countries?  To support us?
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: It's a very demand question.  Very good question because without that data, you can not really get much done when it comes to e‑Commerce.  And when it comes Information Society.  So, government, Dr. Isa what are you doing about it?
>> ISA IBRAHIM JALO: For me, it boils down to the issue of regulation, the necessary framework that will now enforce that everybody should acquire the digital identity.  And also to make the digital identity easy for people to acquire.  This is very critical.  And the issue of infrastructure was discussed earlier.  If you don't have the necessary infrastructure to allow, create and enable the environment for citizens to acquire the digital ‑‑ it becomes a problem.
Then the issue of security, security is very, very critical.  How do you create security around the digital identity?  And also for people to be aware because individuals are vulnerable.  They can share their digital identity if they don't know how to make good use of it.  That's my contribution.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Very good.  Very good.  So digital regulation.  Issue of (?) I think Nigerian Government and the Ministry of Communication and Digital Economy they aligned their work scope to bring in National Identity Commission into their per view and as we mentioned, as they say, realignment to focus more on the digital identity.  So there is new orientation and direction and we will see the effect.  Kossi, what are you doing in that?  Can you respond to the question as well?
>> KOSSI AMESSINOU: Yes.  Digital identity is important.  Every government in the West Africa know that.  You have one project (?) for all of our region in West Africa helping us to put in our country in our different countries, the digital identity for people.  We have some funds for that.  The project called (?) WULI.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE:  W‑U‑L‑I right?
>> KOSSI AMESSINOU: That's right.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: It's very important.  We mentioned something last year that is good for to do peer review.  Taking from the implement project it's good to check what your neighbor is doing, maybe Ghana, maybe Nigeria and Brazil is also what they are doing.  So it's good to ask around so that we do not make any mistake in implementation and then learn from the experience of others.
Let me bring in the Chair with regard to government.  So identity in regards to unlocking the development potential of Internet.
>> HOSSAM ELGAMAL: We have been working on digital identity, I think, since 2009.  The issue is related and then as three companies providing services for this.  Unfortunately since then and with what happened to now, it did not become that much, except within the government itself.  So we have digital signature, digital identity within the government.  Still for normal citizen, they are still doing it on the development and for specific goods.  But it showed what interesting and I think that a year ago we started with a new program for financial inclusion and with this program, they are starting to enforce digital identity for everyone so that we have cashless transactions everywhere, which would minimize corruption, all of that, and would also increase and improve cash flow for different organizations.  So this is for the ‑‑
I just wanted to add if I may, along with other ‑‑ regarding capacity building.  We talked a little bit about industry for technology solutions.  And I think what we need currently is to have more and more national programs for transformational training and especially on the level of vocational training.  As jobs are shifting with the new technologies coming in, so people working in factories, people working in retail.  People working in many industries will not have the same skill set required anymore.  And this we need to prepare properly our countries.  Otherwise we will really have ‑‑ we will lose jobs.  So we have to focus on transformation programs on March 11.  We are starting a program here with the Minister of Manpower on different government entities to help people start choosing systems and people using cybersecurity for OT, operating technologies.  People using design solutions and such.
It showed that it is more and more important for this ‑‑ it's not anymore the future.  It is the current situation to be ready for it.  And I may add only one other point.  Is that we have it here and we are looking at the government and it is related to the evaluation of R&D copyright.  Unfortunately, when we are more and more encouraging and people to go and make social development, especially in technology side, because this is the future, it is not valued in the products.  And this is clearly identified in manufacturing, et cetera, where when you just develop a new product do not include (?) the part of R&D into it, which is something, unfortunately, is not helping moving more and more into innovation.  So we need more policies that would encourage evaluation of R&D and the copyright of it as well.  Because where we are moving in the future, it is no longer only access and IT.  But it's the merge of control, IT, manufacturing and all of that and we need to be ready for it.  Thank you.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Yes.  Very right.  We really need to be ready.  And in this regard, security is so important.  I don't know if (?) is there.  Has been involved with the review of the Nigeria policy and strategy.  So what do you see with aspect to cybersecurity as we move forward in industry?
>> OLUSEGUN OLUGBILE: Thank you, Mr. Moderator.  I'm glad you made mention of the security in Africa.  One of the key things that Nigerian governments has done, Nigerian government is (?) essential.  Ambassador of Security and (?) right now the measures now, National Policy on Cybersecurity for 2020.  Now what that what is Nigeria is not just going to recognize that sector and then that will be (?) encouraging to move into ‑‑ invest in this area.
Another thing I will share is Nigerian ‑‑ the country has also developed some capabilities in the areas of computer emergency response.  What we are doing now is to enhance what has already been done, to take it from where we started from and ‑‑ what we are going.  Let me make mention of something.  I think right now Nigeria is looking at how to mainstream industrial ‑‑ especially in the context of the vaccine and the youth issues in the country.  I think it is essential to start to begin to look at how cybersecurity ‑‑ how the skill can be built into the ministry and then we can begin to build a foundation that is needed to empower our country.  Thank you.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: So you mean in the curriculum?
>> OLUSEGUN OLUGBILE: Yes apart from the school setting, the country has policy in which, before anyone can be employed in Internet services, they have a minimum digital skills which has been mainstreamed into the (?) not only that, if we teach training before you can become a teacher in Nigeria, I'm aware that we have embedded a policy in which every teacher now has to passthrough some level of skill.  We are not talking about computer competencies.  We are talking about doing their work fully.  So across the sector we have that going on.
>> JIMSON OLUFUYE: Very good.  And I would like to note indeed that the Nigerian government has involved a master plan and with that master plan ‑‑ I think there is an echo somewhere.  Can we mute our lines?  So the master plan and with the government master plan they are trying to bring onboard number of governments to ‑‑ can you mute your line, please, sir?  There is echo coming from the line.
Apart from this, there are a number of executive orders that mandated the ministries, departments, and agencies to automate and to bring onboard on to the Internet their services so that government citizens do not need to travel far to use government services.  So I think this is something we believe to be perfectly implemented as the Prime Minister is doing a good job thus far along with his team.
So Thabo, what is it like in South Africa in regards to supply chain?  The COVID issue and their supply chain, inflation and what have you?  So how do we tackle this issue going forward?  What are your recommendations thus far?
>> THABO MASH: Thank you, for that.  If I can start especially in regards to COVID‑19 itself what it has presented us.  It's a crisis that fortunately we did not let go to waste.  From the perspective that it actually gave a lot of different stakeholders and interests, a common why.  So you see a lot of people who usually didn't necessarily come together and actually work together without any financial interest.  So they actually came together.  You saw that a lot in this era.
And I think what is happening is now we have become deliberate in trying to define this why and to define this goal that is compounding for us to be able to adopt today the digital initiatives and for us to be able to work together.  So in South Africa, what do we also realize we saw a lot of changes that have happened.  So changes from the education front and yet minister is speaking about disruption in the education.  So there was a lot of disruptions that happened and we saw schools trying to respond in a myriad of ways and the government also trying to weigh in on the problem since we have the challenge with Internet connectivity and data not being as an affordable thing as well as devices not necessarily if you want to have access to devices.
While private schools they have gone that direction of using platforms such as teams, using Google Classroom and Zoom and all that.  Government tried to implement it using the television and network itself.  So it was not now direct one‑to‑one type of a approach, however they were trying to breach this gap.  They even brought in some celebrities that kids are used to.  I hear somebody speaking about some musicians being invited.  So almost the same thinking that was put here for teenagers and this work is excited to start watching these programs which we are trying. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-ws176-assurance-and-transparency-in-ict-supply-chain-security^^

 
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: We have not started yet, but I would like our participants to briefly write in the chat, what organizations they are from and where they are based so we can get a bit of an idea of who is currently here and, you know, where they are based if you wouldn't mind doing that in the chat function.
Do you actually see the chat function when I'm in presentation mode ‑‑ oh, now I see.  All right.  Chris Blask from Unysis.  Nice to have you here.  Who else is here?
All right.  We have United Nations are here.
Wooyoung, where are you based?
Katherine, welcome, from Washington, D.C., CISA.
Would you mind promoting the other five attendees to panelist mode?  Thank you.
We have Len from the State Department, based in Austin, Texas.
So I think we have a very exciting workshop ahead of us.  I know we have just 90 minutes and we have already discussed with our panelist and co‑organizers how we get this all done.  I want to start on time.  It's one minute after official starting time.  So I want to do that.
First of all, I want to welcome everyone here.  I hope you already had a wonderful experience with the first virtual IGF so far.  Work to this workshop on assurance and transparency in ICT supply chain security.  It's always exciting to be here and, you know, have this exchange about a very critical topic.
My name is Andreas Kuehn, I'm a senior programmer with the EastWest Institute.  And I'm one of the organizers and will serve as the moderator for this workshop.
The next few minutes, I want to give a brief overview about the workshop itself, some logistics that we need to take care of, but before I want to do, that I want to quickly introduce all of our excellent panelists that we have.  Starting in the east, we have Dr. Amirrudin joining us, he's the director of cybersecurity Asia.
And we have Dr. Katherine Getao, she's the head of Ministry of Information in Kenya.
>> KATHERINE GETAO: Hello.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: That was a mistake.  I think there were some others who were supposed to come first.  Salah Baina from Morocco.  Welcome.
And then we go further up to Moscow, Anastasiya Kazakova from Kaspersky.
>> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: Hello, everyone.  Excited to be here. 
>> ANDREAS KUEHN:  And as we continue to go west, Philipp Amann from CyberPol.  How is the weather in the Hague? 
>> PHILIPP AMANN: It's not raining.  Beautiful as always.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: As we go further, we have Arnaud Dechoux joining us from Paris, and he will help me with the online moderation.  Thank you so much for being here.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: And then San Francisco, where I'm based.  It's shortly after 1:00 in the morning.  I hope you bear with me with the moderation.  We'll do our best to cover all of those different time zones.
We'll get the panelists more time to introduce themselves.  I want to briefly quickly run through the agenda.  We have a short introduction what I'm doing here.  I will follow up with short framing remarks as the moderator laying out the goals and the overall arc of the workshop and why we thought this was an important topic to address and we have about 25 minutes for opening statements provided by the panelists.  They bring in their expertise and talk about the issues that we thought are of most important of concerns.  And then we open up for about 45 minutes a discussion.  That is the key part of the workshop to really have this exchange that we want to foster here.
Brief closing remarks from the panelists and I will wrap up the workshop and give a little outlook of what comes after that.
Before I go to the framing remarks, some very brief logistics.  As you all know, this is being recorded and streamed on YouTube.  Links are here if you would like to use captions.  That's also available.
Quick thoughts, quick guidance on questions.  Please use the Q&A feature in Zoom to submit your questions and please do so throughout the workshop.  Not only the discussion itself, and when you have something that you would like to contribute, add it there and we will try to get to that.
If you are on YouTube, use ‑‑ you can use Twitter #IGF 176 which is the number of the workshop to submit questions to us.  You also have the option to raise your hands if you would like to make a verbal intervention, ask questions or provide some comments.  Please raise your hands and we will give you ‑‑ we will give you the microphone to speak.
Should you at any time fall out of the Internet and ‑‑ or disconnected, there's the ID number of the Zoom call, and you also find the link for international numbers of the ‑‑ on the IGF website.
So I think that brings me to my opening remarks ‑‑ or my framing remarks and how we get to this workshop in the first place.  Let me quickly set myself here.
Security and global supply chain is critical to ensuring trust in ICT and future of digital society.  Today's ICT products and services and the Internet itself are comprised of a multitude of hardware, software components.  Organizations including operators of infrastructure and firms rely heavily in large numbers of third‑party vendors provide their operations with each of them having some degree of connectivity, each adding difficult to manage third‑party risk.
At the same time, sophisticated cyber tasks have excessive agency in terms of managing the third‑party risk even further.  I think while we have seen global ICT firms have invested heavily in mitigating third‑party risks, governments, particularly those in the global south and small and medium‑sized businesses often lack the capacity and the resources to manage ICT supply chain risk effectively.
To address supply chain‑related security concerns, and the international security concerns, some governments have enacted strict measures.  This reflects in some ways in mar cases, also geopolitical struggles that we are finding ourselves in and in some cases, ill‑guided attempts, over the Internet which may further the fragmentation of the Internet, and the technological and economic universe.
So how do I come here to this particular topic?  As I said earlier, with the EastWest Institute, and in 2016, we unleashed a report.  I hear some background noise.  I hear ‑‑ I don't know where it's coming from, but it would be good if we can mute our microphones while ‑‑ while ‑‑ at the time that you are not speaking.  Thank you.
As I said, in 2016, we released a report on supply chain security, and the importance of creating a level playing field based in objective and transparency security requirements based on internationally recognized standards and best practices and I will later share the link to the report in the chat.
But back then, this was mostly a technical discussion about, you know, technical discussions among technical people, also back then, the NIST cybersecurity framework did not explicitly address supply chain.
Fast forward to 2020, there's more focus on supply chain security, and tech nationalism tendency as the report describes.  As we all have become more aware on the dependence of suppliers for critical ICTs.
And in the report itself, I think we try to address this kind of like struggle between national security versus economic interest as sometimes those restrictive measures can have unintended consequences, while government measures try to attend legitimate national security concerns, there might be negative consequences for innovation, competition and global trade and support.
So let me take this from here.  I think the point here was really to describe how the thinking around supply chain security has shifted.  And I want to go ahead and address two particular issues that come up, excuse me.
One more back.
They come up in the report, and one of them is trust and trustworthiness.
Underlying many of those issues you are trying to address in supply chain security is about trust.  The question here is often how can we come up with assurances that are trusted?  And so in the report, we kind of outline a set of measures and make the argument that in order to ‑‑ to get to a level of confidence and acceptable level of risk, a buyer has to make the calculations about how much risk a buyer can take on, and what kind of measures are sufficient to address those risks.
The idea is that we take a combination of measures to then minimize this trust gap and also find a level of acceptable risk, including an acceptable ‑‑ to the agree those residual risks be acceptable.  Some of them are technical measures, some are organizational measures and also regulatory measures are part of that calculus to address those ‑‑ those trust issues.
On the next slide, I want to ‑‑ I want to show you what we refer to as the security and trustworthiness framework and basically it outlines three main components.  First on the left side, we are describing what kind of, like, components or measures are in place that individual ICT buyers can do as part of their procurement requirements.  This includes vendors to follow international standards for security development and to ensure that services and software are delivered in a good configuration.
In the middle part, this is the industry level and the second and the third component and the vendors and what can buyers do and collectively to address some of those issues.  An example here is coming up with software bill of materials for entire industry.  And having security vulnerability remediation and so forth.
On the right side of this, we talk about ecosystem measures that can be put in place, those include regional transparency centers or global conformance programs such as efforts that are currently underway in had the European Union.
What I wanted to do next is also to provide a brief overview on what is going to be happening in the United States with regards to supply chain security.  But I will save that and maybe bring this back later into our conversation during the discussion to save a little bit of time here.
For today's workshop, we will hear about current developments and discuss approaches to strengthen risk mitigation trust in supply chain, along three key dimensions, which are first, assessing ICT supply chain risks and the threat landscape; second, building confidence in ICT supply chains through assurance and transparency measures; and third, closing the ICT supply chain security supply chain and capacity gap.
In summary, risk and threat on one level, measures that can address some assurance and transparency measure that can address some of those issues that we find when it comes to supply chain security and third, what are kind of like the competencies and capacities that need to be built up in order to do that.
And managing ICT supply chain security effectively requires close cooperation between government and corporate and civil society stakeholders to address their interests and concerns as buyers, users and service operators along the three dimensions of the technical, operational and normative level.
This concludes my initiative framing remarks.  I hope this was useful to set up the conversation for our panelists and give some more background, but before we go into that, we have a little refresher here.  Arnaud, will you please start the Kahoot! game that will allow us to kind of like talk about some of those issues in a more playful way.
>> ARNAUD DECHOUX: So you should see my screen now.  Can you see it?
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Yes, we see the screen.
>> ARNAUD DECHOUX: So maybe, Andreas, I let you comment.  So everyone, please go to kahoot.it and use the six figure pin code that you see on the screen.  Thank you very much.
We will wait a few seconds so everyone can join.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you.
>> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: I like we have Griffindor in the game.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Can you say that again, Anastasiya.
>> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: Yes, someone came up with a very nice nickname, Griffindor for the game.
(Chuckles).
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: All right.  So we have 19 people in the game.  20.  The count is going up.
All right.  Do you want to get started? 
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: The question is:  Which supply chain attack/operations do not exist?
I think now you just go ahead and choose the answer that is provided on your screen.
So the correct answer was Wannascreen.
Can you advance, Arnaud?  Thank you.
Next question, which method is not used to infect ICT supply chain? 
Please choose your answer.
You see on the left side, the counter shows you how much time is left. 
I only see colors.  So I cannot play.  The idea is that the colors respond to the questions and so I think you can just choose that particular color.
Hopefully that helps.
Next one, please.
Griffindor is in the lead.  Excellent! 
Next, what are the most attractive targets for supply chain attacks? 
And the answer was, your grandparents.
Okay.  So let's see what the final results are here.  Who the winners are.  Slythrin, Salah, congratulations.  And number one is... Griffindor.  Yay!  Congratulations!
All right.
Runners up are Katie and myself.  And maybe I should not have played, you know.
So thank you so much.  I hope this was a good introduction to the supply chain issues.  Now, the exciting part is to hear from our esteemed panelists.  I want to head over.  Anastasiya, you are first.  Again, I ask all of you to stick to the five minutes.  After about four minutes, I will start waving my hands and I would like to ask you to kindly wrap up in order to make sure we are on time.  Anastasiya.
>> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: Thank you very much.  I love the game.  I'm sharing my screen.  Please let me know if you see that and all is good? 
So before starting, I would like to ‑‑ my role, I was told my role today is briefly to give the perspective from the private sector company and the security research company and I would like to throw the supply chain attacks back door into your network.
So before going further, I would like to briefly illustrate and actually with a visualized as well the threat model and the possible threat model of a supply chain attack.  It's important to know that the brands listed here, only for illustrative purposes.  This should definitely not be understood as an indication of how secure or not secure particular software is.
So in an appropriate system network, we have the green zone, which represents the traditional IT infrastructure.  It's usually well secured as a corporate network.  Then we have the yellow zone, which also could be called as a of bring your own device zone.  When employees of the company use mobile phones, laptops, and they all also are in the company's asset.  And there's some extent of control possible for the company.
And the next layer red zone, it represents external services, such as email, storage, service, and it's located outside of the company's assets only.  The company can no longer safeguard the data and in the third‑party service is compromised, let's say your cloud provider could have ‑‑ something happens with the software, then there are red business impacts to your business.
And finally, the blue zone represents services which are based on resources and usually do not belong to the company.  So they have occasional contacts with the company's IT infrastructure.  If something goes wrong, at this point the company's assets do get compromised as well.
Another visualization of how possibly a home infrastructure could look like.  It has several layers.  For example, I have ‑‑ I have a desktop computer, and Intel is designed in the US and in Malaysia.  The mother board is from Taiwan, et cetera.  The additional layer, that could be produced in the US, designed in the US, but have some components from different parts of the world.
And the hardware infrastructure.
So the key idea is that the more the software consists of multiple components which produced in many jurisdictions and many countries and each particular software has different components inside, and it also could be produced by other components.
There's also a myth of a national software.  For each component, I call it myth, because for each component, again we would have to ask the following questions:  Where was it designed?  Who has the access to the manufacturing and the development?  Where was it built?  Who wrote the software?  Who has access to the source code?  And many, many other questions.
So there's a part of us that we cannot trust anyone, but we must trust everyone.  I think this is particularly the same idea as we see in the physical world, not only in the cyberspace.  There will always be some sort of cybersecurity risk, or physical risk, and we are speaking about the physical sphere.
But the key is to build and find the solution to that risk is that we must trust for that.
So what is a possible supply chain attack?  Again, a very brief illustration of the ‑‑ of the supply chain attack.  It's usually called supply chain attack because there's a violation of the trust somewhere in the chain.  The most widespread scenario can be against the company who develops software made of several components that there are these components, digital assign and everything is good.  But when there is a wholesale actor that interferes with the development process and adds some modifications to the software, and still is assigned by the valid digital signature, then the software goes directly not users and infects them.
So this is the ‑‑ I would say the most wide spread scenario for the supply chain attack.
There are possible ways how to infect supply chains.  There are these ways, software implants.  When a threat actor uses malware with persistence presence.  And firmware.  Foot firmware is often the target.  And hardware implant.  Implanting keyloggers in USB drives inserting chips and microphones into the hardware.
So it is believed that all of the three possible ways could be the kill chain for the attacks.  Usually those three particular processes are the most vulnerable parts for the supply chain, they are source code process, build process and updating mechanism processes and supply chain attacks are poisoning trusted mechanisms.
The Kaspersky sees the paradox.  If you install updates, this is what we are told by the software developers, by the IT security community, you may become a victim of a supply chain attacks.
But if you don't install updates, you might be vulnerable to security issues.  Therefore, this is what the paradox and a big problem for the IT security community.
And I walk to about the threat actor group that we have been investigating, it's called Winnti group, this is the three largest supply chain operations.  Shadow pad, ccleaner infection and operation shadowhammer.  And it has been revealed last year.
So from one simple backdoor in a single supplier, the cyber criminals can damage multiple larger targets.  This is the problem with the wide supply chain attacks and one of the most difficult to detect, one of the most difficult to actually prevent at the very beginning.  You may be a target, but you may be a weapon if you don't know if your network and if your computer has been compromised and something is already happening within your network.
So I just briefly covered particular threats, but actually, to address those threats, there are particular challenges and I would like to briefly speak about them, because I believe that we will cover them in more detail later this session.
Definitely the lack of capacities.  Especially among the small and medium companies which is part of the global supply chains and particularly also the countries, the developing countries.  So this is one of the challenges to properly address the threat of supply chain attacks.  Then usually the lack of institutional framework, on how to actually procure the particular software, hardware, or firmware and how actually to make sure that the software, the hardware that you use is secure.
Lack of transparency mainly refers to how actually the vulnerabilities handle the companies and the vulnerabilities handled by the governments as well.
Fragmentation in regulatory frameworks is also one of the particular challenge and disturbing trend as we see the attacks of different jurisdictions to tackle the problem and therefore the risk of the fragmented approaches.
And finally geopolitical tensions and the tech nationalism which Andreas has already covered.  So I won't be ‑‑ I won't talk about this one.
And I would like to finalize with, again, the clear message and a very important message that our colleagues see, you may be a target but you may also be a weapon.  And this is something really very important for the IT security community.
Thank you very much.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, Anastasiya.  I appreciate the perspective from the IT security vendor on that particular issue.
Next one is Phillip Amman, who provides a law enforcement perspective on the issue of supply chain security and some of those attacks.  We have no one from a vendor on the panel at this point, but I know there are a couple of vendors in the audience.  So I think it will be interesting to see maybe some comments if you want to think along those lines later in the discussion sections of how nice the vendor looks at some of those issues compared to you know, law enforcement or an ICT security vendor.
So Philipp, the floor is yours.
>> PHILIPP AMANN: Thank you, Andreas.  And thank you for the introductory remarks and framing the discussion.  I probably won't take too much of why you are time.  It's always great for us to be able to provide the law enforcement perspective when we are talking about issues that are more potentially in the cybersecurity, cyber safety arena but really to highlight, what is our role?  How do we support and compliment other efforts and why should we be at the table.
I work with part of Europol.  So we support moment in complex cross‑border investigations.  So cybercrimes we look into high‑tech crime and payment fraud and criminality in the Dark Web and we deal with combatting child sexual abuse.  And we have seen a whole different types of crime, but we are supporting the very complex cases.  And luckily, we also have some successes because I think that's also important.  It becomes very doom and gloom.  We just talk about the victims and becoming a weapon, and that's true and I agree with that.
From a law enforcement perspective when we look at supply chain risks, what we really see is it sort of ‑‑ it widens, expands the attack surface, right?  And it's often an ignored risk by the company.  It's ‑‑ you know, it's ‑‑ there's an inability, and I think, you know ‑‑ actually, I refer to that, in that there is an inability to also protect, you know, your information, your systems beyond your own perimeter.  So there's a number of challenges and just to go with a case example.  The number of cases that we supported, particularly in the IoT sphere, but there is an ongoing attack.  That's how criminals abuse the current situation, which, is you know, they are targeting actually teams Microsoft Team, and they upload the Global Strike, the ransomware.  They target specifically the education sector.
So you see how quickly the criminals are adapting and they are very agile to use the word, to ‑‑ to, you know, exploit potential security risks as part of the supply chain.  It's something you are supposed to install the updates and then you do install the update and what you get is ‑‑ you install yourself ransomware, which is not what you wanted to do.  This is currently ongoing.
This is just a reminder that, you know, this is ongoing and be on the lookout for those fake updates.
So what's our response?  You know, well, I think the biggest difference to an industry response, to supply chain risks is that we can go beyond defense.  You know, we usually go ‑‑ we can investigate.  We can go after the bad guys which is almost, you know, the gold standard but we also do a lot of prevention and awareness.  That's a key message as well.  That's like, if you will, the standard, prevent an attack from happening using tools, you know, by educating your staff.  You know, that's actually better to have to investigate the attack.
We do a lot of assessments.  We actually specifically highlighted the supply chain risk in our annual report, the net crime ‑‑ the Internet organized crime threat assessment report which is our annual product on describing the cybercrime landscape in ‑‑ in ‑‑ in the EU and beyond.  So, you know, mainly from the law enforcement perspective, but complimented, and very comprehensive.  We also try to predict the future to the extent possible and we have a number of recommendations, but specifically this year we have a number of issues that we highlighted but supply chain attacks is only one of them because of the risks that come with this in our ever connected world.
Like you said, Andreas, there's a much higher level of awareness now when it comes to that.
We have a number of issues.  Panelist European and sometimes working with industry, in connection with specific operations that we support and I think that's very important too, working also with industry partners because we need to have that stakeholder‑led network response to the problem.
One minute left?
You know, we organized with Anissa, the IoT conference, you know, IoT security conference.
So a number of things that we do there.  And so what's ‑‑ what's the solution?  Things like, you know, we heard already defense in‑depth, you know, seeing security and privacy design, positioning that as a competitive advantage, right?  Adding this to the procurement process, right?
And then have specific area for start‑ups and SMEs.  For us, it's really public/private partnership such as the normal ransomware and a lot of things that we can do.  Together we work with the web but we really need to walk the talk.  We need to start sharing more information and create the incentives for the companies to ‑‑ we work with everyone, and make sure that we can actually overcome and address those risks.
Thank you.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, Philipp for those remarks.  You are absolutely right, there's definitely more awareness own supply chain security issues.  You know, you mentioned some of the European Union reports, you know, Microsoft recently issued its digital defense report, and we will talk about supply chain security exclusively.  So I think it's definitely, you know, we ‑‑ as we have seen in our work.  So I think what is still missing, if you want and I think that was your final point, how can we together as a communicate address those supply chain security risks given kind of like current geopolitical tensions and some of those issues.
I think that's ‑‑ if we think ahead to the end of the workshop, maybe that's something we can do is make that very concrete.
Having that said, I think I really like Philipp and Anastasiya's original introduction of the topic, because we have some issues of how to think about then conceptually and what the threat landscape looks like.  I will go to the next speakers who come from more regional perspective and what is happening particularly in the global south.  First, I will hand over the floor to Dr. Amir, who will speak about Malaysia's perspective, but also the broader region.  Doctor, the floor is yours.
>> AMIRUDIN ABDUL WAHAB: Thank you, Andreas.  Very good day.  Firstly, it's an honor for me to be here at the IGF 2020 workshop.  My thanks to Kaspersky, to EWI for organizing this workshop.
A bit of background.  I'm from cybersecurity Malaysia.  We are actually a government agency, a techno center agency, under the ministry of communication.  We don't have any legislative body, so we are not a law enforcement agency, but we work with them closely providing the expertise.  We are not a ministry and we do have legislation.
And we also work closely with industry.  So we know that no one can do everything.  This is why we need to collaborate, and we have you are own platform to create partnership, collaboration, managing anything in cybersecurity.
Today we are more concerned about ICT security in the supply chain.  I think we all know in this digital age everything is connected.  I mean, everything is getting increasing reliance on ICT.  Whether individuals, businesses, and even government, whether it's positive or negative, it is something that we need to understand.  Technology is also getting smarter, in parallel with the evolution of technology.
But there are cyber criminals are getting more and more smarter and more and more sophisticated.  They may take more additional measures to protect themselves but somehow it makes it harder for the perpetrators or the actors to attack ‑‑ more time for them, more work, even more costly when it comes to attack the company.
So they will go to the alternative, which is the third party, and this is more accessible, easily for them.  And this is something that I think it is very important and the security is embedded in the ICT supply chain, you know, from the beginning.  It's to manage the weakest link.
And this is the role.  We have a program to educate.  We have program to educate the public, and also program to train the capacity ‑‑ the capacity building program to train the practitioner and even professional services and we create many roles but we believe it's important for us to work especially to ensure the overall cyberspace, I would say, the country is concerned.  And more now with the COVID‑19 pandemic, I think the increased dependency and use and connectivity, I think the supply chain may be impacted due to the third‑party outsourced business.
So I hope through this session, this panel, Q&A, et cetera.  I will be sharing based on the theme we have provided, I will be sharing more about some of the tracks related to ICT supply chain in Malaysia.
And then probably looking to some of the challenges the government, whether they as producer or as a consumer, you know, how do ‑‑ what do we face when we assess the security of the ICT security supply chain?
And also, how do we in Malaysia and probably the region, how do we approach it to ensure safety?  How do we share the trustworthiness of the ICT supply chain and the capacity building?  I mean, it's always a challenge because when we look at cybersecurity, it's not purely about technical matters.  It is about, I will say people, process itself, policy, and even the technology, all combined together, and we call it a holistic approach.  So this is something that we hope we can listen and interact.  You know, island ‑‑ and we have to learn from others.  I'm a panelist, but I'm not necessarily an expert from everything.  It's good to have this kind of platform to learn from the areas of the American region, the European, and the ‑‑ the north African, et cetera.
So this is something, a good collaboration.  So that we hope that we can interact and even establish networks among ourselves to learn how to get better and come to a security ‑‑ the ICT supply chain.
Once again, thank you for organizing this workshop and also all for joining this workshop.  Thank you.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, Dr. Amir.  I agree with your remarks.  There's very much we can learn from each other and I look forward to having these conversations later on, capacity building and what can be done collaboratively in when it comes to supply chain security.
The next speaker is Dr. Getao.  She has been thinking about some of those issues when if comes to capacity building in particular, and some of her work on cyber norms through the UNGTE, so Katherine, Dr. Getao, we are looking forward to your comments.  The floor is yours.
>> KATHERINE GETAO: Thank you very much.  I tried to start my video, but it says the horse has disabled it.  So I will just proceed.
So thank you very much.  I think I have already learned a lot from my fellow panelists and I thank EastWest Institute and Kaspersky for coming one this noble idea.
Now the ICT authority is a state corporation that is very much involved in supporting public service users, with infrastructure, with technology and with skills, and also we have a broad mandate.  So we are ‑‑ we promote our private sector also.
So we have a very practical point of view when it comes to this issue of supply chain.  So I will start by saying why we are concerned.  The first issue is sovereignty.  As a country, you expect that the technology belongs to you, and it is working for the purposes for which you bought it, and there's no form of external interference in the operations of your technology.
Another reason is we are generally a customer or a client.  We manufacture very little of our own technology within the country.  So we are normally buying from outside.  And as a client and a customer, you expect a reasonable degree of protection.  When you purchase a vehicle, you expect that it will have seatbelts, airbags, and other safety features that give you a reasonable chance of survival if your car is involved in an incident, and in the same way as consumers of technology, and I think Dr. Wahab said the same thing, we have a reasonable expectation.
And, of course, there's a possibility of loss or harm through supply chain insecurity issues and so we need to protect our government, our citizens from loss or harm.
One thing we may not have discussed is why are actors and those actors, most people have been talking about the criminal element, but we also know that there have been suspicions that there are states who are involved in supply chain issues, as well as companies.  So what are they looking for?  They are looking for strategic information, where they serve a national intelligence nature or whether it's of a commercial nature or even from personal data.
And I like what Anastasiya said about, you know, the forms ‑‑ the forms.  Yes, so there's the software.  There's the firmware and there's the hardware.  And for naive environments, of course, it becomes more problematic as you go further down the lists, because while software, we may have the tools to examine and notice what is happening, but when the threat is in the firmware and the hardware, it may be a little bit more problematic for many jurisdictions.
Now, I will end by saying, somewhat are we interested in?  As governments.  We are interested in technology that is functional.  In other words it does what we purchased it to do, that it's robust to threats as well as to natural ‑‑ its natural that is genuine, because this supply chain issue means that ‑‑ (No audio).
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Dr. Getao, I think we lost your audio.  Let's wait a quick moment to see if she's going to come back.
I think she just from the call, if I'm not mistaken.
>> KATHERINE GETAO: Can you hear me now?  Okay.  I'm sorry about that.  It seems I lost network for a moment, but I will try to be very quick to finish my statement.
So I was just saying that we are interested in robust functional and genuine products because this supply chain involves very many actors and not only at the point of manufacturing or producing the product, but also in environments where maybe we don't have the capacity, we involve others such as consultants who are assisting us to set up the software, who are assisting us to manage the software.
So there are a great many actors involves in the delivery of this, and all of them should be trusted.  In my later remarks, I will say what we consider persuasive solutions to assist us in this issue of the supply chain risk.
Thank you very much to everyone. 
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, Dr. Getao for these remarks.  I think it's very important the trust, that we think are ours, and they can be controlled by malicious third‑parties.  We have some questions about transparency center and some of the work that Kaspersky is doing.  Maybe some of those early experiences since you started that.  To have this discussion.
I think the important part, it's not only about cybersecurity in the narrow sense, but increasingly artificial intelligence, whether the mechanism is in place to have transparently mechanisms so we understand what is happening under the hood of the technology so to speak.
Moving on, Salah to you.  You shared with us, our your colleague, Mohamed Saad shared some of the interesting work that's happening in Morocco on a technical level.  It was quite fascinating to see the maturity that you have to see what you in particular addressed small and medium sized businesses.  I'm curious to hear more obviously about that, but the floor is yours and looking forward to your report.
>> SALAH BAINA: Thank you.  First of all, thank you very much for involving us in this workshop.  On behalf of my Moroccan partners and my Moroccan ecosystem, we are very proud to be here with you this morning.
Please let me share with you my small presentation just to focus on some points I would say in Morocco, we are focusing on the supply chain because we aim to be a major actor in the Mediterranean level.  We are trying to develop a facility as the biggest I would say in Africa.
The security is a high level concern for us.  We know that being involved in a world trade ecosystem is also engaging that we are not the weakest one at the security level.  We don't want ‑‑ in the ‑‑ I would say in the chain of world trade commerce, we don't want to be the weakest link so each point of this network has to develop the regulation, the rules, the laws to ensure a little bit of security of transparency and of course, to protect ourselves but also to protect the others and Morocco is very concerned with this security problem so.  I would say that since 2010, we had very interesting roadmap for developing regulatory authorities, frameworks, laws, and also very productive, very active ecosystem in this ‑‑ to tackle this problem.
So I would say that we started in 2011 by creating the regulatory organizations.  So we have, I would say two main actors, which are the strategic security committee, and the general direction of security of information systems.  Both of those authorities have made the which is called today the strategy of information system security in Morocco.  So we have a specific framework that have been developed using international standards but also using national work that has been do with the whole ecosystem to ensure that no Moroccan organization is the weakest point in this network.  So we have ‑‑ lately we have defined what is ‑‑ what should be the security level of the ‑‑ of what we call important infrastructure which is mainly critical infrastructures in Morocco.  So we have a list of those critical infrastructures airports, also energy, suppliers, telecommunication providers and each one of these actors has to achieve a certain level of security and this, I would say cascading to every small company that work with those big players, I would say.
And we as association of the users of information systems in Morocco, we have the ‑‑ I would say we have the role.  We are not policymakers, but we have the mission to educate the ecosystem.  So we accompany this whole ecosystem with seminars, with events, with ‑‑ by producing white books and producing articles in the aim to make education sensitization and also awareness of the whole ecosystem, starting from primary schools.
We also have by the few past years events that have been made with schools, with universities and with industrial partners and at the local Moroccan level but also at the regional level, we collaborate with I would say colleagues from France, colleagues from Tunisia, from somewhere else in the Mediterranean.  So we try to make this thing general, not only at the ‑‑ because if Morocco is a trust level ecosystem and we have to collaborate with another country or another facility in the region, so it's no more our capacity to defend ourself, which will be involved, but also the capacity of our partners to the ability of our partners to protect us.  So it's ‑‑ I would say, it's a team work we cannot only protect our infrastructures.  We have also to make sure that every single point in this world network is protected.  So it's real team work at the world level to protect the whole supply chain.
And so this was my point and to do this I just say that the association is making a lot of work for dissemination of Moroccan policies but work policies and we try to make a framework to accompany SMEs in this maturity level and we have the ICT maturity level which is get assessed and get value, and in this program, we have a lot of, I would say issues about security and protection.  That was my presentation.
Thank you.  I guess we have to exchange about all of this in the next few minutes.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: While you were talking.  There were quite a few questions.  Probably everyone has realized and now I think we said before that once everyone becomes a panelist, you can't use the Q&A function anymore.  So that's why we switched to the chat for that.  I really like your slide that shows the overlay of the actual trade streams are happening and how we can all ‑‑ we can all think about how ICT plays into that.
We can think about that in a more narrow scenario of the ICT supply chains.  It's quite important and probably just drives further the point that we need to look into that.  And obviously besides the cybersecurity conversation that's happening over the past year, this year in particular, COVID‑19, I think brought also to the forefront.  Understanding supply chain security.
That was our opening statement.  Time flew by a little bit faster than we expected.  We originally thought to have some more conversations directly from the panelists but I want to make sure that we have an opportunity from our participants ask questions and get involved.  I think there was a common theme around education awareness that particularly our last three speakers directly or indirectly addressed and I was hoping to get more perspectives on that, you know what in particular are you doing?  I know Dr. Amir has some thoughts on the wider region that the ASEAN countries are doing in that regard.  Dr. Getao also had some thoughts on supply chain.  I'm curious if we can briefly provide some comments on that.  Dr. Amir, would you like to start?
>> AMIRUDIN ABDUL WAHAB: Thank you, Andreas.
Okay.  In cybersecurity Malaysia, we have programs that covers the community at large and that community we even divide into SMEs, the organization and children, we call it cyber safe program.
It stands for security for everyone.
So it's about giving knowledge about the awareness of the threat that might be there and online whether you as individual users or as an organization.  Because I think it's important.  Not everyone is a practitioner.  They are just a user of the technology.  So regardless of where ‑‑ of which sector they are in, so they need to have the basic understanding.
Then if you come back to the triangle.  That's we call it the bigger community.  And then the next layer up we have the capacity building for the practitioner.  So we have a program called the cyber guru, whether they are in the IT area or when it comes to the supply chain.
How ‑‑ how do they need to protect their organization, for example?
And as a practitioner, a person who is pay professional to protect the organization, whether they protect their own organization or the third‑party vendor, for example.  They need to have that basic understanding.  So we have programs from the responsibility side.  And up to proactive measures.  Giving business continuity, and all of these other things and then also looking into various new technology, security requirement.  We are now having IoT security, and it needs to be understood.  So this is the type of training that we provide so the practitioner.  In addition to having a training, we certify them as a professional certification, and certified professionals.  That means that they even have to take an exam, just like following the ISO17024, basically to ensure that they are really capable, competent enough, you know?  And this program we call the global ACE team, global cybersecurity team.  It's not only developed by us.  It's facilitated by us.  It's vendor neutral and industry driven.  It's coming from various sectors whether it's from public sector input, the industrial input and the academia and the community at large.
And we build this together, facilitate cybersecurity measure.  Two months ago in September, this global ACE team was recognized by ITU under the WSIS 2020.  So we won it under category five of the world summit.  This is an initiative that we tried to bring it and not only that, we bring it not next level.  I mentioned by cyber safe and cyber guru.  And cyber ace.  But this up with we work collaboratively at international level where we are putting ‑‑ we are now helping some of the countries in the region, whether in the ASEAN or even in OIC countries, because we are currently also the Asia Pacific chair ‑‑ the Asia Pacific with the chairman and we are the permanent Secretariat to the OIC.  So we are building a mutual recognition of cyber ace, and we are mentoring some of these countries to help build a program and billing professional certification and at the same time we mutually recognize each other.
People we believe is always the weakest link.  So you need people who are aware of the issue of cybersecurity.  But at the same time as a practitioner, they need to be qualified.  They need to be certified.  They need to be competent to be able to do what they need to do to protect their organization.  But at the same time, since it is aligned with the international standard.  We want to recognize whatever they have done, which the organization is put ‑‑ this is recognized also at the international and that's why we are building and helping some of the countries in the region to build a mutual recognition.
So rather than ‑‑ like a mutual recognition, for example, in the case of ICT assessment, for example, a common criteria.  So now at the people level.  So we believe that cybersecurity regardless of your own organization, it must look holistically from the people, process and technology together.
So that's a bit of ‑‑
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, thank you, Dr. Amir.  I like that you tied that together over people, process and technology.  And I see in the chat, Arnaud provided the link to cyberguru.my and that allows our audience to check out some additional information on what you just described.
I know Dr. Getao and Salah may want to respond.  And Chris Blask raised his hand.
Salah, would you like to have a short response or is it ‑‑ it's always an interesting perspective from India.
>> KATHERINE GETAO: I'm happy to allow my old friend Latha to make her contribution.
>> SALAH BAINA: Go ahead. 
>> ANDREAS KUEHN:  Latha, very nice to see you here.
>> PARTICIPANT: Lovely to be here.  I actually wanted to bring in a different element and not necessarily from India's perspective, though I suppose it does also affect India.  When we are talked about the transparency in the ICT supply chain, with the increasing globalization of the supply chain, you know, there is a real issue with dual use technologies and supply chain security and it's not always adequately protected by the arrangements like the WASA agreement, for example.
Now it's a fact that we need the new technologies, particularly the Internet protocol network monitoring systems, the telephone interception equipment, the intrusion software in electronic devices including telephones and computers, and the data retention systems for legitimate purposes but they can be very badly misused.
Now, India has been subject to a lot of restrictions on the dual use technologies, of course.  So from our point of view, we would like to see less restrictions and not more but I think the real question is with the new technologies not yet really being completely under the control of the new emerging technologies, how do any of the panelists ‑‑ and this is open to all of you ‑‑ see this whole issue of the dual use technologies.  It's a new item I wanted to toss into the discussion.  Thank you.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you.  Philipp, I know you work this.  I saw you thinking when she was saying dual use technologies.  So please, for a short response.
>> PHILIPP AMANN: I think very quickly, I couldn't agree more.  I think that's certainly one of the challenges that we have, with the dual use aspect and different, you know, actor groups, you know, potentially using the same, if you will techniques that cyber criminals use.
So there's some initiative ‑‑ I think from our perspective this has to be, again, a stakeholder discussion.  We need to come to a point where, you know, ideally, I know sometimes we don't like the word "balance" but a better balance, but a right mix of safety, security, and privacy.  Meaning that from our perspective, you know when we look at the use of encryption, for instance, or, you know, we are about to publish ‑‑ unfortunately, it will be published on the 19th of November, we will public a report on the malicious uses and abuses of the eye, which we created with two industry partners and that's the kind of things where we look at what are the challenges and to say that and see how can we build safer and more secure systems?
But I think that's going to be an ongoing challenge.  There's no silver bullet as we know to address that dual use aspect, but I think the safer, the more secure the metrics are, the better we are protected the better we can deal with the very legitimate, you know, lawful based ‑‑ on you know, legality and all the transparency measures that you need from the law enforcement perspective to ‑‑ to, you know, address the criminal use of those technologies.  It's an ongoing discussion.  I fully agree with those comments, but it's a challenge that we all together need to address.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, Philipp.  From my side, I think the question around ‑‑ when it comes to tech nationalism, looking at the issue from that perspective that this has been, I think, kind of a problem, right, in terms of like there are new technologies out there.  There are emerging technologies that have good uses and in some cases, I think we have seen the controllers restricting them early on which is problematic from the innovation and competition point of view and there's a lot of literature on this from other emerging technologies back in the day, but definitely something that needs to be addressed.
When you look at the US issue, recently a new strategy on emerging and strategic critical technologies where we see the expert control regimes or training as tools to deal with some.  Security‑ ‑‑ with some of the security‑related issues.  I hope that provides some answers.  Anastasiya.
>> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: Yes, very quick.  I like the questions which Ms. Reddy asked and there's no silver bullet answer, but I would like to be pessimistic and optimistic.  Pessimistic, I think humanity will not be able to address the old ways that exist and we have to just accept that this is a trend.  Though those items is not that completely used.  It could be just the computer, it could be a dual use item.
I think we should be aware that not the ICTs themselves pose the risk, but also the use of technology and here's the human aspect actually takes place.
But I would also like to be optimistic in this regard.  I think that in the global discussions, especially those are taking place at the UN currently, if there would be more discussions outcome oriented with private sector and cover the dimension of the human rights and to map all the risk, to make a basic threat modeling particularly, and also to dig a little bit deeper, what are the particular definitions and there's still the question of what are the dual use items whether the items that could be classified as dual use.
So if this manual work could be more, I would say, a part of the ongoing life and I think it would ‑‑ we would reach some outcomes.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you.  I want to switch over to Chris Blast who I know works with the Linux Foundation on something very practical when it comes to transparency in supply chain security.  Chris, the floor is yours.
>> PARTICIPANT: Thanks, Andreas.  Thanks, everybody and Latha, always wonderful to see you.  And Andreas, you mentioned earlier, that some of us are vendors and I actually have three hats to talk to here.  One as we are sometimes a vendor and integrator and part of that time I spent as a chief security officer in Colombia and we put together a 25‑year plan that includes solving this.
And now as you mentioned, I'm also chairing a foundation project, the digital build of materials, and as the vendor, early last year, inside Unisys, thinking these things through with applied innovation group, answering the question, can't we just write this down somewhere.  Westerly Unisys.  We are the supply chain.  We know how these technologies work.
And one thing basically led to another, and we formed this consortium under the line U. foundation, doing Linux, including Intel, and Siemens and ‑‑
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Can you briefly explain what the DBOM is so everyone knows what we are talking about?
>> PARTICIPANT: Exactly.  We just open sourced our first code in 140 years, it's the DBOM node code which everybody can use and create or involved in the attestation channels.  So we have come at this from the direction that there are three questions and answers in the supply chain security.  What are you writing down and who gets to read it?  Taxonomy, repository and policy.  The repository part was just spread out chaotically in tasks.
It wasn't coherently done anywhere.
With the DBOM node code, organizations can create or involve themselves in policy, where attestations are made that can be stacked up.  When I put myself in a position of the asset owner in Colombia, I can put a process in place where I can take an individual device and look across the attestation channels and be able to say that the hardware, the software came from, you know, these have come through steps.
And you know, keeping the focus on the global south and the regulatory process, we help to put in place, it feeds the inventory and the process back in.  So this ‑‑ this ‑‑ the Colombia example is something that I just always refer to because we looked at that in 7, 15, 25 year quantums of things that must be done.  We are two years into the seven years that we had to make significant progress by the end.  Getting attestations and clarity, the regulator and operator and the stakeholders can see, gives some structure to all the things we are talking about here.  How do we see how do we share the certifications across countries, well attesting them to them along the way, allows us to automate it and build it into processes.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, Chris.  I think when I showed in the very beginning this table of different measures to for assurance and transparencies, and the ideas about softer build of materials, that as an aspect of that.  It's an interesting point to hear something very concrete when it comes to proof of concept how can this be do in from the grid, right?  And I think that's what we need to work on, right?  We had other conversations, kind of looking at monitoring through the chat and the questions have been asked, where certification is a big question.  The DOD is currently on the way to roll out certification scheme where they have an entire practice where they will assess the cybersecurity posture of its more than 300,000 globally contributed suppliers and you get the complexity of the issues that we are working on.  The project like you just described.  When we you talk about the certification scheme, how does it build?  There are still big questions but everyone agrees that we need something to address some of those challenged.
Any other questions?  I know there are a lot of good that Vlada makes.  Do you want to take the floor and speak about some of the insights?
>> PARTICIPANT: Well, thanks.  I apologize for not putting on the camera.  I'm chasing the kids around.  It's not a good scenario.  I like the discussion.  It's really thinking loud, whether the existing certification schemes that we have such as in the UN and the sing pore, whether they are fit for supply chain or not.  And secondly, it's good to have maybe a couple of governments being involved but then politics can play a role.  If the free can come up to ‑‑ I mean, industry ‑‑ it's much less of an influence if they can come up with a criteria primarily, that could then maybe be accepted by the government, some of the governments ‑‑ I don't know, it's really think loud.  I wonder what others think about it.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: I see that Andy Purdy has joined this group.  And Huawei has been thinking about certification in terms of 5G and there are newer standards out there and certifications to try to address this.  I wonder if you can talk about that.  Andy, do you want to address that or other thoughts?
>> PARTICIPANT: Yes.
Yes.  Thank you.  I think some of the work that's been done by our competitors and ourselves and 3GPP and GSMA in terms of focus, for example, on the ‑‑ the telecom equipment, the network equipment security assurance scheme which is the combination as you know of standards and independent testing, are built around the same concept as common criteria where you have recognized labs.
And while there are only two recognized labs so far, that can be an important way to have a baseline of standards and testing that could be add ‑‑ add additional layers for higher levels of assurance.  And so we hope that governments will consider that kind of a program platform, to enable the kind of certifications to specified standards.  If you can combine that type of testing scheme with a couple of concepts that are near and dear to folk's hearts and when I was at the IGF a number of years ago, the ‑‑ the idea of combining norms of conduct with some co‑op or no bias agreements, so you could have countries sign on to that agreement and companies to sign on to such agreements and if we could combine that with some of the recommendations a year ago this month, actually of the global commission on the stability of cyberspace and I see that there are some commissioners that are part of the conversation.  To increase attribution, including technical attribution.  I think those kinds of combinations where industry and government can work together, they provide a transparent basis of knowing which products and services are worthy of trust.
I welcome any comments on those thoughts.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, Andy.  I see some people nodding to those comments.  Anyone would like to answer or respond to that from the panel or someone from the audience?
>> PARTICIPANT: The keyword attestations and ‑‑ I'm sorry, I forgot the word there, but, yes, making those things clear.  You know, whether from, you know in Columbia, or whether from the vendor perspective or whether from the Linux foundation perspective, we had to have the certifications.  We had to have the assessments and, I'm sorry the term up just using, Andy was ‑‑ not attestations, but attributes.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Attribution.
>> PARTICIPANT: That's right, attribution and places.  Ghana in the south, Huawei owns the fiber, the undersee fiber coming in.  I'm an American company as well.  Ghana has the ability to see where everything is coming from and having those attributions and those attestations, they can make the decisions based on that.  So it's ‑‑ you know, the certifications and so forth that we use as many of the panelists have discussed allow us to assign attributes to artifacts whether they are people or software or hardware.
You know, it's the policy structures we have no have to consume those at the national levels or the infrastructure levels and those at the end of the day have to come ‑‑ have to be supported with the visibility to know that the policies are in force.
You know, I'm biased.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: I think Philipp is raising his hand.  We also have ‑‑ I'm sorry, I might in Butrinastrice, who also raised his hand.  I so a quick response and I would like to hand the floor off to you.
>> PHILIPP AMANN: Well, I think, again, that's the way to go.  I think we need to have those built on existing certification schemes, and trust building schemes, working with industry and government and I think, you know, just going to what Andy said about 5G.  That's a perfect scam.  Involved in the 3GPP group as well.  And we want to make sure that this is lawful.  Again, we have need to have the multi‑stakeholder environments where we can discuss and also address the different requirements that we have and come up with the solution that works.
I think from a law enforcement perspective, speaking from the EU, we do a lot of technical attribution.  We wouldn't do the political attribution.  We would do the EU service that does the political attribution.  We work with them and then they take it further.
I have this on my desk.  It was in Malaysia.  We had a visit from your colleague, Dr. Amir and a call with Morocco.  We apply that platform economy to our way.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: A quick question from Allan from the IGF.  If we run a few minutes long, is that hey massive breach of protocol.  With that, I will hand over to ‑‑
>> Yes, we can give you five minutes to wrap up.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you.
>> PARTICIPANT: I will be very brief.  Thank you, Wout.  The dynamic Internet standards in the chat, I would like to explain very briefly where that comes from.  Last year, it was IGF pilot on Internet standards deployment and we asked the world why the Internet standards so slowly deployed.  And the main question is there's no pressure from anywhere, but really to deploy them.
You know, no demand, no supply.  When we asked what is the solution, most people say leg, but everybody else said do not legislate, but then the question comes in, what comes next?
And creating a business case through procurement and supply chain management was one of the major answers provided by basically people from all around the world.
And that's what we are trying to promote, because if we can get the security of the Internet up through supply chain demand and through procurement demand, by governments, then also smaller businesses and the individual end user will profit from the supply that is going to be given once the business case is made through procurement and supply chain management.
That comes with questions like:  How secure is the platforms or the responsible disclosure of vulnerabilities.
I would like to ask you to visit our Dynamic Coalition and ask you to if you are willing to participate.  We will try to tackle some of the questions that have been raised here by the chat and by the panelists.  Thank you for this two minutes.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Excellent, Wout.  If there's a link to the work that the coalition is doing, please, please, put it in the chat so we have it for our records.
As we unfortunately see, we are running quickly out of time.  I know there's a lot of interesting questions also happening in the chat.  We won't be able to address all of them in the remaining few minutes, but what I want to do is kind of like do a final round of final comments or concluding remarks less than a minute, please, from our panelists to wrap this up.  Salah, I know you had your hand raised first.  So please go first.  And go ahead, thank you.
>> SALAH BAINA: Thank you.  Very quickly, Anastasiya said that we can't be optimistic and we can't be pessimistic.  I just want to say that we have to be pragmatic.  In Morocco, for example, we have a special task force which is called the Masser task force which is in a few words Moroccan computer response team, so each time we have a threat, we have to react, and quickly ‑‑ quickly and right.  We can't ‑‑ even if we have a system with ‑‑ with regulation and compliance and certifications, the supply chain system is too big and too complicated to have everyone in the system okay with compliance.
So we have to have this kind of reaction team that will do the necessary actions each time we are in threat.  So having certification is not enough.  We need to have on field active teams.  That was my point. 
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, Salah.  Was it also your concluding remark or is this ‑‑ was this a separate comment?
>> SALAH BAINA: I don't, it was my final ‑‑
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Excellent.  I wanted to double check.  Thank you so much.
Dr. Getao, your final comments.
>> KATHERINE GETAO: Okay.  To Lattah's interring question, there have always been dual use technology.  Guns and knives are dual use technology, and norms have emerged about how we deal with these kind of dual use technologies.  However, I think the problem we have now is the speed of action, which I think many I colleague has also referred to.  We can't wait for technology to just emerge.  And also, there are always outliers even in the handling of things like guns.  We have seen there's a middle norm which most people accept, but there are outliers on either side.  And I think this will happen with technology as well.
I wanted to say that there must be accountability measures as well as the measures that we take to respond quickly as my colleague has just said.
And among those, I would like to add that there should also be a public registry of complaints so that we can examine such registries when we are selecting our technology.  Thank you, and I really enjoyed the panelists and also the participants.  It's been great.
Thank you.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you.
Dr. Amir.
>> AMIRUDIN ABDUL WAHAB: I think from the workshop, we can find the security in the supply chain and we need to be proactive.  Obviously, certification is important.  I think the government, for example, required it because we need to ensure that the supply chain is also well equipped in defense of the cyber threats.  It's not just certification.  It has to go beyond the certification as our panelist from Morocco mentioned, certification is not sufficient.  We have to go beyond.  And it need ‑‑ and it's a continuous effort.  And it needs to comprehensive and it keeps changing as you know, it changes very fast.  And we need to be adaptive, dynamic and innovative and at the same time to strengthen the private/public partnership.  We need to work globally because these are not local issues.  A supplier can also be from overseas.  So always the importance of working together both domestically and at the international level.
By the way, I would like to express my thanks to Kaspersky and EWI and Andreas, wonderful moderatorship.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, Dr. Amir.  Anastasiya.
>> ANASTASIA AILAMAKI: My three final points, I actually feel more a little bit optimistic personally also as a user, not just as ‑‑ an employee of the private sector entity.  But three final remarks from my side.  I think there should always be a risk and we have to accept this, especially with the new lessons learned during the pandemic.  There would be more the use of ICTs.  There's no longer a question whether to use or not use them.  No longer a question whether to live in cyberspace or not to live.  So this is one.
Therefore, we need to trust the communities.  We needed trusted multi‑stakeholder communities to actually first identify what are the gaps and then timely fill those gaps and thirdly, I would say work on the awareness and the capacity building.
And likely, I see the very good OED thing is that today we are actually ‑‑ I think and I hope made a good progress in raising awareness about this issue, and hopefully to share more best practices.
I noticed many useful links.  So we definitely thank you very much to everyone, and definitely we will compile those links.  I think it would be very helpful, especially to small and medium companies and especially to developing countries as well.
Thank you.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you.  Philipp.
>> PHILIPP AMANN: Thank you.  I have about 10 seconds?
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Yes.
>> PHILIPP AMANN: We are in the deep red zone.  I think to repeat what we heard, it is a multidimensional, very complex issue.  So it needs to have a multifaceted approach.  As Dr. Amir said, certification alone will not do the trick.  We need policies, regulations, best practices.  We into Ed to have technical solutions and we need to have prevention, awareness and capacity building and training and all of that needs to come together.  We have to go way beyond, beyond the EU and have that international network and exchange and it's happening already.  So I'm very happy to see that, and just to, you know from my side thank you very much for organizing this panel.  Great to be part of it, and thanks for the panelists and all the ‑‑ you know the participants for the good questions.
Thank you very much.
>> ANDREAS KUEHN: Thank you, Philipp.  I think it's now to me to say thank you to everyone.  This was very insightful.  I was fascinated by all the topics that came up.  Unfortunately, there was not enough time to go really deep into some of noes ‑‑ I was astonished to hear that dual use came up.  It's definitely an important aspect to think more about that when it comes to the future of supply chain security, but also the issue of certification is something just looking at the chat that people really think about and know we need no move forward in that regard, but we also know it will not solve all the problems we are currently facing.
When we do in good IGF fashion, we will write a short report within 12 hours and then a longer one after that, to kind of like bring to paper all the interesting thoughts we heard today.  And we also to hope to engage with you further on this.  I think on a preparatory call you mentioned and also said again today, talk ‑‑ walk the talk, right?  You need to do something here.  So I think that's kind of like the next step where we are.
We'll ‑‑ we will provide some more thoughts on this.  We will work on creating some more resources and share them with you.  Please be in touch.  Again, thank you to all the excellent panels and the participants.  It was great to be here with you, even at 1:00 in the morning.
So thank you so much, and with this, I will conclude, but also thank you again.  At the IGF for providing the mat form for hosting this panel.
Thank you.  Have a wonderful day or evening.  Until next time.
>> ANASTASIYA KAZAKOVA: Thank you very much.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-ws180-trust-media-ethics-governance-during-covid-19-crisis-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  You need to show your PPT.  It's okay now.  We can see.
   >> YUN LONG:  Can you see now? it is there for us in the conference it is available.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Yeah.  This is it.
   >> YUN LONG:  Okay.  This is my PPT.  Great.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Can you stop the sharing, we have to start now.
(no English translation).
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Great.  Thank you very much.  Okay.  Let's start.  Okay.  Hi, everyone.  Welcome to the panel, this session which is Trust, Media, Ethics and Governance During the COVID‑19 Crisis.  So good morning, good evening, and welcome to our session.
So first of all, let me introduce myself and also my colleagues.  So I am Dr. Chin from China, so I'm the Section's Moderator.  I will moderate the section with my other colleagues, Mr. Wang Shu and also Mr. Mr. Koene.  And this is to discuss the impact of COVID‑19 and global impact system and related citizens related to the issue of trust, media, and information flow.
So our section combines the local and global perspectives of Internet governance and also media communications, so we would like to build up with speakers from China, Europe, India, Singapore, to discuss those pressing issues in the disciplinary and multidimensional approach from diverse geographical and stakeholder perspective, so therefore our panelists will speak from this two platforms, audience research, policy and regulatory, and algorithm perspective.  So the issue we want to discuss today is the role and responsibility of digital platforms, social media, governments, and the public in articulating information and also protecting human rights during the COVID‑19 pandemic.  We also want to discuss the best practice to refute disinformation, fake news, hate speech, during the pandemics.  And most importantly, the role of technology in developing and educational programs to empower citizens.
The best practice to uphold in the integrity of individualism and public trust during the health crisis, so we have six speakers.  So let me introduce them first.  So we have Professor Eun Long from the Chinese Communication University of China and he's she's Director of digital ethics and chair of ethics division of Chinese technology for science and technology journalism.  We have Ms. Amirita Choudhury and President, and western Asia‑Pacific Internet Governance Forum.  And we have Mr. Shu Wang deputy Chief Administrator of Board in China.  And we have Elinor Carmi postdoc research associate in digital media and society at University in UK.  And then we have Professor Peng Hwa Ang and is he professor of school of communication and information at Tech logical University and Weinan Yuan and from global ethics, and so welcome to the panelists and so we will invite each speaker for eight minutes of presentation and of that we will some minutes discussion among them, and then we'll open the floor to invite you to ask your questions.
In the meantime, you can also post your questions in the chat room and also Q&A sections.  Okay.  Let's start ‑‑ let's invite Professor Long, so Professor Long, are you ready?  Can you share your PPT?  Thank you.
   >> YUN LONG:  Hi.  I can share my screen now.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yes, please.
   >> YUN LONG:  It's okay?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yeah.  We can see.
   >> YUN LONG:  Yeah.  It's my PPT.  Yes.  Hello, everyone.  I am Yun Long and today my topic is Regain Trust Communication Governance in the China and Beyond the Post‑Pandemic Era. 
So the Coronavirus Is a Public Health Event Which (Audio Breaking Up) it is an epidemic of citizen field is informed, and the challenge to governance of communication in such European context is also mixed with an overwhelming information.  The most diverse communicator and quality of the content virus.  The epidemic community has shown great concern about the new situation and the new challenges as well.  A service of academic studies analyzed rumors and choose cooperation between different media and encouragability of different information channels and discussed the trust dilemma, trust restoration, trust reconstruction, and the role of the government.
This research results provide a Chinese context and global perspective for communication and governance in the post‑pandemic era.
So, if it there was ever a time for the media to act as a force to holding power to account in the public interest, the coronavirus pandemic is it.  (audio breaking up).
We're trying to illustrate the landscape of media reports as well as channels fighting against the COVID‑19, combining with related data and case analysis and discuss hard to gain and trust of communication governance in this era.
The topics and the questions are as follows, the rumors and the truth at the beginning of the coronavirus outbreak, the credibility of different platforms and communication channels, including the traditional media, social media, and other content producers, the public welfare organizations trust reshaping, such as regular society of channel hoping which related some key issues with media ethics.  The synergy and the framework competition among different media reports, and the how to deal with the dilemma between academic, policymaker, and media and public, and also platforms as well as government playing in such a pandemic crisis.
So disaster crisis and social ‑‑ this direction of public opinion is in the context of the new corona epidemic, and Dr. Wang from University of China did analysis based on the specifics based on the socialization of context of disaster crisis.  The study illustrates that first Hu berk i and Wuhan people resulted in incomplete trust from the government and preventible and ‑‑ by the local health commission and governance measures.
This related to the ‑‑ of all the people.  (audio breaking up) at the beginning of the epidemic, and second forced information, forced news or rumors such as traditional Chinese traditional medicine, and can suppress the new coronavirus which triggered panic and related to group behavior.  The information released and embeddedness of people accelerated the social reproduction of rumors.  However, the contradictions of information release and absence of mainstream information relates have led to uncertain information in the post era and interferes with the spirit of public opinion and the overflow of negative has caused emotional transformation of the people.
It can be seen that in the early stage of the outbreak the public opinion field was faced with such phenomena as the crisis of trust and uncertain information and the creatability of it into personal communication and media is information in the channel (audio cutting out) ‑‑ in the public opinion is closely related to the trust status of the public opinion environment, and makes sense of the differences in creatability of different channels should be very important to regain trust.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Professor Long, you have three minutes.
   >> YUN LONG:  Okay.  It's almost.  So, the the Dr. Selected when Wuhan was closed and conducted a survey of medicines in five citizens in Wuhan, Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Chengdu and of the channels it's significantly higher than interpersonal communication and self‑media.  The second trust of Wuhan medicines in the place where the epidemic occur ‑‑ (audio breaking up).
The official channels ‑‑ internal communication is more trusted than media blasts, and creatability of media about the epidemic ‑‑ (no audio).
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  I think we're unable to hear Professor Long.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yeah.  I think Professor Long, can you hear us?
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  I think she dropped out.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yeah.  I can see.  So we'll just wait for her, you know, for a few minutes.
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  We could perhaps continue.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  She's coming back.  Okay.  Hello?  No?  Or maybe we can move to ‑‑ okay.  So probably we have to wait for Professor Long and at the same time we can probably invite our second speaker, Amirita, maybe you can jump in and when Professor Long comes back we can switch to her.
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  Right.  Thank you so much, Yik Chan and hello everyone and welcome to the session.  Certain things which I would like to share, you know, that the issue related to trust online, misinformation, fake news, has been prevalent for a very long time and it has been there much before the pandemic.  However, what COVID‑19 did is amplify the issues, bring it out in the open and into the spotlight.
So, today, I would be sharing the Indian perspective, primarily because I belong to India and, secondly, India presents certain very interesting paradoxes.  For example, we are a country with second largest Internet user base, but we have nearly 70% of our people yet to be connected online.  We are an emerging country with limited resources, and at this point of time, we're having more than 8.64 million people infected by COVID and the numbers are rising.  Thankfully the mortality as per health officials is not so high, so we are at the midst of the pandemic and we're facing it day in and day out.
What we realized during COVID‑19 was our dependency on the Internet has grown tremendously, and in fact all aspects of our life, be it education, work from home, shopping, interaction, entertainment, health, et cetera.  In fact, as more and more of the citizen‑centric services with information related to the pandemic moved online, it was a bone for people who had had access for the Internet.  However, for people who did not have Internet access, such as women or marginalized communities, or certain rural pockets, many of these services and opportunities became unavailable or diminished, and that is a concern.
Also, many of the direct benefit facilities which were provided by the government as relief during the pandemic, especially for economic by backward people or the marginalized communities, was through mobile banking or Internet‑enabled use.
But in a country where people do not have Internet access or the cost of smart phones are really high, despite all of these good intentions, this created a disbalance between the haves and the have notes.  Therefore, we realize that Internet is crucial for all, especially if we want to build an inclusive and empowered society.  And governments really need to focus on getting people connected and making access affordable.
What we also found like other places was there was a surge of misinformation and fake news during the pandemic.  In fact, we witnessed hundreds of thousands of migrant laborers from cities such as economic hubs which was triggered by panic, created by fake news regarding the duration of the lockdown and concerns related to adequate supply of basic necessities, such as food, drinking water, health services, and shelter because many of these migrant laborers were unemployed at that point of time.
Even though the government took steps to address the issues and even platforms started taking actions, however as the issue had become so viral fast, it took quite some time to manage it.  Therefore, it is important for us to learn from these experiences so that we can build strategies to deal with such crises more efficiently.
The Indian Government on its part issued an advisory for social media companies to initiate awareness campaigns on the platform against such false news, take immediate action, disable and remove content on priority, disseminate authentic information related to the coronavirus, and platforms did introduce several measures to reduce the spread of misinformation such as notifying users who engaged with COVID‑19 misinformation, restricted, preventing policies of unverified claims or showing resources of who and other unverified agencies relating to the pandemic.
However looking at the sheer size of the issue there is definitely scope for much more to be done.  Another thing is while the platforms were facing a lot of flack during the pandemic, we also saw a lot of good being done from the platforms.  For example, this was a time when we used these platforms to communicate and stay in touch with our loved ones.  It was used to mobilize resources, help people, including migrants, economically impacted people, and also helped stranded people, so there was social good which happens and this needs to be magnified.
Further during the infodemic, we also found ‑‑ you know, it also highlights the need for media literacy across different communities and sections and age groups.  Governance technology companies have come together and need to work much more collaboratively, especially with grassroot level Civil Society organizations to build digital literacy and media literacy amongst people in a more concerted effort so that they are able to distinguish between authentic and fake news.
Also, while government took steps to demystify the myths and misinformation being spread around COVID‑19 through media such as print, television, radio, and even online, we observed another phenomenon which actually worked.  This was the community health workers played a substantial role in clearing the myths in the local languages amongst communities of which were part or economically backward at the ground level.  This combined rule of online and offline campaign or initiatives actually worked pretty well, and perhaps we need to explore this hybrid model more if we want to actually address these issues.
To conclude my initial remarks, what I think needs to be done more to build the trust deficit online is, firstly, connect everyone meaningfully, focus on media literacy, governance and businesses need to be more transparent about their initiatives as the opaqueness around initiatives creates a trust deficit, and while platforms are taking initiatives to curb the spread of misinformation, hate speech within their platforms, they need to be more transparent on the takedown policies, the way their algorithms take decisions, et cetera.
And lastly, we need to look at innovative approaches to rebuild trust over the Internet and it has to be a concerted effort amongst stakeholders, amongst nations so that we can, you know, address the gaps together.  Thank you so much.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you, Amirita.  Just on time.  And, also, you bring very interesting question about platform's role.  And so next we're going to invite Mr. Wang Shu and he will actually talk about those things.  Mr. Wang, you can please share your screen with us.  Thank you.  Can you start, please.  You have to unmute yourself.  Okay.  Yeah.
   >> SHU WANG:  Oh, I'm sorry.  I'm sorry.  Oh, you can hear my voice now?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yes.  We can hear you.
   >> SHU WANG:  Oh, okay.  Hello, everyone.  I am the Deputy Agent in charge of Weibo, largest China social media platform and we have just more than 500 million and now this is just in the media account in Weibo and today I will share some from us with the time and we know if we use the international meeting, sometimes it will delay, so I could or the main content in the PPT and I give a brief explanation here.
So during the outbreak and most people worked at home and people had more free time, and actually we know that social media becomes the major resource for coronavirus information, so this is a number of the visits to Weibo is 9 times higher.  Most media accounts responsive 24/7 and had update in no time.  Actually in Weibo media accounts have posted 2 million related posts and then about more in China.
So the social media opens the last mile of the media in the situation.  The last mile means that the media cannot only provide valuable information but also meet the needs of ours.  Okay.  Let's see some examples.
The official account of people daily and personally is Weibo and set up a special topic called Patients Sick Help, and the hospitals or the patients could post the Weibo and the sick have topic to project.  Once was confirmed, the message would be passed on to the local government and available hospital.  So, actually, over 140,000 people have received help with this.  Many people share their experience of getting help on Weibo and some story.  To identify the close contrast of the infected is very important and Weibo original media of our search noticed special column, so they were to push the travel records and the transportation information of the confirmed case, so therefore a close contact may identify the risk of the infection and sign up for medical tests through the fast channel.
So in the 5G areas live broadcasting is very popular so the media carried out the broadcast of the construction of the Wuhanhuosheenshan hospital and Leishenshan hospital with a total of more than 1 billion people watching.  The special product live charity sale for Hubei province and with Weibo campaigned with the media and people 10 million people watched the live and 10 million U.S. dollars of goods.
Another of the media was the rumor.  The rumor comes out from the fear of the unknown and meeting rumors is one of the same importance of beating the virus.  So we can see in the social media the credible media were granted a special privilege by Weibo to leverage the rumors and therefore the public could know about truth in time.
During the epidemic, we can see the 740,000 posts to dispel rumors were published by credible media and in total with over 6 million forwards.  Also, Weibo increased the number of staff processing rumor complaints by 6 times.  For the messages that could not be ‑‑ and we know that in some messages that could not be tested in a short time, so we gather together different opinions to help us to make their own judgment.  Any account that tried to spread rumors or take advantage of the epidemic to increase their sales were banned as punishment.
Okay.  The next idea I would like to share some of our thoughts and questions.  Firstly, about the credible of the UGC.  We know during the special areas and we witnessed very active performance of the user generated contents.  Many of them offered huge first‑hand messages from anti‑epidemic frontline, but there are still no effective procedures or standards to help us to confirm whether it's true.
Secondly, in terms of the balance between the free expression and public security, and we were totally aware that those who suffered from the epidemic growth have the right to express their angers through the social media, and they do have the demand for emotional release.  However, such messages can sometimes hurt other users, so how to deal with this situation?  We just need some standard.
Lastly, about the privacy right protection.  As we try to help more people during this special time and some personal information was revealed, such as travel records, living place, or family information that's made possible during travel, so technical solution is required.  And this is the end of my speech.  Thank you for listening.  Thank you.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Thank you very much, Mr. Wang Shu, and actually here are some interesting questions about with how to, you know, monitor or regulate performance well, and I think this question will be also touched by other our speakers following speakers like Professor Ang and others who will also talk about the platform as well, so hopefully we will have some discussion, you know, for following these issues.
So next can I invite Elinor Carmi from the University of Liverpool to share her presentation on the audience side of how to use ‑‑ or how to empower audience and public during pandemic crisis.  Thank you.  Elinor?
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  Hi, everybody.  I just want to share my screen, and I'm really happy that I already saw ‑‑ can you see my screen now?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yes, we can see you clear.
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  Fantastic.  So I saw that people are already talking about media literacies, digital literacies, and I'm really excited that the discover is on that because that's exactly what I'm working on.  I'm Elinor Carmi, a post‑doc at Liverpool University.  Working on projects around big data.  Developing UK sit diseps in literacies, me and My Big Data.  It's sponsored with Glasgow and Sheffield Hallam and the other one is Being Alone Together Developing Fake News Immunity funded by the UK Research and Innovation and Liverpool University and Dundee University and so I'm going to talk about some of the initial findings that we already have and I'd love to hear your questions at the end.
So, it's really great that I saw people are discussing the kind of different definitions and differences between digital literacies and media literacies, and we have actually and article which is open access and I'm going to share it later in the forum where you can see how we analyze the literature of all of these things and how we wanted to propose a new kind of data literacy framework because we felt there were a lot of things missing.
So in our model, we focus on three main dimensions.  The main ones are, the three ones are data doing, data thinking, and data participating.  So data doing, we're thinking about the everyday kind of actions that we're doing.  Data think something the critical thinking that people need to have, and I'm going to show you the kind of activities that we were talking about.
And then we're talking about data participating, which basically means how can people use data to their own benefits in their communities.
So when we're talking about data doing, we're talking about accessing information, assessing, interpreting, creating, citing, and things like that.  When we're thinking about data thinking, and this is something that is very crucial to us because one of the main things that we want to emphasize is the need for people to have critical thinking, which means being aware of different data protection rights, being aware of different kind of privacy settings and what they actually mean.  If you live in Europe, what does the consent mechanism mean?  What can you actually do with that?
But also, understanding, how online platforms work.  So a lot of different organizations, including in the UK, we have different kind of organizations that show that people don't actually know that companies like Facebook and Google are funded by advertising, and this matters because this basically means that people can have more critical engagement of the platforms and know what is their initial kind of business model and how that shapes what they see online and what kind of data they maybe want or don't want to share online.
So these are the kind of critical thinkings that we're talking about when we talk about data thinking, so it's not only about being aware of data protection and different kind of privacy‑related things, but also to understand the online, sort of the broader online ecosystem and how does that work and how it is funded and things like that.
Now, that doesn't mean that you need to be a programmer and know exactly how algorithms work, but you do need to know that algorithms can microtarget you or create different kind of biases and different filter bubbles and those kind of things.
The last one is data participation where we basically talk about how can citizens use data for theirself.  Online hashtags that can be created around a specific topic, and that can be an example, we had an example of our groups of people that wanted to save their local libraries or to motivate people to go online if they were lonely and things like that.
So we identify five different user types, and so in the data we have two main stages, and the first one was a report where we had a national survey, and then we have focus groups which we actually are in the midst of them, so we realize that there are five different types of users, and the way that they differed is according to their socioeconomic status and education.
One of the most interesting things that we discovered is that although there is this myth that, you know, young people are digital natives, what we discovered is that this user type, which uses only social media and maybe some online websites, is that these are young people who come from poor backgrounds and who don't have higher education attainment.  And these are the kind of people that we really want to focus on because we think it's really important not to automatically assume that if you're young then you automatically have all of these skills, and that you know, your background really affects the way that you engage online.
So these are kind of the questions that we got from our surveys, and I think what's really interesting here is that a lot of people don't really ‑‑ don't really trust social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter, as you can see here, the blue represents if you don't trust them, but also you know on the left side, I don't mind sharing my data with companies, but actually most people say that they do care, which means the blue means they don't want to share their data.
Another thing that we see is that, and this is where we talk about critical thinking, so people don't really connect between the right side, which means that you know, people don't want to be tracked ‑‑ or that their behavior would be tracked over time, but then they don't really connect that this tracking leads to the personalization of their experience, so these are the kind of things that we think need to be further developed.
Another thing that we thought is really interesting is that most people don't think that companies provide services that make it easy for people to change their privacy settings, and a lot of people think that there is actually no point to change their privacy settings because these companies, you know, disregard this anyway.
So, that was from our survey, and then when we talked about people and we've talked with people throughout October and we're going to talk with them also in November.  One of the interesting things that we found is that people's trust in social media or media in general depends on the kind of activities that they're doing.
So one of the main things that we discovered, for example, is that when people want to verify information, some people mention that they're going to check it on BBC and different kind of things, but a lot of people actually talk with their family or their friends.
Another really important thing is that as you saw, most people that we talked with, both in the survey but also in the focus groups, they don't really trust social media but they don't feel that they have a choice to go on social media, so this is something that we really want to emphasize that trust is contingent and fluid with people but not the only factor and really depends on the kind of activities that you're doing.
Another thing that was really interesting for us is when people want to learn new digital skills, most people mention they use different kind of friends or the expert family member, but also a lot of people mention that they're going on YouTube to find different kind of videos to help them understand that better.
So one of our sort of main findings is that unlike the past where a will the of kind of frameworks around media literacy and digital literacy was focused on the individual, we want to focus on the networks of literacies because what we discovered is that actually people rely on other people that they trust, which means their friends, families, could be the experts, you know, colleagues that they know, and we really want to emphasize that this is where the kind of interventions that companies or governments or education institutions should focus on.
So networks of literacies are the ways that people engage with other people, it's where they ‑‑ I'm sorry, it's where they engage with them to gain different kind of understanding, skills, and competencies.
So another thing that's really important for us to emphasize is that there is no one, you know, no one program that fits everybody, and this is why it was really important for us to focus on different kinds of user types because in the end of our ‑‑ in the end of our project, we're also going to create different kinds of education material and programs for different kinds of people, in a way that makes sense to them and in their context and everyday life experiences.
So, that was very brief but mainly the Big Data Project and the other project we're working on which is developing this kind of chatbot where people can understand better how to understand the kind of rhetorical tools that the different kind of people, could be politicians, could be news media sites, to help people understand which kind of rhetorical manipulations that they're doing and to play with it with the chatbot.
With the chatbot as well we're encouraging people to play together and to talk about how they learn together, what kind of things they can understand better or not.  Now, of course, a chatbot is not a miracle solution to these things, but what we really want to emphasize is, again, this kind of working together on different kinds of critical understandings, and because we believe that this is where the power is sort of the empowering people lies.
So, I think I am on time, and again if you have any kind of questions for me I'm very happy to answer them in the end, and I'm going to post our article which is open access on the chat now.  Thank you, everybody.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you, Elinor.  And that was a very, actually very interesting we all discuss about digital divide with also including of the skills of the digital literacies.
And so we pass the time to our next speaker, Professor Ang from Technology University in Singapore and his presentation is also a little bit related to the media literacy and digital literacy and audience receptions.  Welcome, Professor Ang, please.
   >> ANG PENG HWA:  Good evening.  I hope you guys can see this.  Okay.  So I'm talking about privacy and trying to understand how privacy connects, given this current situation, and I'm talking particular about contract‑tracing app in Singapore and probably write some reports to say that it is the most successful, so kind of the inside story about that.
I'm using full‑screen display because I have some issues and I want to see you all so I'm putting in this mode.  Okay.  So this app is developed by a unit in the Singapore government called Govtech and they use bluetooth technology and done some things with the Bluetooth and so this technology will actually be able to tell based on strength of signals how close you are to the next Bluetooth device, so the strength of the signal is also involved.
And they used privacy principles from the very start, and so really incorporating privacy by design.  Collected minimum information and just the phone, contact details, and that was it.  But people avoided it, so it's kind of interesting to see, you know, why and so forth.
So, the question that came up was, you know, do people really understand privacy?  So here we're talking about privacy, and actually what I'm going to present is that people don't really understand privacy.
So, to tell you more about this app, this is new logo TraceTogether and it's voluntary installation, no required installation.  Minimum information, no location data, no GPS data at all, and the data is stored in the in centralized government database but on your phone, and it will be deleted after 21 to 28 days if not useful and can tell you how close you were to somebody carrying phone and person was infected based on the strength of the signal as well.  Right.
And then give information to database and then contact other people that may have been infected, right.  That's kind of the principle behind it.
Many governments asked about it because it incorporated privacy‑by‑design and even quote "inspired" apple and Google together which is pretty big deal, basically copying, basically, we know how, right.  And to have Apple and Google together from opposite, one totally exploiting privacy and one selling privacy as a reason for buying products and services, right, so it's come together was a pretty major deal.
There are some downsides, drained the battery, version 1.0, so falling asleep, and two‑third of power was gone and second version, 20% of power was gone.  And my friends told me if you go to use and carrying it aren't it pings so you actually lose more power so it does drain the power a little bit.  I told the government had some success stories but seems to be no success story, I don't really know.  You hear some success stories.
They talked about 25,000 contacts using it, but actual number of cases of people infected with that people is very, very low.  I mean, talking not even single digit percent, right, so very, very low, you know, in terms of that.  This would be why they didn't kind of publicize the contact details, so this is actually very high sort of false alarms here.
So when app came out petitions against it, two petitions and recent toke than came out so all together three petitions talking about contact tracing devices, and interesting the petitions the other way around from India and Italy saying that you guys should get a Singapore app, you know, because you know you could use it, kind of interesting how this happens.
So the last time I checked, a total of 480 petitions globally speaking against contract tracing, but if you look through the log, 480 petitions mostly against contract‑tracing.  All right.  I wrote an op Ed to talk about why people misunderstanding it light of the petitions in Singapore, and I want to carry on with what I'm presenting, in the Singapore case we have a very high trust environment, so if you look at the chart based on the Trust Index, the barometer, and Singapore ranks high in the trust area, right.  Other governments, the media based on the index ranks relatively low.  You can see that we operate in a high trust environment.  Nevertheless, right, we have a relatively low, you know, download rate.  There is an Oxford computer model saying you need 56% and again this is also misunderstanding here and again there is if you have 50%, you know, having that it would be like 25%, right, 25% based on how this thing works.
So 56% of people downloading the app in the country is enough for the country to be sort of covered.  I mean, it's different thing, but so 40% is not quite there, and so but every percentage ‑‑ so every person downloading contributes to this coverage, and globally around 20%, right.  So you can see actually pretty low from the 56%.
So my point is that people don't understand privacy, even when their lives are at stake, right.  I mean, tell me now if I tell you that if you give me a bit of details about you, I can contact you earlier to tell you whether you've been infected or not, and people are saying no, I want my privacy, right.  So the thing is sort of give me privacy, nevermind give me this.  Right.  Totally private, right, but that's not all.  Okay.  We have distributed a token now so to make it ‑‑ so this is like if you don't carry phone you need to carry this phone.  My friend, and I just met for lunch day before asking him about this, and why are you having this token, and he says so he can leave it around so he doesn't always have to carry around, so whereas phone you have to always carry, so people can trace you.  I told you how will you know you infected, but it's different, so I don't quite understand.
So the local people ran these big stories about what does this token contain, you know, showing you the bluetooth antenna, the memory, so forth, the battery, and then the government come out and say if you tamper with this, it's illegal and committing a crime.  Right.  So, people are collecting these devices, tampering with it so they cannot do what it's supposed to do.  Right.
So people are snapping this up because they're supposed to ‑‑ it's more convenient than phone, doesn't drain battery, if you move it around it does brain because pinging, if you leave passive at home, you wouldn't be talking, so wouldn't drain battery, so people are picking it up.  We suggest an almost of sort of convenience here.
So my conclusion now and being academic, I always end with questions.  We academics, we end with questions, right.  So the conclusion is that does convenience trumps privacy?  Or convenience trumps death even?  Or people don't understand what should trump, right?  So my question is your call, what is really, really important in this situation?  Is it privacy?  Is it convenience?  Is it so that my phone battery will not die?  Maybe it's living, right?  Okay.  That's it.  Thank you.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you very much.  That's very interesting presentation from Professor Ang, and we probably can leave Professor Ang's questions to later and invite other speakers to reflect on it.
So but then let us invite Ansgar Koene first and he will also talk about the algorithms, media and relationship of the platforms.  Okay.
   >> ANSGAR KOENE:  Thank you very much.  Thank you for inviting me to participate in this panel.  So I've been involved in two main research projects, both collaborations between the universities of Nottingham, Oxford, and Edenburough that have been looking at how do really people understand online platforms that they're engaging with, what are their kinds of concerns regarding these?
So the first one was the unbias research project, which was really focusing on how younger people understand their engagement with online services, with social media, search engines, recommended systems and those kind of things.  So the target group there was 13 to 17‑year‑olds, and this project has been followed by a second project called We Entrust focusing on two user groups, one being young adults, so 18 to around about 30, and then the other is elderly adults, so 65 plus, and maybe trying to understand if there are differences in factors that will make people feel that they can trust the platform that they're engaging with, depending on the kinds of age group.
I will be putting some links regarding the project websites for these into the chat after my talk.  So one thing that is important from our results that we've gotten from engaging with these stakeholder groups is that many of them feel the kind of information that they're receiving about how social media platforms operate or the content moderation of those don't really address a lot of their underlying concerns.  They're, basically, being presented with instructions like to do this, do that, like if you're getting a message, you should check what is the source of the message.  You should be doing, you know, look whether you can find corroborating messages on other platforms and those kind of things, but what is actually lacking is an actual understanding of what is the basic premise on which these recommended systems operate?  What is the business model of a social media platform, as was mentioned earlier by Elinor, the fact that they don't really understand how does Google or Facebook make money is one of the things that is driving their concerns in not being able to really know how they should gauge their trust in these kind of contents.
For instance, in the current research project, the We Entrust one, when we were talking to the two different user groups, young adults and elderly adults, the interesting difference regarding what they really consider important for deciding whether they're going to trust this particular platform that they're engaging with, is that while the younger adults were really referring to their experience online with the platform, and a lot of that experience was basically around whether it was performing adequately, whether or not, you know, when you put in a request, it actually gave you results that seemed to answer your kind of question.
Whereas, the more older user group often referred actually to their understanding of the business or the organization, more did they feel that the organization reflected the kinds of values that they feel are important, and so it was really actually separate from the way in which the technology operates.  They're kind of judgment of whether they would trust this content.
Now, I think one of the important aspects that has been coming out from our thinking, also, around where does this problem with misinformation, disinformation come from, and particularly around the use of social media is also the way in which people actually engage with social media platforms, and really the psychology around critical thinking.  So one of the things is if you ask somebody, you know, here is a news story, do you believe this or not?  You're triggering them to actually engage with critical thinking around this, and they will often do a proper assessment and will not accept the fake news kind of story.
However, the way in which largely these platforms operate with push notifications, you're not fully engaged with the social media platform and you're just holding your mobile phone, it pushes out a news story, you're seeing it sort of in the corner of your eye and you're not critically engaging with the content, and you may not even be fully reading it, but same as the basic premise behind a lot of advertising.  It's really not so much about reading and engaging with the story, but it's about just having the headline appearing frequently.
Basic psychology of humans is if you have seen something frequently, it makes it more likely that it is true, and so if you just keep hearing somewhere in the corner of your eye, 5G is related somehow to COVID, you know, if you were to critically really read it and critically engage with it, you would immediately dismiss it.  But you just are always seeing this, and in a sense it becomes an underlying thought.
So, one of the issues really is around this model of the way in which information is being pushed out to people who are not critically engaging with the process, and they weren't actually in a mode of saying I want to be engaged and looking for news at this point in time.
Another aspect that I would like emphasize and actually connects to this example that was actually listed in the Q&A around, for instance, is 5G connected to COVID, a lot of the misinformation campaigns that we're seeing related to COVID are actually building on longstanding misinformation campaigns that have been out there.  Stories about that mobile phone transmission would somehow be leading to diseases, previously a lot of the links that were being proposed in these, in this fake news was around things like does mobile phone transmissions cause Autism or those kind of things, and it's just basically building on those existing narratives and slightly shifting them over to say well at this moment the health condition that everybody is concerned about is COVID, so we'll just tweak the story and say that it's not Autism but it is COVID that we're going to link it to.  And we see a similar thing with the anti‑vax movement, for instance, which has been co‑oped into the whole Qanan kind of narrative so a lot of the information that we're seeing relating to the COVID condition are basically building on an underlying kind of narrative or misinformation that has been going on.
And just to connect to one of the other questions that came up in the Q&A, which was around why have certain governments engaged differently with the COVID situation than others, there we also actually see that has been building on a prior narrative of how these governments engage with experts, engage with the scientific community.
In the UK, for instance, there was already an ongoing narrative of criticizing experts and researchers in various fields, which was used in the runup to Brexit and those kind of political domains, and that kind of built a sense of disconnect between health experts and the kind of engagement that was being built in the narrative, and so that is again a case that it hasn't come up from nowhere within the COVID situation, but it's really building on an ongoing narrative of misinformation that was already present.  Thank you very much.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Thank you very much, Ansgar.  I think that's a very good kind of conclusion of all of those issues we have discussed so far, so before we open to the floor and to the questions, I would just like or ask all the speakers probably can share on two questions that I think we have discussed so far.
So first of all, I would like to ask everyone whether you can share or trust that whether peopley your locality and model of the social media whether they have a trust of the social media?  I think we have people from different societies, so probably it's interesting to know that the knowledge of the local peoples, they have knowledge in terms of the social media and their functions.  So can we start with Professor Long?  Can you say something about Chinese situation?  The role of the social media and the peoples' understanding of the business model and, you know, how do they work in the pandemic situation and also, yeah?  You have to unmute yourself.
   >> YUN LONG:  Can you hear me?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  We can.  Please.
   >> YUN LONG:  Yeah.  I think in China there is an epidemic that broke in the beginning of this year and the investigation shows that in social media, maybe more credibility ‑‑ the official, media, because but some difference between Wuhan and other big cities, the difference is in Wuhan the citizen is a lot of trust of social media, but in other cities, it's especially the young people pay more attention on social media, and they understand and trust the social media as official media.  Yeah.  This is the case in China.
So I think maybe other issues, you know, in other countries are not the same, but internally it's very special and after the period, the official media and more is more powerful and the people have more trust to the official media after the maybe after January and February.  Yeah.  This is the situation in China.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  That's interesting.  And Mr. Wang Shu because you have Weibo, do you agree that the social media like Weibo has more trust than social media because you also mentioned that do not know how to moderate some of the hate speech and contents but that is surprising because even without doing the ‑‑ even not in the pandemic time, you should have some rules to follow to moderate the content, is that right?  (no English translation).  I just did a translation for him.
   >> SHU WANG:  Okay.  No problem.  So just as I answer some questions for the moment as social media platform and Weibo or not to take define and use as rumors, and we are not too judgment for these things, actually.  We give the right to the government and from the medias, and we know that the media in China just has some different background.  It's a different ‑‑ it's a different situation just than the other countries because most of the media, in China and they have the government background, so we can trust for this, and because they have very strict rules and just some strict processes and to post the information, so the people in China always trust the media.  And sometimes, if we just want to post some important information, just for example it's about how it coronavirus and how to defend the coronavirus, and maybe some cities in there is in how to use the right medical here for there ‑‑ for them and we always to let just beg the media to post this information to the public.  Yes, it should be ‑‑ and this is true and the people always trust and we use this channel.  Okay.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Thank you, Mr. Wang.  Any other speakers or panelists, can you share some of your country's situation, like in India whether people trust more social media than traditional media?
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  Okay.  So if I look at the Indian perspective, it is mixed.  As in, there is a section of the people who are the new users of social media or instant messaging and they believe whatever comes to them, especially in instant messaging because it comes from someone whom they know.  So they kind of relate to it, and I kind of agree to Elinor in when she says that people like to believe what aligns to their thought process, so there is a section of people who believe it, and however we did speak to a lot of young students late last year and we found that they do not believe everything which is online.  However, they do not have any alternate to get information because they do not read traditional newspapers, and neither do they like to spend much time looking at television.
There is a section of educated people who are now getting aware of, you know, what they're doing online, whether it is harming them, whether it is beneficial, how the companies are monetizing this information, and everything which they are getting for free.  But by and large, people still believe the information they are getting and that is why misinformation is also flourishing and being spread across because most people believe what comes.  If someone says, okay, you have this and it will help to you prevent coronavirus, they find it the easier way to use this rather than looking at something else.  So that is why education, capacity building on how to manage the kind of information which comes is important.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yeah.  And Singapore, I think Singapore people also have more trust than social media.
   >> ANG PENG HWA:  Nobody says I believe in social media.  Right.  They smart, when it comes they believe in social media.  I believe in God, but I'm let me cheat on this side, so I believe in God but I'm going to cheat.  So this juncture between what they say and what they actually do, so we see this.  Yeah.  So it's also present in Singapore, unfortunately, yeah.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  As element, you know, given people use social media but still more trust like guardians or BBC so do you think this is issue of decline of mainstream media or trust in media in your country if they have more trustable source like BBC or Guardian, and they may not rely on that and rely on social media?
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  Are you asking me?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Everyone, just if you have any idea you can jump in here.
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  I do have to say that actually from our focus groups, what we discovered is that a lot of people, so I think social media as a whole is a wrong way to look at it.  So for example, in our focus groups, most people thought that Google Search and YouTube are trustworthy to look for information, and this is where our data thinking is really crucial I think because people don't understand the kind of information that Google presents to you both on YouTube and on Google Search is very skewed and it depends on a lot of factors.
And I think like Amirita said, a lot of people don't feel that especially young people are not exposed to other kinds of more traditional media, and however a lot of news from some more traditional media is then shared through different kind of means, so we discovered that WhatsApp is at least in the UK the most common way to share information and news between people.
So I think that when we're talking about social media as a whole, we need to distinguish between different kinds of social media, and I'm guessing that in Asia we will see different kinds of patterns.  And I think that it's quite important, as I said, to have people, to have these kind of critical tools to be able to identify how these companies have power to shape which kind of information reaches them and what to do about it.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Thank you very much.  And, yeah.
   >> SHU WANG:  Hi.  Okay.  So I would like to add a point if it's okay.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yes.  Please do, go ahead.
   >> SHU WANG:  Okay.  Okay.  I just want to add some more points in.  Just I say that just on in China, the media and the media in the social media platform and where to get more the credibility.  I just want to say that the media can ls a make some mistakes, we can see mistake.  But they often apologize to the public on social media when the media makes a mistake, and which is timely and very truly, so just that sometimes the mistake is a want to factor their credibility, so it's truth.  Okay.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Ansgar wants to say something.
   >> ANSGAR KOENE:  I just want to build on what Shu just said.  Unfortunately, we have also been seeing that the so‑called traditional media have been copy and pasting stories from the social media with very little background checks at times, in part this has to do with the high levels of competition in that space, the reduction in funding for journalism, and the sort of need to get the story out there as quickly as possible so that you won't be scooped by somebody else, and then they don't take the time to do the fact checking themselves.  So they push out the story basically picked up from social media and afterwards they may or may not do fact checking and may or may not publish an apology.  Obviously, it depends on which particular media we're talking about.  This tends to happen more with so‑called Tabloid kind of media but a lot of people read those kind of media as their main source of news as well.
So, unfortunately, it is not necessarily the case that the traditional media are that much more trustworthy in this kind of high‑competitive environment.
>> KUO WU:  Can I join in.  I think basically the social media, I think the term of the name of social media is kind of misleading.  I think you are in the study in the media, so you know that, you know, social media is actually not a media.  It's just a chat for the people to just, you know, without a checking ‑‑ without editing and they can publish whatever they want to say on the chat wall.  You know.
I think the social media term is a little bit misleading, basically, from my point of view.  You can take it easy, you know, it can laugh and take out humor and you can share some of your information, but if you really like to take it serious about anything published in the social media, that basically is quite wrong, and I think we should educate young people to understand social media is not a media.  Media, basically, has a code of conduct.  The media has a certain process to publish their information, and social media without such a process.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Any feedback?  I'm sorry.
   >> ANSGAR KOENE:  I would say, I agree with Kuo that a lot of sort of content that can be thrown up on social media is more or less stream of consciousness thinking as something came to my mind and I'll throw it up there.
However, if we're thinking about the way in which people are actually engaging with social media, they're not just using it, especially for if we're thinking about something like a social media platform, like Facebook for instance, you're not just using it to engage with the messages that are coming from other users.  These platforms have also become a conduit for traditional media to communicate their information to people, and I mean Facebook has been building that as part of their business model, they've been pushing to try to get ‑‑ for them to be the platform that you're on even if you want to read the story from the Guardian, you're supposed to read it through Facebook, and one of the problems is that the way in which the notification of what is the actual source of this information, that does this message come from the Guardian or somewhere else, it's often easy to overlook, to not catch that little notification in the corner or whatever, and that is supposed to tell you what the source is of this information.  Then it becomes blurry, because I was just reading a story from the main news source and then the next thing that came up is actually a ster ee without any kind of source reference to it, but you know I was just in a mode of reading news stories, and these other things got in between and it becomes ‑‑ it sort of gets back to the point I was making earlier about how the ability to critically analyze the different news stories.  You know, do I realize what kind of system I'm currently endpaijing with.
   >> ANG PENG HWA:  Ansgar I agree, I think social media and media are all learning and also changing, and but at this moment, at this moment now, it's still too early to say that social media is a media, and the second point ‑‑ the second point I would like to mention about it is ‑‑ (this is Kuo ‑‑ is that I just don't think social media has a right to filter.  You know, who gives them a right to filter whatever they think you are not, you know, not allowed to publish.  So it's kind of, it's not ‑‑ you know, there is a kind of strange.
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  If I can intervene.  I actually disagree with the whole notion of social media are not media.  I think that the way that we define them should be different.  I think that, you know, my glasses are media.  A lot of things are media, and actually platforms, you know, different Facebook and Twitter and these kind of companies want us to think of them as social, but actually they define how socialalty is conducted in them, and the kind of things you're talking about filtering either with content moderation or algorithmic ordering is editorial decisions that they are making in different parts of the communication channels, and this is the kind of definition is actually very disputed because if they would be actually called media companies, they would have the same regulations that broadcasters have like television and radio and, you know, newspaper, television, radio.  So I think that this is the reason why these companies don't want to have the kind of tagline of media, but they are definitely a multi‑type of media.  We can communicate there, we can share other types of media, so I disagree that it's not media, but I definitely think like you that we definitely need to regulate them and to start to destabilize the huge power that they accumulate in shaping how we understand news, information in our societies.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you.  And Professor Ang, please.
   >> ANG PENG HWA:  Okay.  Thanks.  I'll try to make it quick.  So Kuo, I'll still have dinner with you if you can.  But I'll say you're wrong.  Let me just say upfront.  I just had a test with my students on this point, you know, the impact of social media on journalism.  Right.  So the example I gave actually in the class was this, right.  So now when these people ask, they don't like search for, you know they like for social media I need a am radio, where can I get a room, and people respond and just social media I need a room, where do I go, and people respond.
Similarly, they were like is this place flooded or not, it is flooded I see news is it flooded or not, so social media people respond.  It's news, it's usable a, news that you can use right away.  So that's the problem.  Blurring of line.  What I call snacking, take a bit of bite of the news.  It's not what you and I would ‑‑ I mean, we're about same age, we kind of read in articles and so right, so the way they're reading news is quite different and definite blurring of lines.  I posted medium where you can post anything you want, and obviously anything you want, and in a way you create your own news and media, right.  So the point is that the social side is coming up and you're taking ‑‑ so so is content part of it, and in particular advertising as well, so they are really competing head on with, so if you want to go to this place and know if it's flooded or safe or if there are good restaurant, who do you turn to?  Normally the media in the past.  But now these guys don't.  They turn to social media and each other, essentially, so in a sense I'm closer to Elinor here and really this is blurring of line, and continuum and not one not this or that, but blurring of lines and now we're all wrestling with how to manage so doesn't give out false information, fake news and make it trustable, this is the kind of information we're wrestling with.  Okay.
   >> KUO WU:  For all of you, just one short comment about it.  I agree with that but just that should we give the same regulation for the social media and the media company?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you, Kuo.  So we, yeah, Mr. Wang Shu you are from social media, yeah.
   >> SHU WANG:  Okay.  Yeah.  Okay.  And we always call social media platform, so because in my opinion, I think all the media is social media, so the whole process of the media operation is highly social, so in China in just most of the media must become APP, on our mobile phone, it can be survived, so we don't think this is different between the media or the social media.  It's just only the different between the media and the social media platform.  So we will call it just like Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, or the Weibo, we say it is social media platform, and just to be a platform and we only to do the more technical cross approach and sometimes we more like post and transmit the information but we don't protect the information, so I think when we talk about the media, and which we need to come from and how is the media the background, so it's a company, UGC, organization, or this is actually government?  So I think it is persons.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  So you do not think that the social media, like should go to same regulation as traditional media, is that right?
   >> SHU WANG:  Yes.  It's just a platform.  It just is to transport the information, but do not to protect the information.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Okay.  That's their opinion.  They're not media and only platform.  Okay.  So, great.  Any other opinions from audience, and any other questions you want to?  Yeah.  I got one question from the chat, so one question, his question is the younger generation is generally more source and do you think the generation can consume the interpret from age group creates stronger generation divide across the world?  Anyone want to respond?  Okay.  Amirita, please.
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  Though I did mention here that it would not create a generational digital divide, primarily because there may be certain issues where the different age groups may be aligned, and there may be certain issues like in real life, and they may be not aligned so they could not create a generational gap.
When I look at India perspective, between the economically different sections, you know, children who have Internet access readily available, they're more skeptical about what comes on social media and different messaging platforms.  However, new users or people from economically backwards sections or who are new have not had much exposure, and they kind of lap up all the information.
So I don't think it would be a very great diverse divide, but it would be normally like we currently have in our real lives, where in there is a generational divide but not significantly.  It would be on the thoughts.
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  If I could chime in.  I just want to say that from what we see in our research, actually the divide, the social inequalities come from people who are already excluded, so people who have or come from lower socioeconomic status or also who have lesser tiewbt opportunities for better education, so I think if we want to strengthen young people as well as older people, we need to first tackle the other social inequalities that we have and that will, you know, bring everybody to similar levels.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you very much for all the comments.  So we have only a few minutes left, so I just want to each of you give one sentence to conclude your presentation.  What is the kind of policy recommendation you would give to policymaker to improve the trust in the media environment, and in the Internet governance in general?  Yes, please, one sentence.  Thank you.
   >> AMIRITA CHOUDHURY:  Get everyone to the table and not take a top‑down decision and really involve communities when decisions are taken, especially when it relates to those communities.
   >> ELINOR CARMI:  I would say provide data literacies to different kind of communities, tailor it according to their needs and according to their everyday life and to focus on the networks of literacy in order to strengthen everybody.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yep.
   >> KUO WU:  I would say, I would say, yep, education the young as early as possible of what is trusted information.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Professor Long?
   >> YUN LONG:  I would say the government and informative citizens is equally important in this issues.  Can you hear me?
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Yeah.  We can hear you.  Thank you.  Mr. Wang?
   >> SHU WANG:  Okay.  I will say and actually we have to believe in social media because we don't have any other choice.  The whole world is under the influence of the social media, so we must accept this.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Professor Ang?
   >> ANG PENG HWA:  I don't have ‑‑ and a statement with you I have a question.  How come people don't understand privacy, you know?  It's so important in their life.  I don't understand this one.
   >> ANSGAR KOENE:  And I would add to this to recognize that close to one‑third of users of online media, especially social media are young people below the age of 18 who have recognized extra kinds of needs for protection, and we need to recognize that we cannot expect all of them to do the same level of kind of assessment of quality, so we need to take that into account when thinking about how to craft proper regulations.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you.  And actually we've got one last question, and this post here from audience member.  And his question asks whether we should have distinguished regulatory dimension between the social media and traditional media.  Social media intercept ‑‑ should we have a different regulatory dimension regarding to the social media and traditional media?
   >> KUO WU:  Well, my point is that the government learns very slow.  You know, so it's not enough time for government to really understand how to regulate in their social media.
   >> YIK CHAN CHIN:  Okay.  Thank you.  Any other response?  Okay, so now probably is right, the regulatory framework come slowly and we'll see what happens next.
Anyway, thank you very much for all the panelists, and participants.  Thank you very much.  We close out our panel here.  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-ws212-learn-from-home-during-covid-19^^

>> EDMON CHUNG: Let's get started.  Welcome, everyone.  This is Edmon Chung from DOTAsia and welcome to this session, Learn from Home During COVID‑19.  This is a topic where when we first submitted the workshop, of course, it's a new topic.  Now it's like a talk to death by now, anything to do with COVID‑19, we have to cover your ears to something.  But hopefully, what we want to really talk about here is not just reviewing what has happened and what to do right away, but also pointing towards the future.
Lots of things were done in the last half year, nine months or so, in response to COVID‑19, especially in terms of education and learning.  We are really excited to have a number of speakers with us, including Veronica Stefan, from Romania, and Tim Unwin from UNESCO, Rilla Gusela Sumisra from Indonesia and also from part of the Net Mission Ambassador Program from DOTAsia, very excited to see you here.  And also Paola Galvez from Latin America, and to share with us different experiences about how the response from the education sector has been during COVID.
As a parent of two kids, one just into grade one and one getting to grade three, it has been a very difficult time, I could tell you, to suddenly have them always at home.  I always miss them but it's very tough for a parent working to have kids at home all the time.  So this is also, this particular topic, I hope to ‑ besides the Panel Discussion, really hoping this is a topic that we almost know by heart by now and hope to engage in open dialogue.
This is also a topic that was discussed in the Asia‑Pacific Regional IGF.  So this is sort of a following on a series that the Net Mission Ambassadors and DOTAsia, we have been promoting.  Here is some takeaways from the discussion from the Asia‑Pacific Regional IGF.
There was a lot of highlight on how we implement and how different education institutions implemented the on‑line learning, very much ad‑hoc to start with.  Everyone was trying to shuffle and adapt.  And then after the summer, especially in the northern hemisphere ‑‑ sorry to talk about Summer or Winter that way ‑‑ but after the initial outages, if you will, coming into September a lot of things changed.  A lot of schools were much more ready.  But then a lot of the inequalities and the social infrastructure starts to show.  When most of the students are expected to get on line, things started ‑‑ other types of issues started happening.  Internet connectivity, physical infrastructure that supports it, the digital divide within the classroom, even the situation where your background, maybe it shows that you're home is in a very crowded area or those types of issues become a kind of issue that needs to be looked at.
Of course education‑wise, the loss of physical, non‑verbal cues within the education programs.  But then also discovering that education programs can be disseminated through on line platforms.  That really challenges educators to a number of things.  Here is some of the conclusions that we came up with in the Asia‑Pacific Regional IGF session.
Teachers really need guidance and documentation on how to use these technologies.  They have been working ad‑hoc and trying to figure things out but if this is going to go on and if we look at a future where digital support for education is part of the future, that is going to be important.  How we approach it, the utilization of them, and really to rethink what we ‑‑ we often talk about the new normal these days.  What would be the new‑new normal post‑COVID, afterwards?
The next pandemic ‑‑ hopefully not ‑‑ or post‑COVID back to normal, what we have learned today in form us for the future.  So those are some of the things that hopefully we will touch on.  But before I pass it on to our first speaker, this is what it looks like in my kid's classroom today, which is really interesting.
Usually you would have a bunch of kids with tables and stuff and most ‑‑ this is a setting where it's back in my days, which is like 30 years ago ‑‑ well, sorry, 40 years ago ‑‑ when I was in grade school.  This is the setting of the classroom.  Nowadays usually classrooms are in little clusters and groups.  This is not your typical classroom but now they are back to this.  They are back to doing this.  But not only that, it's more.  Look at all the barriers that are surrounding each of the kids.  That's a very interesting time.  I think this is a very interesting time in the entire education system that we are looking at.  And hopefully this session will lead us into, not only talking about what happened in the last nine months battling COVID, but leading towards what the future might look like for education with that learning and with that infrastructure in place.
So, without further adieu, let me have our first speaker.  I'll go by the list I have here with Veronica first and then Tim and Rilla and Paola.  So I'll pass the time to Veronica who will talk a little bit about her research in terms of the digital behaviors and the youth in terms of inclusion and in response to COVID.  Veronica?
>> VERONICA STEFAN: Thank you.  Thank you to all of you for being here and for having the patience to go in a debate about education.  I'll be honest.  I think if I am to share a perspective, we are talking a lot but it's also that we might remember the wrong side of history in a certain way because it's like we are just discovering that on line education is a thing, first of all, and we can do it.  So of course we are forced about the circumstances but so many things could have been foreseen or anticipated a little bit.  So probably this is the food for thought for all of us and it is the way we prioritize digital issues and digital learning as a whole, as a process, as an organized structured process.  So it's not just accidental as it is right now.
I'm also afraid about inflation about digital everything and not so much sure that actually digital is reflected in any recent policies.  So short‑term programs and projects that we can see and know structural change that is can anticipate at least what is happening in one or three years from now.  With this in mind, I believe it's always good to start from the data we have.
Just brief introduction about me.  I'm basically in Romania but I do work for many years now International context.  I have been working with the UNICEF for 15 years and let's say lately I have been working with the Youth Mission with the Consulate and European agencies a little bit as well to frame a little bit and have a better in‑depth analysis and understanding how youth participate in the new digital world.
But the data I put here is the data that we already knew.  So based on this data in 2017, and this is of course gross data from the countries we do have certain sets of data.  It's not comprehensive.  We know about 71% were connected to Internet to a certain extent.  And that was much more than the overall population.  Since I'm from Europe and I will be talking about it, it is important to know that here the connect activity is way much better.  So at least in terms of Internet usage we already have young people connecting about 97% quite often.  So at least a couple of (?) and world population was really great.  But here is the data that I never understand why is not reflecting in national policies and sometimes the European institutions framework.  That is the skills.  And we imagine I come from Romania and Romania ranks the lowest.  So we range between Croatia in terms of expense.  More than 90% and for Romania which barely goes about 50%.  So the difference is at least if we add with the U.K. and Nordic countries, the situation is not any better.  So definitely some things could be differently and I have worked on research on youth utilization and inclusion and also of fun fact, we started working on this last year because digital was becoming the priority.  We never knew the crisis was coming.  But the data is rather important.
So you remember, 95% of young people use Internet daily.  What do you know?  I'm happy we have our representatives here because their global monitoring tool show at the peak 91% of the world learners have been impacted by lockdown.  It didn't help anything.  And here the discussion should break a little bit because access to technology and Internet and what else is behind that?  What was, at least these obstacles were not at the centre of the problem because they were also part of the solution in the future.
And these are the details I like us to have in mind.  We are talking about on‑line learning but it is not on‑line learning.  This was distance learning.  We improvised everything with the tools we had available.  But this is not on‑line learning.  And I stress that because on‑line learning has methodology.  That is learning objectives and it has a different way of happening.  We didn't do that.  We haven't trained our teachers.  We haven't trained our youth workers or educators to be able to deliver this.  They are simply improvising so distance learning is the best that describes it.
And young people connected to Internet, some of them consider well skilled but how are they using the technology?
That should have been a sign so long time before.  So this is data for 2019, just 5% were using for on line education.  30% for civic engagement.  But they were using it a lot for social media and entertainment and some of them, and this is quite considerable for health information or applying for jobs, but at the same time we were missing many other things.  And the education on line should have been right there.  High on the radar.
And then we go deeper and the deeper part is, the one should concern us because this divides, these are inequalities that exist between my countries and highest level developed.  Imagine about us looking at the entire world from Asia to Africa to Europe to Latin America and so forth.  Young people and probably all of us were not actually designed for technology.  We have been suppressed by this technology and that's why mental health became quite an issue.  The issue would have been as well if we at least, as much as we could have through the services we created, could have provided support for this and the interesting research.  We are trying to map some models, some practices of organizations and people who have done a little bit on this because this services could have been at least for half of the population that was connected to the Internet.  70% of young people.
The loneliness, risk of suicide, learning and working from home is really concerning and domestic violence, especially for children, very young people and women.  So these realities should be concerning for us.
Then of course we did survive in this world.  And I think this is important to be remembered that we have survived with little ‑‑ next to nothing organized health because some other things were in place.  And even for ‑‑ remember 95% have access to Internet almost constantly but how many of them were able to work remotely?  Less than half because also many of them were affected by job losses, not just they had the possibility tow work remotely but also because jobs were disappearing.  And this is effects that will haunt us in the long run.  But also because we have been through another crisis and we can see the numbers already and anticipate the policies.  So my mission today is to say all of this data have been there before it is now, what we do with it now.  Not three years from now.
In terms of platforms.  This is also research I have done.  Zoom is the winner followed by Microsoft, Google, again available to all of you.  But it is important to say these platforms like this one we are using right now, they are not educational platforms.  They are not job management platforms.  They are communication platforms.  But that was missing a lot, especially for educators because the content was not there.  It was a tool and it's a tool that we have been using a bit too much.
And I would like to highlight some other things as well because we were living at home and learning and working, it also means being exposed to all sorts of content and the content was challenging here because it's clear that young people have been affected.  And this admitting that we are discussing now about data that we have identified through on‑line research but on‑line research in itself is limiting in terms of who responds to that.
The fact that young people, a quarter of them, identified that they are being influenced by the news and sources of information it's quite challenging.  And I will not go into the safety and security issues but I do think that what we can learn from now on, is that we need a more inclusive approach to education, to developing digital competence but also more standardized work.  I have included here two frameworks.  One developed by UNESCO some time ago and another by the European Commission who looked in the entirety of what digital skills, media, information, so on and so forth.  We need to discuss about that.  We didn't discuss this before.  We are discussing about digital inclusion.  It is a core matter of access and that has to be cognizant and universal, right?  So I still hope that even we'll take onboard at least this recommendation and create the space or maybe regulation on that, access and universal free access to Internet.  But then on how we work on skills we have to have an understanding because otherwise opportunities will be lost in the future.
So these are my initial findings and I do not want to continue more because I would like to have more time to share feedbacks.  I'm feeling these realities will be extrapolated to different communities and countries.  They are not so new but it was a highlight.  In one of those very developed regions, things were not so much improved because we were simply oblivious before that.  And that is on us.  
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you, Veronica.  It's very true.  Everyone was really adjusting.  We look at it and it looks like it's really encouraging for digital or Internet learning but in reality, we are just trying to ad‑hoc and not really utilizing to the full extent what can be achieved and that seems to be something that is interesting.  So that flows very nicely into Tim and what UNESCO and Veronica mentioned about the UNESCO framework as well.  I now pass the time to Tim who is from UNESCO and maybe share with us a more macro‑view on how this is happening as well.  Tim?  Tim, you're muted.
>> TIM UNWIN: Sorry about that.  It's just been ‑‑ actually, I should say UNESCO and its relationship is complex but nothing I say represents UNESCO.
We were asked a whole list of questions that Jenna prepared and so what I'm going to do is pick on two of those questions and just say two or three things about each of them.  But to liven things up a bit, let's go into a school in northern Tanzania.  Here we are.  So this is the world in which we are talking about.
The first question I want to just say a few words about really builds on what Veronica was saying, which is what's the rule of multi‑stakeholders in the implementation of learning from home?  And I should say it's wonderful to be with such young people.  I was programming in the early 70s and my kids are 32, 29 and 29.  So one is a teacher and his wife is a teacher.  Anyway, but lots of insights.
So three points about multi‑stakeholder.  The first is, I think it's incredibly depressing how many people have gone on the ed tech bandwagon through COVID‑19 and the amount of funding that has gone into initiatives that actually the thing they were meant to solve hadn't been designed but they are being paid tens of thousands of dollars to do it already.  There has been huge wastage in the system.
91% at the peak of COVID at the start of April.  And that went down to 57% to the end of May and it's only on the 13% today.  This hiatus is short‑term.  And you mentioned is it going to last afterwards?  I think it is.
Under this multi‑stakeholder umbrella, we need to identify the different roles and very, very briefly, just some thoughts.  I believe passionately governments have to take the lead on ensuring that means terrible inequalities that are caused by digital tech are reduced.  And my interest is with like the kids here, some of the most marginalized.  These children are in places where there is no electricity.  You could go to a school in Pakistan where actually it's only boys at school.  The girls aren't at school here.
So the most marginalized don't have access.  And actually, learning has continued for the most marginalized much as it has been for their whole lives.  So governments have to take a lead in doing something.  They have to have vision.  International agency is key in sharing good practices, donors giving a bit of program on them already, but they have to fund things that are appropriate and I think a key thing is not the latest idea.  We know what works in the use of digital in tech and that is what should be funded.
Private Sector crucial role.  Innovative and also enabling things that are sustainable.  If a business doesn't sustain itself, it's going to be bust.  Teachers, and I'll come back to them briefly at the end, learning to be more adaptive.  Families, communities, Civil Society, supporting learners.  And the learners themselves and learners being encouraged to take responsibility for their own learning.
So very briefly, many different stakeholders working together can provide solutions.
I'd like just very briefly, Veronica shared some of her findings.  This is also partly for you Marcel.  We have been working over the last six months or so to develop a report on how education and using technology can use the interest of the most marginalized.  And I just like to sort of focus in on the five green points in the middle.  I think these go some way to the solution.  It needs to be a whole society approach.  We have got to have infrastructures for education.  We have to be ‑‑ if relook up here, content‑specific in both the technologies and the content.  We have to ensure that there are appropriate pedagogies and this point that Veronica mentioned about safe and secure, terribly important because if ‑‑ we have horrendous examples of where children, particularly girls, are being incredibly badly treated and harassed and abused in learning on line.
So just thoughts about multi‑stakeholders.  The second question that you asked me or asked us to talk about, Jenna, was question 5.  How is the pandemic redefined the role of educators in society?  I think that's absolutely crucial and just three reasons why.  I think from all I hear in difficult parts of the world, one biggest impacts that ‑‑ Edmon, I'm not sure if you're going to agree with this, but biggest impacts of COVID‑19 related to educators, is the huge respect that families, grandparents and parents now have for teachers because they realize just how tough it is to train their children.
I think we have to use that moment to go back to what we have known all along.  And this is really my second point.  We have to train teachers in the use of digital tech and Veronica, not in using off‑suites and software, but how to use this amazing kit and resources are available on it, to empower and enable young people and also with vocational training, older people, to learn.  So it's not just giving them digital skills but enabling them.
Look at this amazing teacher in China.  The digital techs there but he is here ‑‑ this was taken before COVID.  But I love it because the tech is there but he is actually here working with the children, one of those groups of tables you were talking about.
So respect for teachers.  I'm just shocked over and over again when I see laptops, tablets, digital in the schools but not into the teacher training colleges.
This is my second point.  Stories in some parts of the world, I have been hearing stories of how teachers are trying to teach as they are doing classrooms with Blackboard but using WhatsApp on their mobile phone.
That doesn't make sense.  So train teachers appropriately.  Give them the skills not just learning office.
And then finally and again in response to some of the comments on the chat, and maybe to disagree with you a bit Veronica because I'm old and have been doing this for 50 years ‑‑ almost.  But we know what works.  We are on a continuum.  And the first time I was in Africa working on digital in schools was more than 20 years ago.  We know what works.  We know how to do it.  And COVID has accentuated those trends.  It's being used as an opportunity particularly by the Private Sector who were making huge fortunes out of it.  And I'm not really serving the interest of the poor and mismarginalized.
We can be much more positive and we can rethink education for the future and using digital, and make sure that in the future, when something else like this happens, or in countries where there is a tsunami or earthquake, that disrupts education, we can move seamlessly into new resilient education systems that use digital technology to serve the interest of everybody, and not just the rich.  Perhaps I can leave you with a wonderful cartoon by a superb Indian cartoonist.
This is a running track and here you can see the rich young boy with his laptop and Wi‑Fi and connectivity leaping ahead and the title is on line education.  But here, we see somebody immersed in poverty who has an old textbook and is being left further and further behind.  So thank you for the opportunity to share very briefly some ideas with you.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you, Tim, and hopefully this story ends more like the hare and the tortoise where the tort us has the opportunity to overtake.  But in real life, we know it's much harder.  But what you mentioned about teachers and the appreciation for teachers is really interesting.  I certainly actually very much agree.  I really hope school continues.  We are in Hong Kong right now and we have schools, back to school about a month ago and hopefully that can continue but we are looking at potentially third, fourth waves coming in as well.
What you highlighted in terms of the ‑‑ it's a gradual process.  It's not something that suddenly happened.  We certainly have learned over the past 10‑15‑20 years leading us to here.  But I still think this is an opportunity as you said, because this is now headline news and how we really capture that is going to be something that will really change the course of history because the last 20 years, we have been struggling, really struggling to get this to become mainstream and now we have an opportunity.
With that, I go to Rilla who will talk to us about the Indonesian experience and also from a youth perspective.  So Rilla?
>> RILLA GUSELA SUMISRA: Thank you very much.  Maybe I would like to share my screen.  So, thank you very much.  I'm Rilla from Indonesia.  It is illegal to promote understanding and positive use of Internet in Indonesia.  And also I'm working at the (?) so automation system and software and so on.  So first of all, I would like to say thank you for the people behind me.  So actually when we heard about IT fails ‑‑ there is a lot of job descriptions and various positions.  So maybe the Haitians or so on, we did the team work to provide digital solutions that can be used today.
The best quote of 2020, and we already know about that.  And the first is, I'd like to talk about digital infrastructure.  Actually, in this year, it's really hard for me as a technical company because we get a lot of requests and demands but at the same time, we are very thankful because we can help everyone with our skill and so on, even I'm really happy to see that President of Indonesia said that he will give the Internet reach to the remote areas.  It's really great for me.  And even I travel to other cities in this area and it's really great experience to help the others to know and to ‑‑ can use the Internet.
And the next is, the practices now, for example like the Internet package.  We have to separate.  For example, like 15 gigabytes and the same gigabytes is for the media conference and then the 5 gigabyte is for the other.  And it's easier for students and even for the workers because mostly we use this App.  And because all of the mobile providers have a partnership with the government and Ministry of Education Indonesia gives subsidy like Internet tech package for students.  So the teacher will register the student's phone number and then they can use the Internet for access Zoom, Google Classroom, and the Best Practice that happens in Indonesia right now.
My brother is in senior high school and he still do on‑line learning.  Okay, it is the learning management system.  So this App is really famous in Indonesia and it provides additional lessons for students and also they help the government to give the skills to the students, to the first graduate because it is really important for them to get the knowledge and to get the active knowledge by these Apps.
I have some learning management system for some schools.  What I have learned is we have to listen and understand what are needs.  We don't have to provide all the features and things like that, but we have to listen about, so because this school or maybe the institutions have different goal, different conditions.  For example like they want to have on‑line chat and on‑line call feature for the students because basically Indonesia in junior high school and senior high school, we have a counseling teacher like psychologist or psychology scholars to help them maintain mental health, like that.  It's also the key points of last month.
For the general, Best Practice is, I think like microlearning, like we have to make the small modules to make them not really stress about, there is a lot of things to learn and so on.  So we can give them the Best Practice of this.  And for the interactivity, the UI/UX and gamification, what is important is on demand.  So for example, maybe the elementary student need it because like on math it needs gamification so they were not bored about lessons.  But maybe for University or so on, maybe have the different treatment.  And the last, mobile learning.
I have to ‑‑ for mobile learning, not all of the students have laptop so they just have a smartphone.  That's what happened in Indonesia for now.  So we have to ensure that they can access from smartphone and from laptop so can use anywhere.  And for the spaced repetition, it's kind of maybe we can include or leverage the algorithm so which, for example, like the students get the answer wrong or the right ones and we can focus on the wrong and we can give the situation again to repeat the questions to gain the memorization.
Next is the Best Practice like the other speakers said before.  Like user documentation and guide and training.  Not only effective for teacher or for the students but also for the agencies itself.  In my experience, I have to sometimes get (?) if there is no user recommendation or things like that, it is really hard for me or for the others to update the software system.  So it's really great practice like the user reputations.
Or for the user guide in the learning management system, we can make it kind of the user guide inside the system itself, like if we hover the feature then will pop up the functions and so on.  And we can implement by demand.
Improvement in Technical Community.  What happens in my country is the Ministry of our city provides official International (?) they have a partnership with Google and so on and it is really effective for graduate, for the worker to update your skills and to help because the demand of the IT people is higher than before because of this pandemic.  So this is a great improvement.
That is all from me.  Thank you very much.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you Rilla and very interesting to see what is happening in Indonesia, especially the Technical Community, Educational and Technical Community, not just the grade school or secondary school.  But that is a very, not only niche but interesting and related to what we want to talk about here and what some of the challenges and opportunities there are.
So with that, I'll move to ‑‑ we heard from the European side, a little bit from the Asia‑Pacific side and now we pass the mic to Paola Galvez who will give us a little bit of perspective from the Latin America side.
>> PAOLA GALVEZ: Thank you and good morning, good afternoon and good evening to everyone.  It's great to be with you all today.  First of all, I want to thank the IGF Secretariat as well as my fellow Panelists and organizers for giving me the opportunity to participate in this important discussion.
Regarding the challenges and the limitations faced by the management of the schools and educations in my region, I must say that according to the World Economic Forum more than 154 million children are out of school due to COVID‑19.  Or about 95% of the enrolled students are temporarily out.
Students in more Developed Countries have moved to on‑line learning but data location is not an option for everyone and I see the audience has been discussing this on the chat.  And in a study carried out, concluded in many lack countries the children under 15 years old who are considered Internet users, is under 50%.  This result exposed the region's significant digital divide.  After this I will share on the chat the link to the study.
Also, the educational management and information systems study revealed that most of the countries in the Latin region do not have basic digital conditions and therefore they are not in a position to provide on line education to all students except the only country in the Latin region that has basic data conditions (?)
In early September, we had an informal debate about education from home and I had the pleasure to moderate.
[ Internet disconnection ]
‑‑ reach as many students as possible.  The crisis has exacerbated widespread educational inequalities due to factors relating to gender, immigration, or learning difficulties and special needs.
Likewise, the learning from home experience affects the student teacher relationship that is so crucial for students access and I have seen leaders myself since I teach at the University of Lima and I can see that this year the relationship with my students is not as close as it used to be.  There is no doubt that even the best technologies cannot completely eliminate ‑‑
[ Internet disconnection ]
‑‑ primarily based on the use of data technology, e‑mail, document sharing platforms.  The crisis has highlighted the need to develop teachers data literacy.  Many teachers still lack the required knowledge and it's just not to give them the platforms but to teach them how to use it and how to leverage those platforms.
There are disparities in teacher's abilities to integrate into instruction and transform their lessons into digital interface.  It has been a challenge for me even that I consider myself a geek person and young and actually an Internet native user.  It's been a challenge and it is still a process, but I believe with the right training from the University we will go through that.
Because at least in Peru, the on‑line education is mandatory until July 2021.
Another conclusion is that parents are experiencing difficulties in terms of their abilities and availability to support their children because they are working from home as well.  And of course as you mentioned, it is great to have kids at home, but they need parents and they need the parents to help them in their learning process and in the use of technologies and later on we will talk about the privacy challenges that are next to the situation.
This is also factor I like to bring into the discussion that parents are experiencing difficulties as well as teachers are.
Last but not least is students from more vulnerable context should be a priority in terms of crisis and it is the contents of this education with all students, especially those who come from more vulnerable context.
So, how did the governments in Latin America respond to the education crisis?  The administration incorporated different channels in order to facilitate teaching and learning.  In March, a broad consultation was organized to discover the initiatives programs that Latin‑American countries that were activated in response to the crisis.  By that time, all participants have been implemented.  Another repository of data resources.  In Peru we are using the Cloud thanks to the private support.  Or also a learning management system where a student could connect with their team.
Internet is not accessible for all.  One way government in Latin America are still attempting to avoid interruption of education and access for all children at home, including those without Internet access, radio and television instruction.
For instance, Columbia, Ecuador, Peru and El Salvador governments have government programs on both television and public radio for students as well as through on line platforms.  In Peru, this channel is called, learning at home.  And it's great to see that also adults that didn't have the opportunity to finish school are now learning watching T.V.  That good news after this crisis.
Similarly, the workshops at the non‑profit organizations join efforts to deliver quality educational television content to children in this region.  The programming was made available to the mainstream of education and it will run until June 2021.  That's also great news from a multi‑stakeholder perspective because this is a joint effort between the public and private sectors.
In other countries such as Costa Rica, the government offered hard copies for resources for students who need to rely on their parents to collect physical copies because they don't have Internet access.  In Dominican, the government decided to increase public Wi‑Fi access as a result.  More than 1000 free public Wi‑Fi access points have been set up to facilitate resource distribution.  And as you have seen some governments work quick to take action and help secure students have a way to receive educational materials.
In spite of that, there is still significant gaps.  The education is a challenge for everybody.  I believe that in order to overcome the challenges of connect activity and warranty access to education for the region's most vulnerable populations, and later on in the discussion, I want to share where we see development opportunities I see in this new nor malty.  Thank you.  Looking forward to the discussion and questions.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  And it's very important.   It's very important in terms of the digital divide issue and people and students having connection in order for education to work and also to not leave people behind.  One of the highlights I found interesting you touched upon that students can now learn, be learning watching T.V.  That's obviously very exciting for my kids.  Just a year ago we would be in this forum talking about how to limit screen time for kids.  And I'm looking at how to limit screen time but now I cannot ‑‑ there is no logical argument to say you're not supposed to look at your tablet for more than three hours because you're actually having school through that for five hours.  So now we have a challenge for pulling those devices out of kids hands.  So on who hand, we have an issue of digital divide, having devices to people.
On the other hand there is an interesting dynamic that, how do we ever get these devices out of some of the kids hands?
Now I would like to move to more interactive discussion with the ‑‑ with everyone participating here.  I'm excited to see a number of questions that are already in the Q&A box.  So I encourage everyone to put in your question through there.  I will be biased and whomever puts their hand up and is willing to speak up, you have the priority in my mind.  So please feel free to put up your hand and I'll pass the mic to you to ask the question or add to the discussion.
Put up your hand at any time because we'll keep the queue and no worries for whenever we are speaking.  You can still put your hand up and we'll come to you.
Both Tim and Veronica responded to this question.  But to me, this is a very core question to what the session really wants to talk about.  What does the future hold?  How do you see ‑‑ eventually hopefully fingers crossed, we will come out of this COVID.  We will come out of COVID.  And we will get back to whatever you call the old normal or new‑new normal.  We'll get out of this.  So how do you see going forward?  Will we really go back to the usual classroom settings?  And this is a question for all of the Panelists.  Do you see education going back to 2019?  And most of the teachers will forget all of the Zoom sessions and all the things that they learned?  And sigh a big sigh of relief and say, okay, fine, we are back to the usual.  Or do you see that there is a possibility beyond?  And we can really see almost like an augmented version of digital education on line, whether you call it remote learning ‑‑ is there a future where we would see a hybrid being developed?  And what are the key elements?  Is it technology and the digital divide issue?  Is it more of a management issue for schools?  Whose management decisions in or is this ‑‑ or must this be a government policy direction issue?  What does the future hold and how do you see ‑‑ whether we would see a hybrid or whether we would see us go back to the old normal.  Anyone want to jump in?
>> VERONICA STEFAN: Sure.  Well, tough question, I think on the mind of everyone.  I don't think there will be either.  First of all we should not go back.  We should not stay as we are either.  Also the hybrid, I think, has different understandings and practices even right now so I cannot assume it will be realistic to say we have one class of young people and another one staying on line ‑‑ I hardly have the feeling that will ever work.  But blending them and using on line tools, on line videos and materials complementary within the class and outside of the class, yes.  I think that should be the norm.
I'm including in my comments as well, we should not really have exclusively focus on technology and access.  But maybe even that should be prioritized or seconded fragmented in a way.  Either we focus on equipping all schools and then think also what is or could be outside of the schools that could have access to this infrastructure because I cannot expect that even by 2030 or 40 everybody home will have Internet access.  So I want to stay realistic and see what can be done in next year and two years from now.  So investing in infrastructure in schools, developing community centers where young people outside of the school can also get access to and then also creating a legal framework.  So if you don't have a legal framework that is it, digital skills are important for teachers, for employees in all sectors so they need to be reskilled and so on.  These things will happen by ear.  Everyone will do whatever they think and probably will lose more money.  So pushing for policy reforms now it should be the one thing to do at least.
>> EDMON CHUNG: That's very good.  So policy is a very important pillar.  Tim?  Rilla?  Paola?  You want to add to that? 
>> TIM UNWIN: I tend to be very provocative.  I think one of the lessons we have definitely learned is even before COVID, digital technologies increase inequalities in the world.  I'm very against the use of the word, digital divide, because that implies it can be crossed.  It can't.  It's getting bigger and there are processes deliberately creating that.  So one thing is for sure, and if we use more digital in learning, those inequalities are going to increase; as that cartoon I showed emphasized.
Everything will depend on where we focus our attention.  It's going to be content‑specific.  We have to remember that there are tens of thousands of schools across Africa that don't have electricity and connectivity.  There are millions of children across the world who don't get near a school.  So all of these global initiatives connect every school, are actually increasing inequality because they are not concentrating on the needs and the lives of the poorest and the most marginalized.  People with Disabilities, children living on the streets, refugees.  The list is huge.
So I think that picture is driven by the interests of global capital who are making a huge amount of money out of digital tech.  And until we completely restructure that, we are not going to get much change.  And jumping long‑term, I don't know how far in the future you want to look, but I very seriously, and this is a provocative bit, believe the future ‑‑ people are working on creating chips to put in our brains, neural connections.  So all the knowledge you will need as a biorobot, semi‑human cyborg, will be chipped into you.  You can reboot, upload when you need to regrade to your new job.  Unless we are very, very careful, that is where the future is headed.  I said it was provocative.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Of course it depends on whose chip.  The Microsoft chip or the Apple chip?
>> TIM UNWIN: And who is doing the chipping.  Are the rich going to chip themselves for better life experience?  Or are they going to chip us just automated to do things.  That's also depending on ‑‑ that is really, really interesting question.  And I don't know the answer to that.  I think it will change over time.  But let's see.
>> EDMON CHUNG: And whether you get the Wikipedia in here or the bido Wikipedia in here.  But one of the things ‑‑ so I want to jump on this hopefully since you throw this provocative side, you're saying that this is going to increase inequality.  Is there a scenario where we can address this?  Obviously as an absolute situation, I understand that, but is there a scenario in your mind that the right types of policy can help these types of digital learning to ‑‑ for the betterment of at least the majority of people, if not understand the ultimate, the real vulnerable ones but is there a benefit to this or you see we really should forget about this and go back to paper and pen?  Where we can establish better equality and then address issues on the longer time scale?
>> TIM UNWIN: Before they answer, yes, definitely.  But it needs a complete change of heart in the whole sector and particularly governments to lead on the focus of equity in education.  We have had agreements around equity in education.  Almost ‑‑ our government certainly hadn't delivered on that.  You mentioned Paola Uruguay, the only country I know where they actually started with the ‑‑ so poorest and most marginalized schools and built out from that.  So it started with the most marginalized.  And it's in our language as well.  People talk about the last mile or the next billion or the next billion.  Let's start calling the poorest and the most marginalized the first billion.  Let's design digital learning technologies with them to serve their interests, not kids in smart universities and richest countries in the world.  I'll shut up now.
>> EDMON CHUNG: I think that is a very fair question.  20 years ago I worked or helped work on the one laptop per child initiative, which you must know, and their starting point was trying to do that, at least the idea was to have ‑‑
>> TIM UNWIN: It failed abysmally.  They were throwing kits at the solution.  It wasn't really beginning with the learning needs of the poorest and most marginalized.  It was a great idea.  It's the same as giving tablets into schools across the world, which are often for just before elections so people will get elected.
>> EDMON CHUNG: It is a fair statement.  But I think that flows into Paola, some of the things you talk about, is there kind of a be where we can use technologies to bring about better equality in education and make the education quality better as well?
>> PAOLA GALVEZ: I want to just compliment what this team said.  A very good initiative to create smart schools, however by bringing tablets and not teaching or giving all the skills needed to the teachers right now this is not being used, for example.  And it was before COVID‑19.  So, yes, I'm a little bit more positive.  I believe technology can be a Democratic tool but the government needs to establish holistic policies in order to tackle this very difficult ‑‑ in the north coast or Peru, they don't have ‑‑ maybe all the experience made him more critical.
But in Latin America, I am pretty sure that a hybrid education needs to be established because just on line, even though the President mandate that it has to be on line until June, it cannot be like that for these months because children are not receiving the quality education that they need.
We have seen Professors that go home to home, walking in Highlands just to do what they are committed to, to give education.  But it's not the way and the government needs to be more responsible and give them with all the access needed to educate as well.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  So it seems like the consensus is that the government policy and direction is fundamental to whether this could work into the future.  Right now we are looking at a situation where once in a century kind of a situation where suddenly people ad‑hoc has to solve certain questions, certain issues in this situation.  But Rilla, I wonder if you want to add anything to this?  Your community specifically on educating technical expertise might have a very different situation.  How do you see the future for that?
>> RILLA GUSELA SUMISRA: I can see that maybe there will be learning because I think the full on‑line learning will end.  I mean, like because actually like students like elementary student or kindergarten students, they have to like play with their friends, like face‑to‑face.  So I think that when the COVID‑19 is end soon, it will be better for that learning.  And for the remote areas and students in the remote areas.  I feel like I really hope that the government give ‑‑ give the enforcement to establish the Internet connections like before because there is a lot of islands like 80,000 islands in Indonesia, so we have to take it step‑by‑step.  I hope it will be established all of them like Internet coverage.  Thank you.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  And I'll move now to each of the Q&A questions that we have received but again, I said if anyone is willing to put up their hands, I'm going to prioritize any brave soul who would put up their hands and join the conversation.  So we do have ‑‑ I'll pass it on to Roberto, first.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Hello, Edmon.  Nice to be here.  Good morning, good afternoon to everyone.  It's great to see all of this experience shared by you and the Panelists but also for the different attendance to this session.
I would like to share at some points that I heard some of them are already mentioned in the chat but since this rich chat we might be allowed to see by the people that are going to follow this later.  While this situation found everyone unprepared, no matter what region, what country, what developing situation we have, it found us in the same unprepared situation.
Worst of course in the Global South where Internet is still not affordable and that indeed may increase digital divide, as someone said before in the chat.  Actually it did in my country because on one side we have the private schools that were working and were continuing their activities, but about 30% of the students population.  The other 70% actually couldn't afford to get connected and to continue normally their classes.  And of course they were in a very extreme lockdown, sadly.  Most of them lost the educational year.
And the first reaction that the people had was to move classes to Zoom.  And that is why Zoom was one of the best platforms to do that because it is really friendly.  But of course that was a situation for those that could use Zoom, for those students that could afford this platform.  For now, the option was to implement learning management systems, mobile teams and Google classrooms et cetera.  But these platforms responded well when you had proper training and also adapted content to deliver.  But this is not the case in most of the universities or schools.
And it was fine to quickly overcome the situation using this kind of platform but not smart to continue like this, because as also mentioned in the chat, educational process are not only about platforms, Internet access, it is a very complex process that needs a long debate and long reflection among the different stakeholders but particularly teachers, students and parents and communities.  And it should be performing a very holistic way taking into account not only all of this previously mentioned aspect but also it's not going to be an easy task.
The good thing is that this situation is helping the education process to evolve and hopefully in a better way.  But there is very important tests to do also and if we are going to use Internet as the main channel for doing this, well, we still need to work in inclusion strategies to make ‑‑ really make a lot of Internet affordable for everyone.  Thank you very much.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you, Roberto for the comment.  I understand it's a common building on some of the discussion just now.  Anyone want to, from the Panel, want to add to that?  If I'm not mistaken, it wasn't a question, per se.  But if anyone wants to add to it.  If not, I'll go on to the next ‑‑ thank you Roberto again.  And again, please put up your hand any time.  I'll prioritize.
>> PAOLA GALVEZ: I believe what Roberto said gives us the conclusion that a multi‑stakeholder strategy is needed.  In fact, Civil Society has a great responsibility to ‑‑ a role to play in this situation because when we talk about the privacy effects of use in Zoom, for example, here in Peru, we have the digital rights NGO called (?) and they shared with the Peruvian citizens what are the facts, how to pick the platforms or for instance, you can see that the World Bank Tech Team curated an extensive list of remote learning distance education platforms.  And you can see they are organized by country.  I mean, what we need now is information.  And to have informed opinion.  We need to read and to see just not to use the platforms because they are available.
And I believe everyone have a role in this if we are youth, even upon if we are ‑‑ even if we are economists, we are Internet users so we can have an opinion on this.  And it's important we share and discuss these matters.  Thank you.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  And this is a topic that I don't see in the questions but I would like to jump on as you highlighted in terms of privacy because privacy is increasingly an issue especially at IGF and in the Internet Governance discussions.  It is always an issue and increasingly an issue.  And when we are really excited about the education can at least hobble along what impact is it bringing as we go into these platforms on a technical level, the privacy there, and also on what I touched on earlier in my introduction.
There are cases in Hong Kong because of the classes requiring remote connection, they usually initially at least, ask everyone to turn on their webcam.  But there are situations where their home is just in a very cramped environment and therefore there are students that are unwilling to turn on.  And they were actually punished or whatever.  But once they turned it on, it becomes, those who turn it on, they get laughed at and they get bullied somehow because they are picked on.  Their mother is hanging clothes behind them and those kinds of things.  I wonder what is the experience around and especially Tim, if UNESCO ‑ I know you're not part of the UNESCO but in your experience and view and Veronica, how does that play into the situation, especially privacy and privacy of students?  And how do you balance that with the need for schools and teachers to know that hey, we don't each know whether the student is actually joining the class or not.  What should the balance be?  And is that an issue?
>> TIM UNWIN: Just moving my mouse across.  Thank you for raising that.  I'd love to say more.  It's a huge area.  And I would love to put in the chat, we need to think about combined privacy with security and safety.  And all of these come together.  And actually, if you look at the end ‑‑ I'll put up the link to our report, we cover this in great detail.  It's very difficult to answer but I will just make some brief comments.  It does tend to be context specific.  People have very different views about what privacy is in different parts of the world.  And it's how we encompass that diversity.
I think secondly, to your point about balances, how much of your privacy are you willing to give away for what in return?  And I think people who are educated and know about digital own a position to weigh up those pros and cons.  Children, by‑and‑large, aren't.  We just think, for example, about the amount of sexting that goes on.  Now in the U.K. we are almost in a position where sexting is now the norm and it is, if you send a picture of yourself it won't be counted against you in a court almost.  We are almost to that point.  And I think that ‑‑
And the third point I'd make is, and this is again links to cultural sensitivity.  But in general, the poorest people have least privacy already.  If you're living in a house with a room, so a small apartment with six siblings and mother and father and a grandmother, you're not going to have much privacy.  It is totally difficult from the sort of small cellular families in many of the richer parts of the world.
So, and this is really difficult and I haven't quite worked through my own mind through this.  If you never had much privacy does it matter if you have no privacy on line?  I certainly think it does.  But there are those who would say that privacy is a western concept.  So I think we need much more deconstruction of what privacy is and there is a danger of trying to create general norms which by‑and‑large serve the interests of those who are creating those norms.
Quick final point, what do we do with all the data about schoolchildren?  There are parts of the world where children's eye movements, body position are tracked on line by cameras every 30 seconds and that is fed into the teacher's device so they can see actually how that child is interacting.  And then all of that data is kept.  And used by people for particular purposes.
So you touched on a huge issue.  I just skimmed the surface but I hope it gives some way to offer some suggestions.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Very useful, Veronica did you want to add to it.
>> VERONICA STEFAN: Sure.  Maybe bending a bit on what Tim said.  But I think it should be a bit privacy in the context of education which should be different than privacy in any other context as well because even here it should be very much connected to the methodologies as well.  So right now we are in a situation when basically whatever happened off line happens on line, which is a approach by itself.  That is methodology problem.
So, I will give an example or several examples.  Teachers are upset they cannot see the face of the children they are speaking to.  But then again, children should have that option, especially if they have to spend a whole day in front of the computer.  And sometimes teachers should consider to record or find other ways of young people to have access to that specific moment when a teacher is ‑‑ so nothing happened.  In a different setting when feedback is required and interaction is required and that's part of the whole teaching and learning process, which is very much based on the interaction and the creativity.  So it cannot happen with blind screens or just voices.  They cannot happen especially for the long run and for the younger children and students.  So I would separate those parts.  I think it's a very big problem we had from the day 1 and that they didn't know how these platforms worked, what data is recorded and how long they are in front of security challenges and with Zoom, we had all these horrible events we are aware of now.  Which the platform was not aware but we as educators were responsible.  So going back, we are using communication platforms, not designed educational practical platforms because those could be designed with a different mindset with different security levels.  For me it should be very much connected with part of a more structured well‑designed process with different methodological approaches.  Obviously what he is happening now it's not fair and we should at least make sure the rights of young people, not the ‑‑ are not infringed and they are not being punished for something nobody is so much aware of.  At this point.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you, Veronica.  And quickly we are running out of time.  So I'll jump to Vrikson who put up a hand.
>> VRIKSON ACOSTA: Wherever you are in society, I have been listening to all the interventions.  I want to record something that if somebody doesn't (?) it doesn't matter how much privacy he or she has on line.  And that is global thing because I continue happens that way but.
[ Indiscernable audio ] 
They say you can use this phone for classes but they also use for every other sense and they can get a lot of material who are not properly for children or even adults.  So it's a very troubled issue.  The lack of privacy and ethics.  (?) almost two million square kilometers here in Venezuela there is trouble because electricity doesn't get everywhere where there is electricity.  Even in the capital city.  Internet service is very, very limited.  So we have a very, very difficult challenge to adapt both on the part of the.
[ Indiscernible audio ]
Even teachers have been having trouble getting used to technology because they weren't used to it ‑‑ they use WhatsApp or other things just to chat and they now have to use those skills to know what the homework the teachers are sending to their children.  And they have to control more than the children.
And everybody has to be having getting more digitalized but it doesn't mean that it has been most literalized.  So more utilization doesn't really mean more literization.  And it's in trouble.  If you look at digital literacy and ethics, it can go anywhere.  It can go anywhere.  Last point I want to mention is somebody mentioned about Zoom on‑line platform.  But even in this is it pandemic, people are really very tired of webinars and using cell phone for WhatsApp or telegram for classes.  They just had it.  Using platform, I know people in the educational status and they said oh, no!  Maybe March, April, May.  Okay Zoom was something new but now, there are so many.  Whatever?  How long?  What are you going to say to teach me?  Some people are getting really tired of technologies, especially for this use.  So there has to be some kind of a trade off control in the use of technology because we are being (?) and we have to get people to like access that people get data literacy and ethics.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  Suddenly we are getting zoomed out.  So digital literacy on ethics and learning and parenting is the comment.  I see Marcel and Rosalia.  Please keep it really short because we are running out of time.  About a minute each and we'll go back to the Panel to almost wrap up.  Rosalia?  We are not hearing from you.
>> JENNA MAN HAU FUNG: I think there is some issues on the audio.  We still have another hand up.  Marcel.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Marcel?
>> MARCEL: Can you hear me?
>> EDMON CHUNG: Yes, please go ahead.
>> MARCEL: This is Marcel from Germany.  I wanted to make a comment on Zoom fatigue.  I don't think it's an issue of the platform.  I don't know any student who likes school at all so I don't think we will find any platform that any student will say hurray, that is another class!  We won't find it.  We can just put a lot of effort into to make these platforms better and to develop methodologies to increase the comfort within the sessions and to educate our teachers and Professors or whomever is going to educate people to leverage these platforms at best.  Thank you.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  Rozalia.  Are you able to speak?  I see you have muted yourself but you can try to unmute.
>> ROZALIA KLARA: I tried to unmute myself.  Referring to the dysfunctional digitalization, technology was supposed to solve the educational problems.  It won't.  Technology will not do the education instead of us.  I think it is coming to develop in a hybrid system, we have probably need also a new approach to education.  Participatory approach involving teachers and parents and students in the process of learning.  Something that Zoomers called connectivism.  So it's important to also to look at the methodologies of teaching and the technology aspect and the push button problems is not going to work probably.  Thank you.
>> EDMON CHUNG: Thank you.  So the methodologies behind is highlighted.  The Zoom up issue, the Zoom fatigue issue, the digital literacy on ethics and learning and parenting.  And I also see that in the Q&A there is the question on, especially to Tim, what the KPIs are or should be in terms of the impact of the pandemic on education sphere.  So I'll go around just as we have in the very beginning.  Veronica and Tim and Paula you have the last word and perhaps touch on some of these questions.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-ws236-data-flows-trade-and-international-cooperation^^

 
>>  The chat feature is for social chat only and only the Q&A feature is used to ask questions. 
>> Thank you. Quick question. Webinar is recorded. Where would it be possible to get the recording of the webinar afterward? 
>> I think one day we wait for this. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: That would be on the IGF website? 
>> Yes. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Same for the presentations of the speakers? 
>> Yes. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Okay. Thanks. Well, let's start, I think, so that we're on time. So let me introduce the webinar. Welcome to the speakers and attendees. I'll start with the topic of the webinar and the speakers. 
I'm Kian Cassehgari and I work at the World Trade Organization. With my colleagues Agata and Lee who helped me to organize this webinar. 
In terms of the topic at hand, international trade is facilitated where internet functions at its best and data can flow freely and efficiently. 
By the same token the global reach and effectiveness of the internet depends on international trade to a large extent. That's why in this session we would like to show items that international trade governance contributes to the smooth and effective functioning of the internet. And therefore should be part of the internet governance discussions with the IGF.
 
In addition to that, we would like to share that governance is key to international trade growth as well and the Trade Policy Committee can also learn from the different policy communities that regulate data. 
So for this webinar we have four speakers with us today with different backgrounds. I'm sharing my screen to present the speakers. Please let me know if you can see the PowerPoint. I suppose not. 
>> SEAN MANION: Yes, we can see. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Wonderful. First we have Carl Gahnberg, a senior policy advisor at Internet Society. We have also Jade Nester, director at the GMSA consumer policy unit. Richard Syers is a principal policy officer at the information commissioner's office in the united kingdom but is also representing the Global Privacy Assembly today which is an association of data protection authorities. 
Finally, Sean Manion is a neuroscientist and chief scientific officer at ConsenSys Health which is small and multiple enterprises. 
Okay. So we will open the floor to you, the audience after the presentation of the four speakers so that you can make comments or ask questions. You'll be able to turn on your mic thanks to the help of Alexandra who is helping with questions today. 
You can also write questions in the Q&A or the chat box where my colleagues will be monitoring your questions. We'll take questions at the end of the presentations. If there are follow up questions we may take some during the presentations. 
Without further ado we start with Richard. You are going to present the privacy dimension of the discussion today. The questions for you that I have will be the following: How do data protection authorities cooperate to ensure trust on the internet globally? And how do privacy governance principles and rules facilitate data flows and contribute to international trade growth? Over to you, Richard. I have to share my screen for you. 
>> RICHARD SYERS: Thank you. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Wonderful. I'm in your hands. 
>> RICHARD SYERS: Thanks, Kian.
Thank you very much. It's a pleasure to speak to everyone on the webinar today and take this opportunity to engage with you all. My name is Rick Syers, I work with the an information commissioner's office which is the UK data protection authority. Today speaking, also the global privacy assembly which the ICO currently chairs. So next slide, please. Thank you. 
So the global privacy ‑‑ I thought I would start by explaining who the global privacy assembly is for those who don't know. The global privacy assembly is the premier global forum for data protection and privacy authorities to interact with each other and cooperate with each other. 
As I said it is currently chaired by the UK information commissioner Elizabeth Denham. We provide the secretariat function for the global privacy assembly. We will be the chair for the next year until the next conference. 
So the GPA has been around since 1979. It's been around for a while. It was until fairly recently called the international conference of data commissioners which was a mouthful. So one thing we have overseen as part of our chairship of the GPA is the change of names to the global privacy assembly. We held our 42nd annual assembly recently which was scheduled to be in Mexico. Unfortunately because of the current situation we are not able to travel. So we held it as a virtual conference. We think it went well. We are currently in the process of digesting all the output from that. So that was in the middle of October. So it was only about a month ago that we held that. 
So the purpose or the goal of the GPA is to be an outstanding. The idea is to provide practical assistance to help different authorities more effectively perform their mandates and provide leadership on an international level, data protection, and privacy issues. By connecting and supporting the efforts at both domestic and regional level we want to connect with other international forums such as the world trade organization and the Internet Governance Forum so we can provide that expertise in data protection to the questions we are talking about today. 
Next slide, please. Briefly that's the GPA's vision. An environment in which privacy and data protection authorities around the world are able to effectively act and fulfill their mandates both individually and through diffusion of knowledge and supportive connections. Next slide, please. Thank you. 
There are three strategic priorities for the next year. They have been since 2019. Obviously we want to advance global privacy in the digital age and want to do it by working toward a global regulatory environment with clear and consistently high standards of data protection. We want to maximize the GPA's voice and influence. So we want to enhance its role in wider digital policy and strengthen our relationships within international bodies and networks in order to advance data protection and privacy issues including observer arrangements, for example, with other forums. 
We have other organizations that can be a GPA observer as well. Finally, we want to help build capacity amongst the assembly members. There is quite a wide spectrum of capability and resourcing and of experience within the GPA with at one end we have varied experience, privacy regulators like the ICO and other European regulators that have been around for a long time. 
We also have new data protection authorities who are regulating regimes. So the idea is that by working together we can help build that capacity and knowledge by sharing the experience we have. In some ways, the newer authorities have an interesting position because they can create the data protection regime purpose built for the digital age we are in now as opposed to having to adapt to it as some of the older authorities and regimes. So I think there is an interesting future there in terms of how new data protection regimes are built with the digital world in mind. Next slide, please. 
I just wanted to touch on a few things ‑‑ some workstreams the GPA has been doing over the last year. So these are relatively new things. We split into a number of different policy workstreams. Three of them are particularly relevant to the conversation today. The first is work we did over the last year to analyze different global frameworks and standards to look at what the differences are between them and where the points of difference are and also why they are similar. That's a list of the ten we looked at. GDPRs and there is well established things like the privacy guidelines, 108 which is the only legally binding data protection standard globally. And then there are newer things like the Madrid Resolution which laid outsets of common standards for the GPA members in order to help them build that regime. Next slide, please. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Richard? 
>> RICHARD SYERS: Can I get the next slide, please? 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: I'm facing some internet connection issues. 
>> RICHARD SYERS: No problem. The first thing we'd like to stress about that was we found there were strong commonalities between the different frameworks. The basic principles are fairly well established. However, there were differences particularly in mechanisms for facilitating cross‑border data. Although the principles that most of those frameworks have when it comes to cross‑border transfers were similar in terms of allowing data to continue to enjoy the protections in its country of origin, the mechanisms for ensuring that were different and there were different ways of doing that. 
Over the next year we intend to carry out further analysis more specifically on the cross‑border transfer mechanisms to see where they differ and are similar and look for areas of commonality we can work towards more interoperable systems. The next is the digital economy. A quick look at what the mandates of the workstream is. Basically to create a narrative and more coherent approach to issues around the data protection aspects of regulation and also to look at closer engagement with multilateral and international bodies. This webinar is part of that work that we'd like to do to reach out to different forums to talk to forums where data protection issues are important. 
Obviously we think we can contribute to that and learn from practical issues. Next slide, please. 
As part of that we did a background paper called "towards a trustworthy digital economy" which lays out our view of what the digital economy is, what are the important developments and main things we need to look at in this context. Next slide again, please. 
So one of the things we wanted to point out in the paper and the point of today and that we'd like to make in the GPA is there are systemic benefits to systemic data protection. We would say data flows across borders. We mean a digital economy. They are a sustainable level playing field. We believe trust is something that's hard to gain but easily lost. 
While certain uses may yield economic growth in the short term, if those uses are detrimental to individuals they eventually become detrimental to the digital economy as a whole. We think appropriate laws and regulations combined with appropriate oversight by supervisory authorities and courts ultimately help to ensure data control is in ways to allow people to enjoy data protections and realize the benefits of the digital economy. 
It enhances the choice of individuals and prevents harms so they are able to make informed choices about the services they use and consumers are aware of the risks that data ‑‑ misuse of the data could lead to. So there is also an opportunity to offer a competitive advantage for organizations that can sell their products on the basis of it being privacy friendly. We think that's a selling point now. All parts of this is trust which we think is important. 
We believe data protection is a driver for innovation. At the ICO we have a sandbox which allows organizations to come in, test out ideas in a closely supervised environment so they can use data in new ways but in a way which still respects the basics of data protection law. Next slide, please. I'm sorry, I'm slightly overrunning. I will wrap up. 
Just kind of the key takeaways is trust is key to a vibrant digital economy. You need trust from users and the systems they are using and between different countries. Data protection law is a vital building block of that trust. So we therefore don't believe data protection law should be a barrier to economic activity. We don't believe this is a question of data protection or economic benefit. We believe they go hand in hand and that with a modern well-regulated sensible data protection regime you enable data flows. In terms of data flows across the globe the more harmonized that could be, the more interoperable the systems can be, the easier it will be for data between borders and the last will be between different data flows. 
Next slide, please. Last one. So the last workstream that's a good example of working together and how it helps with the international enforcement cooperation workstream. This is something again that's been newly established. It provides a forum in which members can discuss live issues leading to joint working on matters of mutual concern. Particularly with multinational organizations operating in different countries it is useful to talk to each other in that forum and to coordinate our actions. That's led to concrete enforcement cooperation initiatives, a joint investigation between ourselves, the ICO and the Australian Information Commissioner into Clearview AI and a joint statement of video conferencing companies signed by six member authorities of that cooperation. That's become more and more important in the current situation where we are much more reliable on video conferencing suites at the moment. 
Thank you very much. My final slide just has links to the GPA website where you can get information on those things. The GPA website has a lot of information there. Thank you very much. I look forward to discussing it with you further. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Thanks, Rick. 
>> RICHARD SYERS: Thank you. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: All right. Now to the next speakers, Carl and Jade. We have heard from Richard that privacy governance is key to generate trust and can contribute to digital economic growth and international trade growth. That's what matters for us. 
Of course there are other policy objectives for data policies such as fostering market competition, innovation or protecting national security interests. 
So taking that into account, I would like to ask you, Carl, first if you can tell us more about the relationship between those different data policies. Just to name one. Data rules and the global architecture of the internet. Carl, over to you. 
>> CARL GAHNBERG: Thank you very much, Kian. I'll share my screen here for the presentation. Hope everyone can see it. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Yes. 
>> CARL GAHNBERG: Thank you very much for having me and thank you very much for inviting me to this great panel. I think we are all contributing different complementary angles to this really important topic. The angle that I will be presenting is stemming from some of the work that we have been doing in 2020 at the Internet Society about an Impact Assessment Toolkit for the internet trying to understand how policies or other developments might impact the global architecture we call the internet. 
Looking specifically at the case of forced data localization in this context. 
So I usually start these presentations with this picture to give people a sense of what we are trying to do. If you look at this image you'll see there is a forest and then there is a highway surrounding it. Ideally someone will have considered what is the impact on that eco‑system in the forest. That forest itself when you decided to build a highway. This has become the norm in many countries around the world that we do these type of impact assessments. We assign a high value to the environment. It's become almost a reflex in many communities to do that type of impact assessment. 
We are hoping to do something similar for the internet and that's the work we are working on this year to contextualize and describe the impact of different choices and how it relates to the internet. So what we did in order to achieve this and started building this work, this is a work in progress, I should say is first trying to articulate what's really important about the internet, what's the critical thing that needs to be strengthened and preserved going forward. 
Step two here is to try to provide a lens or other tools for people to assess the impact on the internet itself. 
That resulted in this Internet Impact Assessment Toolkit. Starting with that first question, if we are thinking about trying to describe what's important to preserve, it is useful to try to articulate the internet in some way, shape or form. What you see on the screen is one of the ways that people usually describe the internet. It's a network of networks. There is also a bit of a so what question to that. It seems to be a necessary but not a sufficient description to talk about the internet. 
If you were to sort of conceptually visualize the internet it would look like this. You would have networks of internet hosts interconnecting. Together they create a global platform we call the internet in which you have these amazing innovations and creations that is sort of fueling the global economy today. 
Now what we wanted to do is sort of add a little bit more detail to that. We're talking about a network of networks. An internet, but can we add more detail as to what that capitalized I global internet we have today, what defines it, characterizes it. 
So we started looking at the fundamentals together with our community and other experts trying to identify what are those critical properties that come to define the internet and what are their ideal states? What would be the ideal way to do the networking model? The purpose is to establish that baseline that you then assess different policy developments towards. 
Hopefully what you see on the screen here should resonate with many people. It shouldn't be any novelties here. When we are talking about the internet we should be striving to have a common protocol, for example. We should have a common global identifier system in terms of IP addresses and the domain system, for example. 
There are also ideals. We know, for example, that in the current internet we have two protocols in IPB4 and 6. In the networking model you are striving to have one protocol, the IPB6 for example. Each of the properties are trying to describe things that are critical for us to talk about the internet and that capitalized I internet and preserving that networking model. 
The idea here is that you be able to add more detail to this conceptualization of what the internet is. It is not only a network of networks. It is a network of networks that have a common protocol, a common identifier system that's general purpose and so forth. By doing so you can also start thinking about when do we move away from the internet? When do we start harming the internet, degrading the internet? You end up with question marks. 
If you move away from a common protocol, move away from having a general purpose network, move away from having high degree of autonomy of the participating networks then you move away from the internet as a networking model and you get something different. You do not have a capitalized I internet anymore. That's what we are trying to convey in this toolkit. We are describing these critical properties as being associated with important benefits that we have achieved today. 
For example, the fact that you have an accessible infrastructure with a common protocol means it is very low barriers to entry to participate in the internet. IP and you can deliver your service online. Simplified. Basically it provides low barriers to entry. 
Similar if you look at decentralized management and distributed routing you have networks that are able to optimize their interconnections and routing to serve local needs while still maintaining a worldwide connectivity. So the autonomy of networks participating in the networking model is critically important to have the internet we have today. 
Similarly, that general purpose network that allows the network to just move bits and bytes and innovations at the edges to preserve the internet going forward. 
I'm going to move to the second step in this toolkit where we have a lens for different ‑‑ what we call use cases and trying to articulate how they affect the fundamentals of internet. It's important to think about them as fundamentals because they don't capture everything that's important about the internet, for example. It is only looking at those critical fundamental pieces and how they are affected by different policies and what you might lose through some of those policies or how the policies might strengthen the properties as well. 
We created a number of use cases in this work. We have more coming in 2021. I'll talk briefly about the case of forced data localization which is one of the angles of today's conversation. If you think about forced data localization you could describe it as you see on the screen that it refers to government requirements that control the storage and flow of data to be kept within a particular jurisdiction. 
That can come roughly in two different forms. Either data at rest which means that the data is physically located within a country. You also have other types of data localization requirements that is about data traffic not traversing networks across borders for example. 
They can come in different forms. Today we'll talk about the data at rest case. But the idea behind these use cases is that we are trying to illustrate with such requirements what is the impact on these critical properties? I have listed them here on the screen. I won't go into them in detail now. I think we will discuss to a great extent the impact on the first critical property in terms of data localization requirements raising barriers for participation of services on the internet because in effect if you have these type of requirements where they are indiscriminate, you would need multiple duplications of your infrastructure in order to comply with the law. So you wouldn't just require to have one web server in a country. You need to duplicate that across jurisdictions and so forth. 
Similarly the general purpose network, if you start having requirements about how traffic can flow across the networks and across borders then you are adding requirements in terms of the networks becoming content‑aware and doing traffic management in a way that's not in line with this general purpose idea. 
We also have here critical property three about the decentralized management and distributed routing. I was thinking I should try to illustrate this a little bit better visually. I usually find it helpful to get a visual description of some of these issues. But the idea here is that the fact that you have these data localization requirements ‑‑ and we are talking about data at rest ‑‑ is that it doesn't really correspond to how the internet itself looks at the world, if you will. 
If you think about how we as humans look at the world, we would look at it in this fashion kind of. We would see it in countries and in country borders. We look at relationships between those countries in terms of those borders. So the relationship between country A and country D, for example, is that in between them you have country B and country C. That's how we think about the world as humans. 
But this is quite different from how the participants or networks and services in the internet looks at the world, if you will. 
So rather when you are on the internet you think about the internet from a network topology point of view. In this example this is a miniature version of the internet describing a network topology. If you were a cloud provider and had the option of allocating resources in network A or B you are faced with a choice. Where am I likely to more efficiently deliver this content, for example, to clients across the world? 
By looking at the map stylistically it looks like network A would be more beneficial than network B for a few reasons. For example, if you are in network A you basically have three hubs to any other network in this map. 
In network B you will have five hops to some of these networks. Also for example you have a higher degree of interconnection in this part of the graph than here. Those are the types of rationales that you can benefit from when looking at the internet because the internet doesn't have the idea of borders. It looks at interconnection patterns and where it is most efficient to allocate resources. 
The problem is when you're trying to sort of impose that geographical constraints on the networks because it doesn't map well. You have networks that cross borders and just because you have a resource within one country doesn't mean that it would actually improve the service delivery for users in that country who might have better service delivery if you have in your resource stored in a network in a neighboring country. 
So you're sort of losing these benefits of the interconnectedness of the internet through these data localization requirements. 
So those are the type of issues we tried to bring forward in this toolkit as considerations when you look at different policies, including trade policies like this, that you start losing some of the benefits of the internet, the global reach, the interconnectedness and the efficiencies that an interconnected network can give you in terms of promoting your economy and your services. They can be put at risk from stringent and broad data localization requirements, for example. 
So I'll stop there. Thank you very much. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Thank you, Carl. That was interesting. One follow up question is whether or not privacy rules or governance will affect one at least of the five properties of internet and for example decentralized management, whether or not privacy governance will influence the decision of cloud service providers. 
My gut feeling is no because we are talking about data transmission and not the content of data. But I would be happy to hear your views on that. 
Before I go to the next speaker I would like to see with Agata if there are follow‑up questions from the Q&A. 
>> AGATA FERREIRA: Yes. There is actually one question. But the question was addressed to a previous speaker, to Richard. So we can ask it now if you want or leave it for later. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Sure, if it's a follow up for Richard, go ahead. 
>> AGATA FERREIRA: So the question for Richard asks that there's been discussion of the DNS over HTTPS DoH implementation in the context of cross‑border data and privacy. Is that something that GPA would consider? 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Before that ‑‑ 
>> RICHARD SYERS: Hello? 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: You can unmute your microphone, please. Before I give you the floor, Richard, Lee in the chat box and in YouTube are there any follow up questions? 
>> We are not having the YouTube people posing any questions as yet. But you've got three thumbs‑up in the YouTube. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Thank you. Richard, go ahead and maybe Carl can address a question as well. 
>> RICHARD SYERS: I tried to respond in the Q&A. Apologies. I should have waited to answer. 
Basically I don't think it is something that's been discussed at GPA. I'll admit I'm not an expert on internet protocols. I'm not sure it's something I could answer at this point. It's certainly something we can take away and raise with colleagues. 
The only thing I would say data protection law is generally ‑‑ it tries to be technology agnostic. It wouldn't usually specify or endorse a particular standard or a particular protocol or a particular technology. All these things have pros for privacy and cons for things. 
I don't think there is one that's perfect. Generally what's data protection law and what privacy standards try to do is leave space for data controllers to choose the best solution for them if you like in those circumstances. 
Clearly from a security, cybersecurity thing the more secure something is the better. Of course it has to be balanced with whether it allows you to fulfill what you're trying to do. I'm sorry if that doesn't answer the question. I'm not an expert on internet protocols. I don't know if that quite gets to the question. It's certainly something that I can say has been raised and we can consider whether it fits into any of the descriptions we are having at the moment. 
It's something that I think if there are ‑‑ if you have a more in‑depth question on how you think that relates we would be happy to take it away and think about it. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Carl? 
>> CARL GAHNBERG: In response to the DNS question or the other question? 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: The other question except if you want to address DNS as well. 
>> CARL GAHNBERG: I'm not sure I would have a response. It's an interesting question and probably relevant for Richard's work given that perhaps the question by the participant was sort of thinking about one of the rationales behind DNS is you get an encrypted connection to the DNS resolver and the big players may not be located within the geographical jurisdictions. You might access a resolver outside of borders which is a move from how it's traditionally been within the access network. 
It's an interesting question for Richard for sure. 
With regard to the privacy rules the key is coherence. Some of the things we have seen in terms of, for example, I don't want to say undermine but coming in conflict with some of the benefits of the internet is something you can see illustrated with the GDPR, for example. It was an extremely needed data protection regulation and it certainly has improved a lot for internet users not only in Europe but globally. 
The crux is that although it moves the needle forward in a very positive fashion it also comes with, for example, an extraterritorial application where other providers outside of Europe in some instances have decided not to make themselves available to users in Europe. If you try to visit, for example, the Atlantic in the U.S., that website, it usually says they won't resolve in Europe because of GDPR. 
Of course that isn't in any way, shape or form breaking the interoperability of the internet, but you are adding legal conflicts that emerge and suddenly you don't gain the benefits of that global connectivity because you have regulations that prohibit people from making themselves available globally. The point is the coherency is important because it can affect your utility, usefulness of having a global network. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: ‑‑ data transfers model that Richard mentioned becomes really key for allowing international trade or what is the flow of services across borders. 
Richard, do you want to say something? 
>> RICHARD SYERS: Would you like me to say something on that or wait? 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: The last question we received from jack? 
>> RICHARD SYERS: I'm sorry, let me bring it up. Yeah. I think, first of all, I would say the purpose of data protection law is to allow data flow. So we certainly would hope it is not being used as an intentional barrier to data flows and to economic activity and trade. 
Of course I think the problem is, like you stated, when you have differences between different systems that can create a barrier not intentionally, but a barrier because you are transferring data to two places that often have different views on how data protection works. They are coming at it from different views, different optics. 
That's where we hope that forums like the GPA we can try to sort of break down those barriers and to come up with, you know, common standards, common principles at least that mean even though the legal system may be different. Even though I think we have to respect that different countries have different views on these things. But that doesn't means the impossible to build interoperability. I think the basic principles of data protection are well established. Not many countries have a completely different view. It's how you achieve those things. So from our perspective at the ICO at least and I think I speak for most GPA members in this sense, no, we support trade. We support the ability of data to flow as long as it is in a way that maintains the protections that the data enjoys. 
I think the answer ‑‑ well, that's a simplistic way to put it, but it would help to find commonality to allow data to flow more soundly. But, yeah. I would reinforce the point that the point of data protection is to create a common set of standards. Certainly in Europe is to create a common set of standards so the data can flow unimpeded without the friction you get with different standards in different countries. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Thank you so much. Jade, what about you? What can you tell us about how mobile operators benefit from cross‑border data flows and how are they affected by data policies? Over to you. 
>> JADE NESTER: Can everyone see my slides? I think so. Hi, everyone. My name is Jade Nester, director of consumer policy at GMSA. It's a pleasure to join you today. 
For those of you who don't know what the GMSA is, we are a trade association. We represent the views of nearly 800 mobile network operators worldwide. We also represent about 300 companies from the broader mobile eco‑system including handset and device makers, software companies, and different companies in the mobile eco‑system. It's a broad array of companies that depend on cross border data flows which is why I'm here today talking about it. 
Much like Richard, we really want to start with privacy as the basis for discussions about cross border data flows, privacy and accountability as a core privacy principle. 
Back in 2011, the GMSA developed mobile privacy principles which are based on these commonly accepted fair information practice principles that Richard also mentioned. So these were a mobile industry‑facing set of principles and we also developed some privacy design guidelines for app developers based on those principles. 
But more recently, we developed this report on smart data privacy laws in 2019. The idea was to have a resource for our members to figure out what the best type of privacy laws are worldwide as they encounter revised and new privacy frameworks in their jurisdictions. 
This is also intended as a tool for policymakers. In part because we would get asked in consultations or directly what our views were as a global trade association, so we wanted to have some sort of benchmark tool to talk about what we think a smart privacy law entails. 
I think a lot of what's in that report actually mirrors elements that Richard mentioned earlier in terms of embedding things like privacy by design, privacy impact assessments, having a law that's sector‑neutral, technology‑neutral, horizontal like the GDPR is focused on the risk of harm to individuals so that it forces organizations to really think through the privacy risk process and mitigate those risks. 
But really, what underscores our report and just our view on privacy and data flows in general is the importance of accountability. We think that's the bedrock the other elements are built on. We think accountability can facilitate data flows globally. Data flows require trust between governments and individuals, governments and companies. Privacy is a critical part of trust. Being able to demonstrate as an organization that you are doing the right thing, abiding by the law, that's what is also going to facilitate trust. This has been hugely important for us. 
Why are cross‑border data flows important to the mobile industry? In general for the digital economy they are important. You can build businesses based on your local area and have global customers both for goods and services and for our operators we are fueling through connectivity that growing global data economy. 
But our members also need to be able to send data across borders sometimes for reasons like if they have a global footprint themselves and they need to send data from one jurisdiction to another for HR purposes. Increasingly some of the elements of networks that were physical hardware becoming virtualized or cloud‑based. So we need cross‑border data flows to make it worthwhile to scale up to those more efficient cloud‑based systems which creates for consumers if those are managed effectively. These are some of the benefits.
Some of the issues that apply to mobile operators are that telecom license obligations sometimes include restrictions that prevent mobile network operators from sending data. But sometimes that's public like in India there is a universal license that includes data localization requirements. Sometimes it is a confidential requirement that the mobile operator knows about because it is a license obligation but the broader public may not know about. Also the telecom operator would have to deal with the license obligation whereas other players in the eco‑system may not. It's not an issue of wanting to lower the bar. It's like bringing the bar up for everyone in a way that's workable and facilitates data flows. We have issued a number of reports in this area. One of these reports on realizing benefits and removing barriers for cross border data flows made a number of recommendations including things like committing to cross‑border data flows and removing unnecessary localization numbers. We had recommendations similar to those in the smart data privacy laws report including removing legacy sector specific privacy rules particularly if they include localization requirements encouraging regional data privacy initiatives. So basically the regional version of some of the frameworks that Richard spoke about earlier. Making privacy frameworks more fit for the digital age, and addressing government concerns. 
We see them as different issues with different solutions. We know these are ongoing debates, particularly in the European context. The data supervisor ‑‑ the board put out guidelines on data flows post Schrems where the privacy field was invalidated. A number of recommendations in the guidelines are similar to those we have in the report that we did. In addition we have been looking at specific regional frameworks more intensely. Taking this and doing a deep dive. In ASEAN in particular starting in 2016 we started engaging with the ASEAN countries and also looking at the ASEAN privacy framework and figuring out how that can be useful for increasing privacy protections across the region and also for facilitating data flows. 
We took that and asked a detailed survey of members and governments in 2017 talking about privacy practices and talking about what would be useful for the member states and for our members in terms of facilitating data flows and best practices. We used some of the information for a report on regional privacy frameworks and cross‑border data flows. This report is quite detailed, substantive, looking at commonality between the ASEAN privacy work, other global frameworks Richard mentioned in terms of convention 108 and the OECD guidelines and mapping the privacy principles, trying to figure out how certain elements of the privacy cross border rule system could be brought in to cover the ASEAN area. One thing we landed on was the development of something called a regulatory pilot space which is a sand box specifically focused on discrete data flow issues. This is a safe space to test policy ideas and specifically looking at cross border data flows between a region that has a localization provision, for example, and one that doesn't. Or one with a more developed privacy framework, a less developed privacy framework. Basically how to bridge the gaps between frameworks and build trust between a specific set of ASEAN member states. If we look at the next slide this is a rough diagram of how this works. There is a paper that explains the space more, but basically for those of you familiar with the APEC cross‑border privacy rule, it is a lighter touch specifically between two member states to facilitate data flows between member states. 
So there are governance controls around it and there is accountability enforcement mechanism as well. This should help with trust between countries. 
But we are still working on this. We still have support from ASEAN. We are looking at the best company and companies to get it off the ground. We are still excited to have support from the region. But it is still a work in progress. 
I'll end on this slide talking about some of the work we have been looking at across Africa that we did a report which is very long. But there is also a summary to it as well. We looked at the privacy frameworks if they exist and telecom and other types of laws with privacy and data governance elements across the MENA region. We mapped those against GDPR principles. 
The idea here is to figure out, like Richard said earlier, to figure out where the principles are in common so later if you want to facilitate data flows across the region or across two or three countries specifically you can figure out where the gaps are between countries and develop some sort of accountability mechanism to be able to facilitate data flows between the countries to make sure there is trust. The interesting thing about the region is even from when we put this out in 2019 to now there are new privacy laws in the region. The Egyptian privacy law was passed after we put the report out. We know there are a few draft pieces of legislation in the region as well. This is an interesting area where things are changing and you're getting GDPR‑style rules in these different countries and different independent regulators as well. 
I'll close on that and look forward to any questions. Thank you. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Thanks, Jade. I'll come back to one of your slides on this sandbox. It would be interesting to dive deeper into that. 
I'll give the floor to you, Sean, and then we'll put up questions to Jade's presentation. 
So, Sean, we have discussed about data privacy and privacy governance. As I said in the introduction, data policies can be introduced for achieving different types of objectives. One of them is to promote and foster competition and innovation. So you work in the health sector. It would be great if you could share your experience with us on how data can be used to foster competition in that sector. 
>> SEAN MANION: Certainly. Thank you. Thank you to Lee and Agata and Kim from World Trade Organization along with IGF for having me here. I enjoy moving outside of the health sector sometimes. I think there are greater challenges and greater opportunities for growth in the health sector we can learn from. 
My name is Sean Manion. I'm a neuroscientist by training and I spent time overseeing research and got to know the pain points and opportunities to have data flow and data stoppage. 
I moved into the health tech sector in 2017, block chain technology was for me the in‑roads to looking at what could be done with emerging technology in health care. What I would like to do is introduce a new paradigm of what could be done with health data in a way that probably has implications not only on the regulatory side, but also on cooperation and competition and new opportunities in trade. The block chain technology, I'm not going into the details, but it has arisen rapidly over the last decade. Health lags behind. Something like finance or supply chain. But there are a large number of companies that have begun setting up consortiums to explore the use of the technology. 
The value proposition for using this technology in health care is greater from a consortium standpoint, sharing data to compete with other aspects of data. 
In this, it resembles so far a lot of other industries, use in supply chain, health care supply chain, use in pay and remittance, use in sharing information from provider directory has really been the baby steps or the initial look at what this technology can do. 
But health data itself is sort of the gold. That's the most valuable thing but also the most heavily regulated and sets up some of the challenges for how that data flows not only for individuals' health but also in public health crisis like we are in now with COVID‑19 along with what are the opportunities for different types of businesses to thrive in this new environment. 
When thinking about health data it is good to think about not only the regulatory compliance but the cyber security aspects, privacy aspects above and beyond those that are written into regulation and of course the bioethics and the identity of those individuals and those organizations involved in health care and health research. So it is this wider framework we keep in mind as we look at what some of the new technologies we have can do for sharing the information that's necessary but not sharing the data that's not necessary. 
This new paradigm shift, and if there is one thing you can take away from this, moving copies of data is no longer the only way to create value from that data. We are looking at how you can share knowledge and not necessarily have to move the data so that the data flow and the regulations relating to the data flow no longer become a barrier to more rapid advances in health care and health application at both population level as well as a personal level. 
In this, I will use this diagram to visualize what we are talking about. There is a tremendous amount of source data in any industry, but in health care especially. Often times people move from one locality to another or need treatment for some sort of problem in one place and need to get the data from another place. There are regulations and, you know, the GDPR in the U.S., HIPAA and many localities a variety of different privacy‑observing health regulations that can be a constraint to moving the data around, to even getting treatment with the doctor having the best data available. Of course in a public health crisis like the current pandemic, it becomes a very big barrier to advancing not only public health treatment but the innovation and some of the new creation that can come out of that. 
By looking more closely at this data and focusing on the derived data, we have a smaller set of data that if we can share this, there may be ways to advance treatment as well as business associated with innovative treatments without violating any of the regulatory barriers in place already. 
Data is becoming a very big challenge and issue in just its volume. In health care it is certainly the case that there is just a huge, huge amount of health data that's coming into play. As things get more advanced, some of the imaging. You used to get an x‑ray and that's a small amount of data. An MRI is a much larger amount of data. As more and more technology advances how we treat and how we assess health, sharing that data becomes almost impossible to do. It's not only a regulatory issue. It becomes a real world challenge in where that data is stored, how quickly you can transfer large amounts of data. 
So this new paradigm and approach is really looking at not moving data around but instead leaving data where it is and having instead of large data silos be local data repositories. Those can be tapped into in a unique way with a new array of technologies. 
Here I won't get into heavy technical depth but want to introduce three areas of technology being blockchain, privacy in depth and decentralized AI. So built on the current web 2.0, this is the foundation for in health what is being called web 3.0. 
Blockchain provides a variety of functionality. The deployment of smart contracts which are just programs to automate some analysis or quality assurance and things that would be done already in a reliable, automated and verifiable and auditable way. Bitcoin, those applications in health care becomes a much more advanced application. Here it is optional but is something people are exploring. Blockchain alone is just a rail of security and trust that different parties can tap into. The real power in deploying decentralized AI or an algorithm to the data so you don't need to move the data around and just having the derived data come back to you is where a lot of this new functionality comes from. 
Right now machine learning is very powerful, but there is a lot of challenges with the ethics of it as well as the viability of it when it comes to who touched the data, what machine learning data was used for, training the algorithm, all of these things can be open transparent and audible with the use of block chain. That's why partnering these is powerful. 
Finally in health care especially you need to preserve privacy. There is trusted execution environment when layered over the two other applications which allow you to essentially have your data lake or an individual's data lake exist across the planet and never move it outside of the local municipalities and deploying algorithms and smart contracts that can be set for the particular privacy regulations of each place where the data may sit. You can pool and derive this combined data for a population health question I may have, an individual question I may have. I think that changes the paradigm entirely of what can be done with data, how data flows can and will match the regulatory barriers that are necessarily in place and how we can do things to advance health from population to a personal level in a new and different way. 
I'll stop there and you can jump to questions for me and the others as well. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Brilliant. Thank you so much, Sean and Jade. Agata, do you have follow up questions in the Q&A? 
>> AGATA FERREIRA: Yes. Kian, there are follow up questions. There is a follow up question to Richard and there is a follow up question for Jade as well. 
Maybe I'll start with the one for Jade because Jade was talking about some framework. The question is what suggestions do you have for the framework you mentioned on how to convince countries that the data localization is not the answer to ‑‑ surveillance or law enforcement outside the contract. 
>> JADE NESTER: In terms of the foreign surveillance question, we pointed to encryption in particular in that report. I think that's something that's also been echoed in the guidance in the EU on data flows with the U.S. You know, that data needs to be ‑‑ or one of the safeguards you can apply is that it is encrypted and the key is kept in the EU. 
I think in practice as technology becomes more sophisticated a number of techniques that Sean just mentioned will actually be used more in practice. Things where you can learn from the data remotely, things like secure multi-party computation where not every party involved has access to a full data set but you can glean access from data. Things like that will be more critical. And more people will be implementing them. I think in practice, you are going to have to use some sort of cryptographic way if there is no legal basis for it basically. 
Or if, for example, in the use case it was deemed disproportionate. In terms of the law enforcement element of it in the report we mentioned things like the effort in the U.S. to advance the cloud act and cloud act agreements in various countries. Basically some sort of improved version of the mutual legal assistance treaty framework. 
In the EU there's been an effort to look at the E‑evidence process, basically even within the EU the process to get information from one country to another and from service providers in different EU states and there are still issues in terms of streamlining the process and making it effective. And to prevent service providers from being basically deputized by law enforcement to assess the legality of requests. That's not a position that we want to be in where service providers are having to evaluate every request. So there does need to be some sort of better centralized way of dealing with it. The short answer is it is up to, in that case stakeholders to work with governments to try to push them in the right direction and to figure out something that works in the governmental level. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Thanks, Jade. Let's take a couple of questions. Agata, do you have more follow up questions in the Q&A? 
>> AGATA FERREIRA: There are quite a few follow up questions. I think one that is quite interesting relates to unfair competition. Victoria is asking whether data protection laws are also a way for privacy‑friendly countries to prevent dumping and unfair competition so they are established in less privacy‑friendly countries that they could offer services for free at the lower prices because of increased opportunities to monetize without the consent of the user. So that is the question that relates to the unfair competition that some countries may be facing from those bigger companies from other jurisdictions. 
I guess that's the question to all panelists, but particularly to Richard, think. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Richard, if I may, we'll take more questions and then open the floor. 
>> RICHARD SYERS: Sure, sorry. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: I'm sorry to interrupt you, Richard. I see a few questions for Sean. 
>> AGATA FERREIRA: Yes, there have been a couple of questions. One that relates to Sean is about opening access to data. The question talks about data flow concerns, the social, commercial and political value of data. The tension remains because of how various geographies access and share valuable data. While various actors share data liberally in matters concerning health or environment in technology and commerce there are various barriers to sharing. 
So the question is what work is the internet community doing on opening up access to all data that must be global? 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Okay. 
>> AGATA FERREIRA: There is another one which I can follow up straight away to Sean. Sean, are you suggesting that companies will adjust to data localization in the health sector by localizing AI processing? And can you provide concrete examples of companies or coalitions that implemented decentralized AI? 
>> SEAN MANION: Certainly. I'm sure there are more outside of health care. But to the last question first. Owkin is one of the leaders in deploying federated learning or decentralized AI in health care and health research in both Europe and the U.S. The melody consortium mentioned on my first slide which is a host of different pharma companies in the U.S. and in Europe are also looking at how it deploys decentralized AI and in this case they are using the more advanced combination with blockchain for the auditability. 
What we are doing and we are precommercial and our partners unfortunately aren't able to disclose at this point, but in spring of 2021 we should be launching our product and have a little bit more public discussion. But what we are doing is bringing this extra layer of privacy in. 
In all those instances you are starting to see the exploration especially in research, the health research allows for the consenting. Moving to other questions, whether or not you are getting the deployment of these algorithms locally so the data doesn't need to move, yes, it is happening in a very early stage. I think companies are looking at the reality both because of regulatory challenges and also because of the volume of data and looking to do this more and more. 
One of the interesting questions, and I didn't have a chance to go into this in this short presentation, but the question of, you know, access to the data and especially the imbalance in regulations across countries. 
One of the things that we are looking to do and we spoke at a U.N. general assembly‑related event recently and unveiled what we call the health utility grid is to deploy this type of data access but also patient data control. Individuals controlling their own data as a new type of utility and a new type of way to empower both the individuals, particularly in instances where there's been historic discrimination or health disparities to see if we cannot empower those individuals to be the ones who control access. 
I don't envision everyone on the planet will immediately want access and control of their own health data. Many don't want to be bothered. It may create a system like you have a bank to control your money, you may have health banks to control your data. And you can apply certain settings in this futuristic scenario I'm laying out of who gets access to your data and also when you get recompensated for it. 
You know, I may only allow pharma companies who reached a certain threshold of ethical responsibility to access my data. I may only allow those companies who are giving me some share of profits if it is a successful drug discovery to access my data. Putting the access of data in the hands of the individual rather than controlling it by the access of necessarily each company or each municipality will level the playing field. But also open up new types of opportunity for competition because if you've got that sort of framework and structure of fairness, if you will, but also wide open access, if you can make the pitch for, hey, I have a new company that's trying to gain access to people because I want to look at those with this behavioral profile and bring new treatment to market. Groups may be more interested in sharing data with me, small company, than some big company that has questionable uses of data and reselling data and problems in the past. So I think we are able to flip the dynamic and it started to happen in real world practice. It's going to take a little while. 
>> SEAN MANION: Wonderful. Richard, I will give you the floor, but I want to stress to the audience that if you would like to make a comment or ask a question orally we can turn on your microphone. So please let us know in the chat box whether or not you would like to intervene as well to share your perspective and experience with us. 
Richard, you had a question, I think. 
>> RICHARD SYERS: Thank you. Just to confirm, the question addressed to me was the one about a way to prevent ‑‑ 
>> AGATA FERREIRA: Competition. 
>> RICHARD SYERS: Yes. So I'll presume that's coming from the angle of preventing unfair competition from other countries who don't have privacy law. I'm sorry. I wasn't sure whether that was coming from the angle does it create a barrier to competition or is it good for competition. 
Very much we would say, of course, if you have services ‑‑ you know, the starting point if you like, in Europe at least, is that the individuals have a fundamental right to privacy, a fundamental right to data protection. That's a right that must be respected by anyone offering services to citizens of those countries. So if you are a company operating in a different country that doesn't have those privacy standards but you are targeting your services then the GDPR says you must comply. Those are the standards to comply with if you want to offer services to EU citizens. 
So I don't think it would be a good thing to allow countries without those privacy standards to offer services that can benefit if you like from using data in a way that they don't have to comply with the standards. I think the standards are important. 
I think what I would go back to because I know one of the questions in the chat was about not every country has the same cultural values when it comes to privacy. There are countries where perhaps people are more willing to share the data. The importance is that the individual has the choice. They can choose and make an informed choice about the services they use, which data is used at part of the services. Of course it has to be a recognition on the privacy side of things that some services, there is a value exchange there. You can't offer service for free effectively. If you're not paying for it, you are paying for it somehow and that's through the use of your data. The important thing is if that's what a company is doing, they are clear and transparent with individuals about what data is being used, how it is used and the individual has the choice and they can make the choice. 
As I mentioned in my presentation poor privacy practices won't give you a competitive advantage in the long run. If anything, they are going to give your competitors who offer better privacy protections an advantage.
Ultimately reputation is important and I think people are more aware of how their data is being used. So I think people will stop choosing services if they realize the services are not treating their data in a way that's appropriate 
But of course that relies on transparency and the law is there to ensure those organizations provide transparency in how the data is used. I hope that answers the question. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Just to back up, Victoria's question is interesting. I'll give you an example. Yesterday we had a discussion with an E‑commerce platform in Latin America which is the equivalent of Amazon. They are adopting what they call binding corporate rules. That's a term used in the GDPR as well. Those are corporate privacy guidelines. Any supplier using the E‑commerce platform would have to abide with these corporate privacy guidelines regardless of where they operate in this jurisdiction. 
So to Victoria's question I answer ‑‑ to give you an example. It is not the real case. But if Chile has a low privacy regulation but a Chilean company wants to sell a product through the E‑commerce platform it would have to comply with MercadoLibre. They promote sellers even in a jurisdiction where you have low privacy standards.
Please don't record that I have ‑‑ I'm not judging Chilean privacy standards.
I'm sure they are really strong. It was just an example. 
So we'll take more questions from the audience. No one wants to intervene, make a comment to ask questions orally? We can turn on your mic. Let us know in the chat box. 
In the meantime, I will ask the questions if you have speakers to ask between each other based on the presentations you have heard from the others. 
>> AGATA FERREIRA: There is a follow up question in Q&A that refers to what you were saying. It's about balancing ‑‑ how do you balance different views and concepts. It's a question from Imran. Is there different views of the concepts of trust and accountability and different approaches that some societies don't mind data being shared because that's their culture. 
By focusing so much on data privacy in the con equity the of globalization of data privacy how do you balance those different approaches? 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Interesting question. Do we have more questions from the speakers themselves? 
>> AGATA FERREIRA: We have a question for Jade from jack who asked would you argue that encrypted data should be considered similar to good content type of respecting data should be then irrelevant? 
>> JADE NESTER: So I think what kind of data it is important in this preassessment process or pretransfer assessment process. Because if it is personal data that you're transferring you should have been, I think at this point regardless of the framework, you know, you should be thinking through the risks associated with the data transfer. So certain protections would be applied to the data which you probably should have already thought about before it is encrypted. 
If you're encrypting it that's not necessarily going to mean you're going to do a better job if it is high risk data. You should be doing a good job regardless and making sure that's implemented correctly. If it is high risk data there are other governance controls in terms of access controls and access to the key controls where there is a heightened requirement depending on the type of data. 
If you are talking about it in terms of a trade angle it's interesting ‑‑ and I don't know if this is a solid answer ‑‑ but I was interested in a point made earlier in the Q&A about data localization applied to nonpersonal data because there was a leaked version of a potential European commission recommendation or rather a new proposal on data governance. It mentioned localization of data including potentially nonpersonal data. 
A lot of people said that potentially violated WTO rules. So in your question about what kind of data it is ‑‑ the content type should be irrelevant, I wonder in that case how do you apply a privacy exception under WTO rules if the data is encrypted and you don't actually know if you are dealing with personal or nonpersonal data on the technical level. 
So that's sort of I think a slightly wonky trade point but something I thought of in the context of that question. 
In short, I don't know for sure, but it does seem like the content type once it is in transit isn't as important and maybe could be considered goods. I don't know. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Thanks, Jade. Alexandra? Can you turn on the microphone? 
>> Okay. You can do this also. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: That's true. Okay. In the meantime, Richard and Sean, I think, want to address Imran's questions on the cultural dimensions or differences in terms of privacy. 
>> RICHARD SYERS: Thanks, Kian. I would echo the point I made earlier that choice is the important point. So I think it is a good point and one we recognize that different cultures in different countries are will have different approaches to privacy. They are coming at things from a different historical background, a different optic they see these issues through. 
Europe is very much from a post‑war human rights background that data protection law comes from. So there is much more sensitivity to those issues than other countries. 
The point is if you have a service operating in different countries and it uses the choice over ‑‑ the more control you can give to the individual over how much information they share, the better it is. If an individual is happy for the information to be shared happy to make the trade‑off if you like between the service they receive and more personalized service for example because they are happy to share more activity data as opposed to somebody who would rather have a less personalized service but they can keep the privacy. By having the controls built in with privacy dashboards and things like that, I think that's a good way of addressing that. By giving individuals the choice of how much they share and how the data is used and clearly explaining what it means so they can make an informed choice, that's a good way of tackling differences between different cultures. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Sean? 
>> SEAN MANION: You know, you have said 90% of what I wanted to say. That was perfect. Just adding that from the individual choice perspective I think the array of technologies we have at our disposal already being deployed will allow for that level of personalized privacy and of course countries in the United States ‑‑ California has a different level of privacy settings than other states based on laws just passed. We'll get that smaller to the individual level, being able to set privacy settings and change them. I might be going through a health problem where I want more privacy than I wanted yesterday. I should be able to readjust those privacy settings as I choose so each individual is empowered to do that and each individual is empowered to do it as they choose when they choose. It becomes more of a personal choice than a governmental choice. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Over to you, Bertrand. 
>> Thank you very much for the good panel. I want to thank Jade for having picked my question. There is a lot of debate around the notion of digital sovereignty, data sovereignty becoming a buzzword in the international environment. As she mentioned the European union including commissioner is using things like European data must be stored and processed in Europe. There doesn't seem to be a particular distinction between personal data or privacy protection and other types of data. I think it is a very important element to take into account in the discussion because we address most of that in terms of personal data where it might make sense in a certain number of cases under certain conditions but when we are talking about industrial data it is not necessarily the case. The notion of the paradigm shift in value location. The location of the data is now less and less relevant. What matters is control, access and value creation. The fact that you don't have to share the data, there are APIs, ways to access especially nonpersonal data that changes the economics of the data environment. I think one of the challenges is that a lot of the thinking about this data sovereignty is anchored still and when it is dealt with in the concept of trade it's about moving big chunks of data as if it were traditional goods that are rival instead of having the opportunity to query across borders. It's a completely different type of question. 
So I just wanted to broaden the scope a little bit. We have a mental framework that's sometimes anchored in very traditional notions of sovereignty, territoriality and moving the data as big blocks from one country to the other whereas most of the case it's not the charge. Thank you very much, it's a very interesting panel. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Thank you very much, Bertrand, for these insights. Who wants to reply to that. Sean? 
>> SEAN MANION: To the extent we are talking about health, I think the shift in mental framework is important. It takes a while to get that shift into the legislation and interpretation in the past. The internet past is relatively brief in the legislative past but it is still the case that we are arming legislators with only sledgehammers and buzzsaws. They don't have the fine surgical precision or understanding. When they talk about all European data must be housed in Europe and all processing must be housed that needs to be dissected in the types of data and in the types of processing and what you are defining processing. It takes a lot of communication and education both in forming those legislators what tools are at their disposal and what is available as well as the public so they know and understand that, you know, you don't need to use the tools you use to build a house in order to do the surgery that's necessary in the current environment with data. 
I think that mental framework shift has to happen on a lot of levels and education is key. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Do we have more questions in YouTube or in the chat box? 
>> Nothing on YouTube. 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: Agata? 
>> AGATA FERREIRA: There is a very related question to what's been discussed that in the long‑term perspective looking at data flow in general will there be a distinction between personal data protected by privacy law and other data subject to all types of other regulation and national intrusion? 
>> KIAN CASSEHGARI: I think we'll stop there so the speakers can add a last point. We'll provide the slides that will be uploaded on the IGF website. 
So I turn now to the speakers to know if you would like to have a last point before we close the meeting. 
>> JADE NESTER: I'll make one point on the nonpersonal data point. In the context of COVID‑19 when mobile operator aggregated and anonymized so nonpersonal data was used for research to see the spread of COVID and plan a possible spread we emphasized that even though we are talking about nonpersonal data accountability is still important. I think that's a way to think about it that it's not necessarily in a way running to figure out which framework has to apply. In general the data needs to be accountable that the parties involved need to be accountable. There needs to be governance between the parties. 
>> RICHARD SYERS: I think one of the interesting points in the conversation about localization is looking at the incentives for localization. Why do people want to start making data more localized and having to be kept in a specific territory. It's a good thing to think about. What are the ways of removing the incentives for people to localized data. If it is a worry over access and law enforcement access to data does more common principles, more standards in terms of agreed approaches to how you access how law enforcement and how national security data can be accessed. Is that a way of removing that comes from a fear you don't trust what will happen with the data. The more trust there is and what the standards are that everyone is complying with, the less incentive there is at a localization. There will be countries that take an approach that we feel we should get the benefit.
(End 11am CT)
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-ws247-icts-sdgs-and-existing-data-gaps-for-measuring-progress^^

 
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Vincent, are we ready to begin?
>> Yes.  Go on.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Well, thank you, everyone, for joining us on our workshop today at the Internet Governance Forum on the role of ICT and achieving Sustainable Development Goals and existing data gaps for measuring progress.  My name is Christopher Yoo from University ofpencil vaina and I lead a initiative called One World Collected and has a goal of collecting as much data as possible as innovative ways to bring more people online and to try to make ‑‑ to try to build a data ‑‑ a central point of data to be collected in a way that allows comparisons across projects so we can learn from what has been done in the past to improve what we've done in the future.
Obviously, our interests in learning from what is going on is the inspiration for this panel and we are pleased and deleted to have three experts who are acutely aware of the wonderful things that we can do with data in terms of closing the digital divide, but also are very well aware of the limits of the current data and what more needs to be done.  And we are very grateful to have them here to share their expertise with us today.  In no particular order, alphabetical speakers are Anne Delaporte of Connected Women Program for GSMA.  Ain tona Garcia gab he will yoas works for and Lorrayne Parciuncula, my apologize, who is director of the Data and Jurisdiction Program at Internet and Jurisdiction and for those of you who know her, Lorrayne, you may have known her and she recently left the position as economist and policy analyst on communications, infrastructure, and services at the Digital Economy and Policy Division of the OECD.
So we have three very distinguished experts working with data trying to understand and make recommendations and investments and guiding how we're actually making positive action to close the digital divide.
So we would like to have 60 minutes with panelists and open the floor to questions and answers at the end.
I'll introduce you so let's just start by the way, Anne, let's start with the basic question of why is data so important?  Why does everyone always talk about this as a key need to closing the digital divide?  You're still on mute, Anne.
   >> ANNE DELAPORTE:  I will say three things.  First like to measure success, to measure success and impact of what achieves the Sustainable Development Goals, I think that's what I'm here for.  But also like to inform decisions because without data you can't set objective, you can't make a decision, and I think that sets of what we're trying to do is helping to track data, monitor data to then to be able to make a decision and as well as policymakers.  And the third one is to reduce inequalities, so using data to improve the life of people in working in mobile industries and using data to close the digital divide to reduce inequalities in gender, so, yeah, to me that's the three reasons why we need data.
>> You're on mute.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  I made the same ‑‑ I followed the same pattern from Anne.  I learn from the best.  Antonio, how about you?  You're interested in data so why is it important for the decision‑making of your work?
   >> ANTONIO GARCIA ZABELLOS:  Thank you very much, Christopher, and thank you very much for the opportunity of being here with you all.  Do you know, whenever we are designing as Anne was mentioning before, whenever we're designing a public policy on a specific intervention, in our particular country, we have to understand where is the market failure and it's very difficult to understand the type of market failure or type of interventions we need to do unless we have a clear understanding of what is it and what are the main challenges that the country is facing.
So having access to that data, to that information, will not only provide us with very useful information that allows us to establish a status quo of what is the starting point, but also we should be the specific policies and regulations that we need to define either in terms of regulation, either in terms of increasing the level playing field competition, or moreover, even to identify which is the infrastructure gap and what could be the potential financing of the potential policy reforms that are needed in that particular country or region in order for them to catch up with the rest of the country and the rest of the regions around the world.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So I find both of your answers fascinating in one sense.  It's figuring out what to do but then also to measure it.  I know you have to scope the actual intervention but I know from my previous work with you, Antonio, after interventions in one country you often discuss with other countries to show what you learn from the previous efforts to show how we can benefit and leverage the benefits into the future and that's a critical role that that plays, and that's again the first thing Anne said, we need to learn how to measure success and not just targeted interventions but figure out how to do things and do things better.
Lorrayne, over to you.
   >> LORRAYNE PARCIUNCULA:  It's a pleasure to be here with this group of friends and experted, so why data is important?  So as humans we like using analogies, right.  So one could be that data is a new sunshine or new air.  And for me because of my background in infrastructure regulation, I like saying that data is an underlying infrastructure for so many things.
But mostly, it is a key asset everywhere for social and economic development.  For business it's about value creation, to improve business decisions, new services, product, and entirely new business models.  For governments it's to inform policymaking, and in academia it's to produce knowledge.  Data is different than knowledge in itself, right.  And for Civil Society, data is important for empowerment, either individual or collective.  So in a nutshell data is very important.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So I think you all made a powerful case about why it's so critical.  When you come to meetings you constantly here we need more data, there is not enough data.  So let's go back the other way, Lorrayne, having said it so wonderfully, if it's so important and you all agree to this, so why is it so hard to get and why do we have not enough?
   >> LORRAYNE PARCIUNCULA:  I think, so starting from a more granular perspective, it's that there is a lack of standardization of several indicators, and in my previous role as an economist in the OECD, I would see that especially in countries that were not part of the OECD membership, the actually comparing different datasets, and so just we end up using very generic indicators to compare countries, such as Internet users or Internet usage in that case, but then the experience of the Internet is much more granular than just if someone is using the Internet or not, and a lot of the data that we have is just very basic in terms of being online or offline, and as Antonio was saying, a lot of the market failures, I mean, you need more information to understand what are the bottlenecks there for access and usage of technology.
But then beyond the issue of standards, and I think one of the reasons of those issues is that the lack of the required institutional framework in terms of the mandate that regulators may have to collect certain kinds of data, the clear plan and action to use that data, and what for, and an institutional framework to actually have a plan to do informed and evidence‑based policymaking.
In terms of traditional providers, especially when we're talking about Internet and ICTs, I think at that the issue of the mandate is resolved in many developed countries, especially, but for example when we're going in items of trying to understand what is the issue of Internet usage and the data that Internet companies may have and OTTs, that's not really the case.  There isn't a mandate of regulators and policymakers to collect that kind of data.
And on another level, beyond the issue of standards and the issue of institutional framework, there is also the lack of capacity and human capacity both from the technical side of dealing with this data and also in terms of the policy side because you actually need policy people to be able to bridge these two worlds in terms of understanding what kind of information and data knowledge is needed to inform policy.
Finally in the last dimension, there is ‑‑ there is a lack of cooperation between stakeholders, and we are in the IGF, in a multistakeholder forum, so it's always important to talk about that in terms of the cooperation between international and regional organizations and governments and service providers, Civil Society and academia for you actually to be able to bridge those issues in terms of standards, institutions, capacity, et cetera, so that's a first thought on that.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Antonio, your thoughts, please.
   >> ANTONIO GARCIA ZABELLOS:  Yeah, thank you, Christopher.  I totally agree with Lorrayne.  I would say this is probably a mix of capabilities and incentives.  Let me just explain and elaborate a little bit more of this.
When it's about the institutional level, one of the things that we have observed is that, for instance, regulators, even those sometimes don't have the mandate and they're lacking the capabilities to collect and gather those datas.  Moreover, they're lacking capabilities to even analyze that data.
So let's say that there is one specific problem as related to the capabilities and the institutionalty framework to somehow endorse the mandate of regulators and institutions to request that information and eventually analyze and provide some conclusions out of that.
So from that end, we have identified two major concerns.  The first one is as Lorrayne was mentioning is precisely the institutional framework of how to make the institutions really capable of requesting that information and having the strong mandate to at times actually introduce some sort of fines or on the industry as a whole whenever they're not fulfilling with their mandate.
On the other side, we have another issue that is related to the mandate and the capabilities to analyze and take advantage of that information with the design and implementation of particular policies, so from that end there is quite a lot of, let's say, quite a lot of areas of actions that we may consider.
But also, there is a mix, and I was mentioning before as related to incentives.  Sometimes it happens that the private sector as such, they are very comfortable in the area in which they are providing businesses, and for them to provide, let's say, data and information on a particular area of the business, it's not right im, they understand that they don't get anything out of that beyond more regulation, beyond more implementation of particular actions that are going against the P and L and so on and so forth.  And so probably here there is a lack of incentives in a sense that probably there is a missing link between the national strategies and that the government as a whole are having and the objectives that the private sector does have in order for them to precisely establish this sort of matching between what the government wants to do and what the private sector may get out of that particular strategy, so there is also an issue related to incentives that we have observed that makes the gathering of that information a bit complicated.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Anne?
   >> ANNE DELAPORTE:  I agree with Lorrayne and Antonio have said.  I think on that I would add the idea that, you know, we talk about data, more data, more data, more data, but I think it's also part of like what ‑‑ it's not only about collecting data but it's collecting the right data for actually the right purpose, and often we collect too many data and we've come back to capabilities as well of like private sector, government, et cetera, how you get that together to actually understand which indicators are important, what data I will need to measure progress, to track whatever indicator we want.
And a lot of times it's also like a very top‑down approach where it's more like I would say institutional organizations who want data but local governments don't necessarily see the value of it, and getting back to them like and making them understand why it's needed and often that seems like coming of this data and often we don't have the capacity to understand why they need to do it and don't see the value of it.  And in the same way with the private sector, you know, I've been working a lot on understanding the gender gap in mobile Internet, mobile news in general and it's really working with operators to make them understand the value of it, commercial perspective and social perspective, and so really bringing back like why do I need to collect the data is something that I would add to the rest of it so far of why it's difficult to produce data.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So what's also fascinating to me in the work that we're doing, the way international organizations are often constructed, they often can gather a great deal of data, but they can't analyze it in a very hard‑knowed way.  They can't pick winners and losers, if you will, and identify successes and failures as easily.
You often see samples as related to systematic analysis because they have constituencies and members with sensitives that don't want to be told.  No one wants to say it's better than this, this is better than that.  We found that many international organizations we worked with were delighted to have someone with some distance from that to be able to make those kind of analyses and claims.
So this has been great in principle.  I want to ask you both, all three of you a question.  Which is, do you ‑‑ we've set the stage of the need, we have the problems, so can you think of examples that were particularly good examples of when you got the data you needed?  Is there an innovative way or ways to solve this problem that you've seen that obviously we have the reporting by governments, we ask companies for data, man tree reporting to regulators, but is there ‑‑ can you help us with thinking through solutions of not just the problem stories but possibly some success stories or some positive stories about when we actually asked for more data or tried to get more data and succeeded?
   >> ANTONIO GARCIA ZABELLOS:  Well, let me just say if I may, and Lorrayne, let me give you a real example that is happening these days.  At this moment of time we are precisely having conversations with the Government of Jamaica, and they are very keen on improving the level of digitalization that the country is facing, so in response to your question, I would say that ‑‑ I would say like kind of a systematic methodology that in order for it to really be successful, we need to align the interest of the public and private sector.
So first point I want to stress in here is that we don't have a clear strategy, a clear idea or where do we go as a country, then it's going to be very difficult to convince the private operators, for instance if we're talking about the telecom sectors to provide you with that data.  You know, so the first thing is that we need to have that strategy of where we are, and what are the targets that we want to achieve.
The second thing is that we have to understand as well the market dynamics, in a sense that know what it is and we are serving and the number of users or the private sector is going down, and the level of requirements in terms of investment for new technology, but even investment for operational maintenance remains pretty high, so it implies also that the telecom operators are facing some additional difficulties, and you know there is a public role that we have to understand.
So in this particular situation of Jamaica, what we have done is come up with a new strategy that is defining with layers and layers of data, and first by identifying which is the infrastructure, not only telecom but also infrastructure coming from utility, and second identify the location of different institutions, schools, hospitals, police stations, and certain public services that know what it is, they need to account the situations that we are facing because of the COVID, you know it's very important first to understand where are they located and second how far they are from those particular infrastructures, in such a way that even in situations of emergency or in situations in which we need to provide particular services or connectivity, we can identify which is the most cost‑efficient way in which we can provide those services, so that would be like the second layer.
And the third layer, it would be very much related to what are the technical specifications or what are the requirements in terms of technology that those particular locations are going to request, and so in order for us to do that, there is a piece of information that we need to collect from the government and there is a piece of information which is critical that only telecom operators and other utility companies to provide.  And only by doing that we'll be able to come up with a sound problem that is identifying the infrastructure gap on the policies that could be fully in place in order for those public locations to be connected and overcome pandemic situations like the one that we are facing.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Fascinating.  Anne, please?
   >> ANNE DELAPORTE:  So to add to what Antonio is saying, I think you asked for an example of where the data is collected and works show and I think what we're doing in terms of infrastructure, we develop coverage maps, and so understanding and having really granular data that will help operators roll out cost‑effective networks in other areas, and in order to do that it's really getting, in each country, it's getting operators to give us their data so that we can do these coverage maps and that requires other stakeholders and regulations and governments ‑‑ ICT, et cetera, to get to that.  And I think we started with like two countries and with coverage gaps, eight last year and now we have I think 15 countries that have been mapped in Africa, and so this really helps like not only to ‑‑ it's kind of like a circle where we need coverage data to be able to understand where we need to get more coverage and that is also like helping get us better data because obviously of all the ICT way of like connecting ‑‑ or using ICT to survey, so that is kind of like we need to know what is covered, what is not covered, and then like able to collect your data.
So, anyway, so a way to say that it's just not only for operators to what is covered but also NGOs and government to better target the activities and that's I think has been a very good example of like a good collaboration across different stakeholders to get to that level.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Lorrayne, do you have any thoughts?
   >> LORRAYNE PARCIUNCULA:  I like that we're among peers here talking about telecom, so it's just easy to bridge the different discussions.  I'm going to echo what Antonio eloquently put.  I think that the issue ‑‑ I like the point that Antonio made about incentives, and I think I would add to that a dimension of trust.  I think it's very important, in addition to this alignment of objectives, is to foster trust between these different actors in a framework for cooperation.  And you asked for examples, and I can think about countries views that I worked on which is Mexico and Brazil, and a while ago operators in Mexico would give the data that they had on a printed sheet in font 8 for the operator, and they would have to type in the computer, and I'm not talking that this happened 10 years ago.  It happened 6 years ago.  So I mean, it's just ‑‑ it's very recent this change, and it took, okay, a constitutional reform in Mexico to change the institutional framework there and to give more power to the regulator so it wouldn't be questioned in the courts every single time that it decided to collect more data or to implement its decisions, but it also took this building of trust between stakeholders.
And I think it's important to have this alignment, especially so the private sector knows what the data is being used for and that it's being used in a responsible way, and that the decisions can be accounted for.  So, I mean, in the example of Brazil, for example, small ISPs are a regulated by a different sort of service framework.  What happens is the regulator did until very recently and it's just finishing compiling this basic coverage map on Internet connectivity in the country because they weren't the traditional teleco operators so that meant there was a lot of patches in the method they had of connectivity, and ultimately, that had negative effects for ISPs and I'm going to explain why.  The regulator was promoting remedies for microfailures in specific regions where in their ‑‑ in their view, there was no Internet connectivity.
So what happened is that those particular regions and municipalities were actually receiving sort of subsidies to ‑‑ so that big telecos would come and invest in their networks in those places that already had pretty descent and good coverage, but from small ISPs where the regulators didn't have any data from.
So, actually, by not providing data, they were actually having or being ‑‑ having to compete with big players that were receiving subsidies from the government, and they thought that there was no service there.  So, I mean, now that you're actually building these connections and this trust and this understanding that that's why we need the data for, and if we actually know that you're there and you're providing the service, you're not going to be among ‑‑ you're not going to be placed among the regions of Brazil without any connectivity.
So, I mean, it takes, I think awareness and the building of trust in identifying the players and identifying what the policy objectives are there, and so I just wanted to add this dimension to this discussion on telecoms, which is that, yes, creating incentives, creating institutional framework, but making sure that this is done in a way to foster trust among players.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So you're talking about how to foster trust among these small ISPs, and explaining to them why it's important that they support providing data.  Is that correct, Lorrayne?
   >> LORRAYNE PARCIUNCULA:  Yes.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So that's an interesting idea, and especially these smaller deployments, if they've got a lot of work to do and the idea of providing data to the government is not ‑‑ they have to see the clear cost‑benefit analysis to make that go, is what I take you're saying.  If they understand that, that makes it work better.
What about the larger telecos, the larger providers, the incumbents?  You know, Antonio, Lorrayne, and Anne you've all talked about aligning incentives, so in the real ‑‑ I mean, let's get down to it.  How do you align the incentives for an incumbent?  Because I know even when a service provider is trying to do some experiment of having supporting innovative ways to connect more people whether it's zero‑rating or something else, they're providing the support and they can't get information out of the actual partner provider that they're using, so how do you overcome the reluctance, the understandable reluctance of private companies, larger providers, to engage in this?
Because an Antonio said, they have to look at their responsibilities to look at the request for information and say, how will this help my organization, and that's the most profound incentive alignment problem that we have, for those people.  Can you give me an example of how people have overcome these kind of barriers?
   >> ANTONIO GARCIA ZABELLOS:  Well, I will take the lead here.  Do you know, I think what Lorrayne was mentioning, it makes a lot of sense to me in a sense that incentives at the end of the day comes out of a situation in which you are going to win something.  Let's put it in a very simple way.  So, telecom operators, the way in which any other private company is working, they decide to deploy, attend, and provide particular areas whenever that they are going to get a particular region.  So it is not about social return, in the case of the private sector, it's about financial return in most of the cases.
So, the incentives in there is that, again, whenever that you are designing a strategy to, for instance, allocating particular subsidies, it's very important that the way in which you decide and design that particular option, for instance, to provide services in those particular locations, you focus on giving precisely those subsidies in those areas that at this moment in time, let's say the financial return is clearly negative.
So unless that is not happening, the operators will not be interested in going, and we do have some experiences in situations where, you know, either the telecom regulators are defining building processes associated to location of frequency bands that eventually remain, you know, not attended by the private sector because of the conditions that they're put in, or even we have situations when they are launching particular auctions to allocate those subsidies that, again, the way in which they were designed is not precisely aligned with what the expectation of the private sector is.  That's why I said at the very beginning that it's very important to understand what is exactly what you want to achieve.
And in doing that, you will be able to design those bidding processes and auctions in such a way that you take advantage of that.  This is what is about subsidies, but even if it's about creating a special vehicle with a participation of a public and private sector, the same thing is going to happen.  You have to create, let's say, this telecom operator that is going to be formed with contributions from the public and contributions from the private, and the governance model and incentives that you're going to give to each of the stakeholder has to be aligned with those objectives that they have in terms of financial and economic return, especially taking into account, and I want toinsist very much the situations that the private telecom operators are facing these days.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So, Anne, if I can draw you in.  GSMA has made coverage maps, so I imagine you have similar problems.  So how do you convince people to contribute the information to the coverage maps, and are there challenges, how do you align the incentives to get people to cooperate?
   >> ANNE DELAPORTE:  That's a very good question.  And I am not the one who is dealing with that, so I can only talk to you about my personal experience, and again what Antonio was saying really about the commercial opportunity and potentially, you know, like most of the people that are not connected are in rural, remote areas.  I mean, when you look at the figures, you know, like in Africa, like 25% of the population is not covered by any network and they're in rural areas.
So what is commercial for operators, and so in terms of our like showing them that there is value to invest of these areas comes to trust as what Lorrayne was saying early, like to share data that's quite sensitive, so it's really about like we aggregate all the data that we have and it's a lot of like building this trust relationship with your operators so that they are willing to share it with us because it's, yeah.
So but then on the microlevel, I wouldn't be able to tell you in details of like how, you know, what's happening.  But there is definitely like also role for governance to play and in talking about operators of the importance of doing that to social benefit as well, but yeah.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So think, I think, a perfect segue.  Someone mentioned before about the role of the government.  How do you work with governments to ‑‑ what kinds of challenges do you need to do to get them to provide data?  Or as someone said, you talk about to change the data they collect or how do you work with them to get them to see the information that they have, and you acknowledge as a critical component of the information that decision‑makers need?  How do we work with governments to get them to support providing data?  I know in my experience, governments are always worried about privacy concerns, data protection concerns, and that it's a tough one because we don't actually need individual‑level data.  We need much higher levels of aggregation.  Are this ways that we can work with governments to make it easier to get to yes or to change their systematic ways they're going about things to try to improve decision‑making that you need to make or help us connect more of the world?
   >> LORRAYNE PARCIUNCULA:  Maybe I can jump in there because I think it's exactly the point that I wanted to make in the previous session as well in terms of how can we get the government to help the private sector with data that they have as well, and I think there are interesting examples around the world where data has been responsible for reducing the cost of deployment for the private sector, and so I'll give you an example from Mexico as well.  They have a pilot project that works pretty much like AirBnb of rooftops, so what they did is they were able to compile an inventory of rooftops of government buildings so that operators could actually deploy antennas, and we know the bottleneck that it is antenna deployment around the entire region of Latin American and Caribbean and many other countries.  In Brazil it's a very big challenge as well.
But at the same time, a lot of governments don't even have an inventory of all of their official buildings that they have, so I mean, it goes again to the problem of capability that we're talking about in the previous question, and also about what was commented in the chat about the cost of doing that.  And sometimes, I mean, we have a lot of possible applications of AI and neurnetwork and satellite images and all of that trying to understand where the unconnected are, trying to make sure that you have models that improve and optimize transport networks and are also a big cause for deployment, but at the end of the day a lot of this bottleneck especially in developing countries, comes in terms of the fact that you simply don't have lists of what is an inventory of a government.
And when we go further than that, we can also think about not only interoperability of datasets but also interoperability of regulatory frameworks and incentives, and I mean in the literature of connecting the unconnected, one of the good practices is fostering initiatives in terms of when you deploy, one particular infrastructure, you deploy a connectivity infrastructure as well in the fiber, and that's one of the big costs for that, so if you're actually able to facilitate to the private sector in terms of accessing data that is available around public infrastructure or the infrastructure that is already there, but the ones that are planned for the future, you're actually creating these incentives in terms of sharing ‑‑ sharing more information and knowledge among the different stakeholders, but your question wasn't how do we make sure that governments do that.  And I think it's about, again, increasing ‑‑ I mean, improving the institutional framework and regulatory frameworks around the world which sometimes are still stuck into legacy patterns and they haven't really moved into being more streamlined and more simplified, and sometimes it's just a patchwork or very old and legacy legislation.
But at the same time, making sure that this is a priority in terms of doing evidence‑based policymaking and not only to facilitate to the private sector to their job and to invest, but also to improve accountability processes from other parts of the society and economy.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Antonio or Anne do you have any thoughts?
   >> ANNE DELAPORTE:  Yeah.  I think that whenever that we have been requested information to the governments (this is Antonio), they're always requesting some sort of MBAs, these agreements in such a way that they feel protected about the misuse of that information, and I have to admit though in the case of IDB, those governments at the end of the day they're part of us, they're shareholders for the bank, and we already have let's say by definition, MDAs with all of them since they are having participations from the bank, so it makes sometimes that information request easier, but the incentives at the end of the day and it's very much related to DNA of our bank and interventions and we are not working ‑‑ we are not intervening in a particular country just because we want.  We are intervening because there is a demand or request from those countries, and they already understand that in order for us to design those projects, in order for us to support them throughout the implementation and execution, there will have to provide some information and some data.  Right.  So I can tell you that I have observed a change in the pattern in the last 10 months with respect to the previous time, let's say to the pre‑COVID time, and these days the countries that are approaching us, they understand that if they really want to have a sound project, well designed and with a specific indicators that eventually can be tracked throughout the lifetime of the project, they need to provide data and they have to provide information.
And in this regard, I mean, in all the conversations that I've had so far with the different governments in the region, in Latin America, I can tell you that they are very keen on providing that data andI haven't seen so many cases in which they're requesting this nondisclosure agreement, no.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  And to be clear you think the willingness to provide data has gone up as a result of COVID.
   >> ANTONIO GARCIA ZABELLOS:  Absolutely.  I think so.  And not only that, Christopher, but even the interest from the government on having that data has increased quite a lot, do you know, because of the precisely the situation that we are facing and designing policies to mitigate the impact, to design policies to coordinate different bodies within the government across precisely this emergency situations that we are facing, but moreover, to define everything to overcome the economy ‑‑ I mean, to overcome the situation and make the economy be prepared for a post‑pandemic situation, and more so the governments that we've opinion talking to are already gathering quite a lot of information and they're very keen on working on data analytics.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  And so picking up on something in the chat, you know, they're saying that about how do you obtain the ministerial support.  It's what you're talking about is aligning incentives, Antonio, by they're getting something in terms of a support for a project and something that they want to do to try to make it in addition.  Anne, you were going to say something as well?
   >> ANNE DELAPORTE:  Just I'm actually reflecting on what Antonio just said on the willingness to provide data that has increased, and I was actually on reflecting on what because we talked about equality so do they have the data and are they able to put that toward that, so these are just questions bouncing back to me.
But on a more practical level like what example ‑‑ like several examples of work I've been doing in terms of practicality of governments to collect data is really to engage several stakeholders and the table and have each of them having a responsibility and ‑‑ the responsibility for gathering data coming to the same stakeholder all the time and really like having this like sharing ‑‑ having this sharing, cost sharing, who is gathering what sort of data, and what timeframe, and again it comes back also to what is the data that needs to be collected and making sure that, you know, like having ‑‑ or making it as cheap in a way, as possible.
And I think that recently like last year when I was in Berlin and we had a roundtable with different stakeholders who understand the digital gender gap, and turned out that then they were like we don't have the information, and the first thing we need to do is actually measure it, and operators are interested in getting that sort of data.  Governments are interested in, I mean, in different statistical office and ICT ministry, et cetera, and everybody like really cooperated to like we need to get a plan, and we need to have a plan in place to collect the data.  It's a collective effort.  It's not coming only from one.  Yeah.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So, what's fascinating to me about some of the things you're saying is, you know, what ‑‑ are we collecting the right data?  And there is a question in the chat saying, it's not just about, you know, connectivity but it's about the quality of the connectivity, and there is one world in which a fascination also we know now with download speeds, and first download speeds matter less than throughput because it's actually delivered bits but now we understand there is latency and jitter and all of these other questions of reliability.
But what strikes me, and so there is a natural debate that happens all the time, so are we collecting the right things.  And so what strikes me a lot of the information you're talking about, the data you're needing, is not even about providing the actual delivered service.  There is a lot of data you need to provide service in areas that don't have service.  You know, you're talking about, for example, AirBnb for government locations of buildings, mapping of location of buildings, or mapping of current existing needs, or for example, demographic characteristics, costs, things that affect costs.
So, I guess, the question is are we ‑‑ what is the data that we're not getting that we need the most that is the hardest to come by that influences your decision‑making?  I mean, what is it ‑‑ where is the gap in essence in terms of the data we're collecting?
   >> ANTONIO GARCIA ZABELLOS:  Yeah.  This is even a very interesting question, like the last one posted about powerlines and availability of electricity.  I totally agree that with this comment.  You know, let me give you an example of how we are handling the design of a project from, you know, from the Development Bank approach and I guess that is pretty much similar in the case of other multilateral development banks.  So, first thing that we do is to precisely by means of using georeference, GIS, we're trying to collect information about where the infrastructure is.  Infrastructure means telecom infrastructure, electricity infrastructure, and we're from abroad, railways, and something that could be eventually the vehicle by which we can, you know, provide Internet services and Internet access.
So, let's say challenge is to have inventory of that infrastructure.  I totally agree that sometimes there are governments that don't even have that information, right.  Here we go to the point raised by Lorrayne in a sense that either they don't have it because they don't have the mandate, or even if they have the mandate, they don't have the capabilities to make that request, you know, strong enough that the telecom operators, or in general whatever company of infrastructure is capable of that or giving that information.
So here we have another important issue to keep in mind.  If we're intending to use infrastructure for electricity to provide Internet services, this is another piece of the question that we have talked so far which is the regulation associated to that particular sector, which is different to the ICT and telecom sector, and this could be a major issue because sometimes it could be a situation in which the countries and electricity companies decide simply not to provide those services because as far as they start doing those services, they will have to comply with particular regulations that at this moment in time, I mean you're just pulling in a balance the cost benefit, it makes no sense for them from a financial standpoint.
So there is a whole branch of discussion in this first step that, as I said, it begins with an inventory of that infrastructure, that is a major issue.
Second phase is precisely as you were mentioning where the location of different institutions do intend to connect, institutions or municipalities that you want to connect.  And here there is a number of informations that we request in terms of the quality of services that you mentioned, so what is the bandwidth that they do have, or moreover, which is the bandwidth that they may acquire according to the area and population that they're intending to serve.  Because you know, this may have an impact in terms of the technical solutions that could be put at the disposal at that particular location, so we need to somehow come up with a demand analysis that makes us understand how much usage that infrastructure is going to have, and according to that, you know, to be able to go and move to the Step 3 and identify which are the technical specifications, and those technical specifications are pretty much related to SLAs, you know, Service Level of Agreement, and even issues related to affordability as well as it is another major issue that we have to think of.  Or it could be in particular a aspect associated to estimating what are the technical solutions that makes or not make sense according to the demand or populations that we are going to achieve.  So that would be the third step.  And those are basically the three areas in which we are in particular designing the design of a particular project and in some locations we are getting that information, and in others we are not able to get those informations in 100% basic, and we have to have conversations on how to find alternative varrables that somehow allow us to make a proper design of the project.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  That's extremely helpful.  I think that's a very useful way to frame things.  Lorrayne?
   >> LORRAYNE PARCIUNCULA:  Yes, no, I want to add to Antonio's point there in terms of what data we are missing, and just to give an idea I worked a lot with OECD countries but also non‑OECD countries, and one of the studies that we did in 2018 was about bridging the rural digital divide, and we carried out an assessment to understand what were the targets around the countries of all OECD countries in terms of bridging the divide, and in EU it was pretty standardized and they usually have the 25 megabytes per second or 50 megabytes per second for X percent of the population, for example, but the problem is that a lot of countries that are non‑EU simply have in targets fast broadband oar ultra fast broadband or super fast broadband, and so there is a prefix to broadband there which is not really standardized among countries.  M and it's interesting because by not even have that stated within their national broadband plans or strategies, there is no way to ‑‑ there is no incentive to measure it.  So, I mean, I mean, the concept of broadband, it's still one that was understood and coined by ITU years ago by 250 megabytes her second when we were talking about connecting everyone, but in most countries it's not satisfactory speed, and in you said it's not only about speed and it's in terms of all the measures about quality, and it's not only about the quality in terms of the moment quality and but also robustness of the network and about the user different profiles of the network.
Households have different needs than public offices than businesses than small and medium big enterprises, and so you have different profiles of need as well, so we just need a better and more granular understanding of what we mean by connectivity there, and that is data that not even OECD countries are often collecting for their own regions, and it's again, it's not only about what percentage of the country is connected, what percentage is not, but it's also trying to understand and geolocate those different speed limits or quality levels of the Internet, and that I got to say, it's not ‑‑ it's not there yet even in the most developed countries.
So when you are looking into developing countries, it's just ‑‑ you're just many steps behind.  And that's very hard in terms of targeting public policy for specific regions to try to understand where the gaps are, and I mean we mentioned issues around basic connectivity maps around the Internet, and in the chat mentioned ‑‑ it was mentioned the issue of just electricity provision as well.  I mean, there is so much knowledge which is not there, and it is needed for you to actually do good public policy and planning.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So it's fascinating.  One of the things that we saw in a previous panel we organized there was a person deploying, and I think in Uganda and they wanted to look for anchor institutions, they wanted to diagnosis to this schools and there was no comprehensive list of schools that the country was able to provide.
Interestingly, one of the initiatives I'm working on is the Gig Initiative seeking to connect every school.  They're using satellite maps, and actually are improving data and finding and able to create lists, so there seems to be some opportunities in terms of using advanced tools to try to get some greater data out of this.
A question in the chat about electric power.  It is a critical issue and sometimes the solution is to connect people more, but there are essentially off‑grid solutions whether it's diesel power generators or solar generators or maybe different ways, and it's a huge problem that may not be solved in one particular way.
So, we only have a few minutes left before we switch to question and answers, and if someone has in the audience a specific question, I encourage you to put it into the Q&A section instead of the chat and phrase it in a question.  And if not, I will start asking questions and continue the discussion.
But the last thing I want to talk about is granularity of the data.  So one of the things that I know, for example, Anne your work with connected women, and sometimes we just have data on total usage but we're missing important cuts, and you mentioned earlier in your comments about gender.  There are other communities in terms of urban and rural cuts, you know, disability access, senior access, you know, vulnerable youth.
I'd love to hear more of your thoughts about how we're doing on getting the data we need not just in terms of its amount and the dimensions, but the granularity to get at the policy issues that we all know are important.
   >> ANNE DELAPORTE:  Yeah, so in connecting is really interesting with gender but as you say like getting to what is a person age of women in rural areas that don't have access compared to men men, disabled, employed, not employed, and what we're doing each year is we have a survey that we run across 10‑20 countries which is a sample and so we have these kind of like cuts of, kind of like ‑‑ I'd say the most important for us in terms of like mobile phone development in the GSNA which is around world and right now for digital inclusion looking at disabled people.
What we don't have in terms of data where it's a big, big gap now for us, it's around digital skills.  And Lorrayne talked about connectivity earlier, and you know it's ‑‑ that's on the demand side, it's really understanding the granular ‑‑ like have a level of understanding of like what do people have the digital skills to operate Internet because we know that most of the people in lower‑income countries use Internet on mobile, and currently also data that exists are very much either in developed countries on limited income, but also the skills or ICT skills are usually based on methods and indicators that are computer based and not for low and middle income countries and that's a massive gap that we have and where we try to do more on.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Lorrayne?
   >> LORRAYNE PARCIUNCULA:  Yes, I want to echo Anne's point and to say that which need more data and more evidence to understand the differences and how far we're behind in terms of including women in the digital economy, but it's also not only about including a column of binomial male versus female in certain some of these indicators, all those that's also, but that's certainly not enough to capture the spectrum of gender identities.
But, also, while it's a problem in many countries, the lack of this data, but it's also about representation.  And I think it's about the questions that we're not as keen in the surveys as Anne put.  And I mean what about how safe women feel in the Cyberspace or on the Internet or in the entire ecosystem of the digital activities that they carry out?  How productively they can use those tools, and if they have the skills and capabilities to use those tools productively, but also how they use ICT tools to increase awareness on issues that are important for women.  And then at the same time how sensors and wearable devices are compiling data on their own bodies or in health or in reproductive health of women.
So I think it's ‑‑ I think it's around inclusion in general and the questions that we are not asking, and at the same time, what are the architectures or standards and practices that we assume are working for everyone, but that at the same time, excluding either women or trans people, or seniors or youth or people of color, people with disabilities, and so I think the discussion is much broader than simply supply and simply connectivity and simply disaggregating to the level of male and female in certain indicators.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Yeah.
   >> ANTONIO GARCIA ZABELLOS:  Yeah.  Christopher if I may jump in here.  I can hear that there is definitely a challenge.  I totally agree with Lorrayne in a sense that, you know, we don't find, even if we want and there is a it can component in almost every operation that is dedicated to gender, even if we try to include specificities related to the gender gap or even indigenous populations because there is also an issue related to diversity, and we find some difficulties to find data and design the program itself.
But, do you know, I think that the issue that Anne mentioned about digital skills, I cannot agree more.  I think that one of the things that I have observed, and this is almost repeating in every country, is that sometimes they are designing programs on digital skills and thinking about the average of the population.  And I totally agree that first this topic needs to be brought into the top of the discussion and it is not just about connectivity, but it's also allowing the people and understanding people and the different users either in terms of gender, in terms of diversity, or in terms of the business in which they're involved.  This is a major issue.
But immediately after is how do we design those training courses on digital skills according to the maturity level.  So here I would like to bring a very good example that is happening these days in Mexico.  Do you know, Mexico is a very large country with about 120 million people divided into 32 states so why not the initiatives in which they are involved has to do very much with the digital skills, and but it is not just digital skills for the entire country, because as you may understand, there is a lot of differences between one area and or another.  There is a lot of differences between or across the different states, but one of the things that they have done is to run social demographic and economic analysis that understands which is the level of maturity, the digital maturity that the area has and what are the benefits that particular sectors or particular areas of population social social strata to benefit from the design of particular digital skill programs.
And so, again, this is an example of how to use particular data to make decisions in these particular cases on data skills which is another very important piece of the equation that we haven't brought at the very beginning and I'm glad that Anne brought it now.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So I think it's a great point because what's interesting is we spent most of the time talking about infrastructure and the supply side and providing service.  Digital skills, the comment also about talking about local content and we know that there are other adoption drivers that are part of the equation which were much less developed in terms of collecting data and standardizing.
And so there are two questions in the Q&A and they're related so I'm going to ask them at the same time, and they're talking about, someone asked what is the place of statistical standards in allowing data to be collected more cheaply and comparably.
The second question is from Susan, which is can we require work with countries for implementation plans to implement SDGs and infrastructure and it would allow them to baseline, track, and report progress and bring together all resources including multilateral and NGOs to work union sen to work on budget and provide them on time.
So to me the common thread is standardizing ways we approach data in ways that are relevant, and there is a tension here, which is there are some variations across countries that things don't always generalize, and there is a problem where a lot of the projects are specific to different things, but they're asking for a ‑‑ in terms of effectiveness and cost reduction, can organizations like the positions, the ones you're in, can they advocate some generalized forms of data collection that will actually make it more useful, more effective, and is there a role to try to encourage or to model, to improve, to standardize, if you will, the way we collect data that would be beneficial?  Or are we missing an opportunity?
   >> LORRAYNE PARCIUNCULA:  I think I can jump on that one, and the answer to your question, is yes, yes, absolutely.  I think there is a role to not only international organizations, but also regional organizations to collaborate in working together to create those standards, and, of course, there are challenges to doing it, especially when it comes to the sector that it does a lot of it which is already embedded in legal frameworks, so just to give you an example on the work I was doing before in the OECD, it wasn't able to ‑‑ we weren't able to find a consensus in terms of defining broadband because a lot of countries had already the definition of broadband within their legal frameworks and that is a big challenge, but I do think that by iteration and by including countries and statistical offices and regulators and ministries into the discussion around evidence‑based policy, and also by fostering this sharing of good practices in the methodological side in terms of compiling, collecting, and also comparing data, we actually build the importance of building that and we move toward capacity building doing that, at least from the side of the government.
But I think it's important to also stress how crucial it is to have different stakeholders around the table helping with a process of understanding what the needs are and understanding what are the questions that are not included in the service in the statistical frameworks as well, so it's very important to include stakeholders around the table when we are negotiating the standards, the statistical standards.  But the standards are therefore that reason to, exactly reduce the costs in terms of having one model or one methodology that other countries can apply to, so I think there is a lot more room in terms of interoperability between those ‑‑ between the different statistical frameworks of Internet organizations and regional organizations alike.
   >> ANTONIO GARCIA ZABELLOS:  Yeah, and if I may, Christopher, I would like to bring here a real example.  I think that the points raised by Lorrayne, I mean, they are mentioning in a sense they are bringing in precisely different view, about but let me give you an example that I had a opportunity to work with her directly three years ago or something like that, Lorrayne, we were drafting toolkit on broadband policies for North America and Lorrayne was precisely in charge of leading this group within the OECD and where the first starting point was precisely to understand what was going on across the region and the different countries.
And she mentioned something at the very beginning that I believe is very important.  One of the problems that we have faced and that we are actually facing whenever we try to make a comparable indicator, is precisely the level of heterogeneity.  I mean, the information is very different.  I mean, it is very heterogeneous, let's put it this way.  It varies very much between country and other countries.  And so having the political will, having the institutional capabilities as she was mentioning and having the coordination across the different institutions, you know, they are going to be involved in information gathering, but more importantly in the analysis, will help us, and will help them eventually to establish comparisons between one and another.
And so in addition to the points that she mentioned, I would like something that was also mentioned at the very beginning and very much related to make the variables comparable.  Which is a tricky thing.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  Anne, any thoughts for roles on coordinating data and making it more effective.
   >> ANNE DELAPORTE:  I completely echo what Antonio just said.  That's something that we see all the time.  Every institution has different way of measuring something, and it's still don't have a solution on what or how can we make it better.  And talking to international institutions, ITU and mobile, and ITU data, GSMA data, and we all have a different way of collecting information on mobile, gender, Internet access, connectivity in general, and it's ‑‑ it's a lot of discussion and raising of awareness around this that at some point will make it happen and hopefully get to something that everybody will agree on.
   >> CHRISTOPHER YOO:  So, I think that that's something that is an interesting idea.  So, I heard two things.  Among other things that Lorrayne is getting at is the collection of data can actually serve as an educative function in terms of capacity building as well.  And it's interesting because I've seen this not just at the national level but at the grant and application level and when you're actually giving out money, by making people report certain kinds of information to apply, that's often the first indication that they need to be developing a plan for these different dimensions they have to report on the grant application, and it's possible that there is a way of collecting data that is a way to single to different authorities that getting this information is important, and it's something that throughout ‑‑ because obviously, one of the things that you're seeing is until you have the data, you don't know where you are and you can't do anything.
But as you know, just collecting data can actually change people's behavior.  The fact that something becomes visible, automatically increases salience and without regulatory restrictions to change behavior, behavior can start to change and it's an interesting soft‑way to do this and there was a question in the chat about starting with user needs at the rural level and I think this is what you're all saying, almost all of the data collection, the collection you're talking about begins at the rural level and you have a plan what to get but aggregates from the bottom up to make it all work because otherwise it's never going to function properly.
We are out of time.  At this point, I would like to say thank you to our panelists for leading a very stimulating discussion.  It's a challenge and I'm sure that we will continue to have conversations about, or I'd like to say that we solved all the problems about data gaps and data collections in this hour or 75 minutes and we can now proceed and not talk about this again further, but I think we all know that the problems will continue to evolve, and actually a sign of progress is to have new problems to work on because it will always be a challenge of how to bring or marshal the information that we need to bring more of the benefits of the Internet to all of the world.
On that I would like to thank Lorrayne, Antonio, and for being part of this panel and I think it was a fantastic discussion and we really appreciate all of you being here.  Thanks to everyone in the audience for your questions and participation, and we look forward to seeing you at future events, later events at this IGF and future IGFs as well.  Thank you.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-ws252-connected-health-in-the-post-covid-19-era^^

 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Thank you, everyone. I think we are at the starting time. Hello, welcome. Welcome to this IGF2020 session, connected health in the post COVID‑19 era. 
I think as IGF staff has noted in the chat, I can briefly say that everyone please be informed that the session is recorded and hosted under the IGF Code of Conduct and U.N. rules and regulations. And the chat feature is for social only. Only the Q&A feature should be used to ask questions. Both of those are enabled for us here today. 
Again, my name is Brian Scarpelli. I'm senior global policy counsel with an organization called the Connected Health Initiative, a digital health multi stakeholder policy and legal advocacy organization. Very, very excited to be here today to talk about this extremely timely topic. We have a great diversity of experts here. 
Thank you for your attendance, your interest. We look forward to an engaging discussion here. I can provide just a brief panel overview and then I can briefly note who our speakers are before turning it over to the speakers for opening remarks. So to give you an idea, a baseline about why we are here, the COVID‑19 crisis has really been a catalyzing agent for very rapid change in a number of sectors worldwide, but probably most of all the health care sector. 
As the world has had to move to do things like produce travel and even reduce nonessential health care visits health care providers have adopted digital modalities, telehealth, remote patient monitoring solutions to handle a greater load of cases, and to incorporate social distancing policies and other policies to mitigate the spread of the coronavirus. These technologies can provide benefits with continued advancement in areas like AI which we'll address here. But these changes come with their own set of challenges and those most in need of connected health care can be the ones who are least able to access it for a number of reasons I'm sure we'll discuss here. Some of these impediments can be lack of smartphone access and internet coverage and capacity. Sometimes there are regulatory regimes and policies geared toward health care, in‑person care. That may inhibit the ability for these tools t greater provision of health care over the internet is really an incredible opportunity. But again there are new vectors for cyber security and therefore risks. How do we address this? That's what the panel is here today to discuss. There is no better place to discuss it than the internet governance forum. Thanks to the United Nations and IGF for having us on the panel. We are looking to explore the prominence of health care. It will be a lasting one that can include well‑being beyond the coronavirus pandemic, the current crisis or looking toward benefits of the move to telehealth, remote monitoring and other drawbacks ‑‑ 
[ Audio disruption ]
‑‑ expected outcomes that have been shared in the information for this panel. I believe we should make sure those are clear for all of you attending. 
One, we are looking to understand the spectrum of opportunities and challenges that telehealth will bring to bear on communities during and after the COVID‑19 pandemic. And how the challenges are mediated by socioeconomic factors. 
Two, we are looking to learn about what the IGF community can do to further ‑‑ for action and collaboration to realize the potential and challenges. 
[ Audio disruption ]
In this conversation. 
Three, we are looking to share perspectives ‑‑ I hope my audio is okay. Apologies. Oh, I think ‑‑ sorry. 
Third, we are looking to share diverse perspectives on priorities and challenges for the IGF community. Is my audio okay? 
[ Audio disruption ]
Not at all? 
>> SVEATOSLAV VIZITIU: I don't understand nothing from what you were saying. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Now? Now it's better? 
>> SVEATOSLAV VIZITIU: It's better. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Goodness. Well, to be efficient with our time here, what I was just doing was giving a brief overview of the abstract of the description of our session. I won't repeat that. It is listed, you know, on the IGF website. I presume everyone who has attended here hopefully has read it. I won't repeat it. I was going over that and expected outcomes. Many apologies for my audio issues. They seem okay now. 
I would leave it to each of our panelists in their opening remarks to share anything about themselves they would like to share rather than take up more time. We are joined by a great slew here of Sveatoslav Vizitiu, the cofounder of well OD AI. Jelena Malinina with the European consumer organization, Subbarao Kambhampati from Arizona state. And the chief information officer with the minister of health from Buenos Aires, Jelena Malinina and Geralyn Miller with AI for good and Microsoft. 
Again, we can turn it over to Sveatoslav if that's okay for some of the ‑‑ for your opening remarks. 
>> SVEATOSLAV VIZITIU: Hello. I think I will present myself. That's more easy.
I'm Sveatoslav Vizitiu. We are helping the families with artificial intelligence systems to be more healthy. We have good results here in Romania. We also have summer schools. We have ‑‑ our children will be more healthy. Also we have a company that's developed a mobile application and games for children. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Great. Thank you. I think Jelena is next to share anything about yourself, opening remarks. 
>> Sure. My name is Jelena. I'm a digital health expert working at the European consumer organization. We are based in Brussels and represent 44 consumer organizations from 42 countries, mostly in Europe. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Great. Rao? 
>> SUBBARAO KAMBHAMPATI: I work in artificial intelligence which has gotten much of public interest because of the connections and societal impacts AI can have. Of particular interest that's relevant to this panel is how AI can be helpful in health and in particular connected health. So I'll share some of that information. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Great. Analia? 
>> First I would like to thank you for the invite to the forum. It is my first time here. It is a pleasure to share the health information strategies implemented in Buenos Aires city. I'm a specialist in health informatics. Also a professor of health information systems in universities. For more than 15 years I have been implementing health care institutions. Currently I'm the chief information officer at the ministry of health of Buenos Aires city. Since 2016 I have been working on digital transformation which means implementation of electronic records according to standards. We started working on the outpatient setting and the integration and during the pandemic we focused on in‑patient settings, telehealth and patient monitoring. I will give you more details later. Thank you very much. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Geralyn? 
>> I drive our strategy for our health investments. A program called AI for health which is a five‑year investment that's geared at bringing artificial intelligence, machine learning, analytics and visualization to some of the world's greatest challenges in health care. Thank you for inviting me today. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Great. Thank you all for being here. So I guess we can get into it here. Again, we encourage those watching here to engage with the Q&A function in Zoom. But definitely have some questions that I can ask here, open ended. Please, anyone jump in. Respond to each other if you like. 
Again, I hope my audio is okay now. 
>> Audio is fine. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Okay. As the public health crisis evolved we have seen telehealth monitoring solutions adopted to a greater degree than ever before what about these use cases is encouraging and what do you think are the major challenges that still need to be addressed? Do you think that the more rapid uptake during the COVID‑19 crisis will be lasting or do you see something of a reset, hopefully soon, not that we see a reset on use of digital health tools but hopefully the end of a handling of the COVID‑19 pandemic soon. 
What will the impact of moving on past the pandemic be? Anyone. 
>> SUBBARAO KAMBHAMPATI: I can start. I was just thinking as I was bicycling here about this "House" episode in 2008 called the frozen where House is stuck having to diagnose what's wrong with this lady that's a scientist in Antarctica. The whole thing is done in the old Skype. We have shifted obviously from Skype to Zoom now. What looked like a futuristic thing has become normal day‑to‑day scenario across many of these ‑‑ for many of us during this pandemic lockdowns. 
I think it is very interesting that ‑‑ you asked what's going well and what are the things that we should be worried about and what might stay longer. 
What's going well to some extent is at least speaking from the technology side we essentially had the ability to connect. I mean compared to something like 1918 pandemic, right now we can do things like Zoom and we have diagnostic technologies from AI, looking at x‑rays, chatting technology for triaging of patients and so on, all of which are being used as far as I know. My sister is a pediatrician and for several months during March she was actually seeing patients only through Zoom. So that has worked, you know, to some extent. The worries, of course, is there is also ‑‑ I think AI ‑‑ we can get to it later. But as of now AI technology is well suited as a triaging technique, but there is a tendency for people to let it take more role than just a triaging technology. That can lead to significant concerns, both ethical and possibly health oriented concerns. In terms of whether we will continue having this, I think there is no complete going back, it seems to me. We will get used to being able to do many things as a remote way. I think it is certainly going to have advantages in terms of reach and access the people in remote areas before the pandemic started. They didn't quite have the level of health care that city, for example, had. 
So I think those things might continue and will be hopefully for good. I'll stop there and we can get back to any of the issues. 
>> GERALYN MILLER: I would love to join in on those comments. What I think has gone well are opportunities like this for people in different areas of focus and cross sector and cross domain to come together and have an honest conversation about the state of things. That extends to the collaboration I'm seeing on the immense research that's happening. From a Microsoft AI for health program perspective we did an open call over the course of the summer this year. We accepted over 500 proposals and funded 150 of them which is just an amazing response in terms of people who are focusing on COVID‑19 research at the intersection of health care ranging from models with x‑rays and CT scans to understand potential disease to people looking at dissemination of behavior of information. Just to see the collaboration has bye‑bye amazing. 
I want to also echo the sentiment that I think what the pandemic has done is laid bare places where there are inequities. So I think as responsible citizens of the global community that's something we need to take forward with us. We are now aware and that's one of the things to take forward. 
>> JELENA MALININA: I will jump in next if I may. I think with COVID‑19 crisis at least in the EU we have seen a massive encouragement to use the technologies because if we compare Europe with the U.S. or with Asia, we are a little bit more conservative when it comes to adopting new technologies. It is also quite challenging in the health care sector, I would say, because despite we have the common legislation. We still have 27 different member states with very different rules on health care. So whatever is happening at the national level is happening at the national level. With the major health care service we are forced to move a lot of services online including health care. So now there are quite a lot of opportunities to speak with your GP, even to get some mental care possibilities. But when it comes to looking at what is next, I would say the next one is adopting our legal systems into the technology world. 
I can give you an example for Poland for example, at least until. The act only considered a medical act when two people are present in the same room or more than two people. Basically talking about medical consultations in Poland and any rights for the patient or person and liability. If we speak about cross‑border health care service when say someone from Romania decides to call the polish doctor this would be illegal. 
Then the patient who might receive any kind of harm through this service would receive nothing in return because the legal system doesn't cover it. There are plenty of examples when it comes to telemedicine, when it comes to diversity of products, AI which is also for technology advancements. 
>> ANALIA BAUM: In Buenos Aires the issue of health is installed in the public sector. Patients, health care professionals and policy makers realize the benefits. So it is an issue of public interest. So this means it requires political commitment. The second good news is the health emergency introduced the concept of remote monitoring patients. This is new for public health in Buenos Aires City because home care services didn't exist and I think this strategy is here to stay. What still needs to be addressed is implementation research to understand accessibility, inequity in telehealth services and patient needs. Also regulatory frameworks like Jelena said. 
Although we published temporary regulations now we need to work on telehealth and prescriptions. This is a trend that will last beyond the crisis. I think that it will. At the moment there are no agreements between professional associations on this issue and in the private sector there are no agreements with care providers and the insurance services either. 
Also the national ministry of health needs to finish up the regulation frameworks of the recent laws in order to implement telehealth services. 
With remote patient monitoring we need to discuss which strategy the minister needs to address that will benefit from connected health. During the pandemic the necessity was clear although the resources ‑‑ to stopping the circulation of the virus. Now we are expecting about the future policy decision and investment. But surely it would be great if we could continue offering the services to all our patients. Thank you. 
>> SVEATOSLAV VIZITIU: I'm the last one on this question. For myself and for our company it's really advanced but worth the crisis of COVID. It is not a good result about health and people dying, but it's given like a rocket for digital health. Also for telehealth. For example in Romania with telehealth it is popular now. Results are showing that people are addressing now to the doctor more than before and the results are better. It's lower than last year with COVID which is amazing from my opinion. 
Before COVID Germany made the first steps toward digital health and because of COVID every country was forced to employ the digital health and help people online and so on. In my personal opinion about the COVID, it's positive for families because each family stayed home at least two months and they stayed with kids. It is an advantage for kids and families because they were very united. They did many activities together and so on. 
We have some minuses but also we have some pluses for this crisis. In my opinion it will give us big advances in the future because before everyone say said, oh, digital is complicated. Doctors were saying I'm too old for digital. Now they are forced to be digital and be more happy with digital. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: That's interesting. For the comments you just said, Sveatoslav and also made Analia, too. I'm curious what you see the ‑‑ what maybe the top practical ‑‑ for people utilizing these ‑‑ and also for anyone else on the panel actually. I would be curious to know. 
The practical barriers that you see to the uptake in use of the tools, maybe the top ones. Is it capacity? I throw that out. Capacity. Like infrastructure. Like broadband infrastructure. I throw that out and I don't know if that's the answer. Everyone who has robust enough broadband to support a video call with a physician, it doesn't always exist. I was curious if that's a challenge. I have heard also, Jelena I heard about liability which is a very important question. Not only just for what I would say is basic digital health interactions, and I don't mean to downplay the importance of just simply a video call between a patient and a physician, but also I think there are implications for AI obviously when you talk about the use of AI in health care and liability issues. 
But across borders as you were mentioning, what do people see as the biggest challenge practically you run into? I would be interested. So many different perspectives here. It would be interesting to hear them. 
>> SVEATOSLAV VIZITIU: Here in Romania, I think we are in the top four above the internet over the world. But with these results also we have only 60 person from all the countries that have access to internet. The rest don't have access to internet. 
Also we have issues about the schools because for example we have online school online now. And many of them don't have any devices to connect with the schools. The big problem is when weather channel more children you can't connect more children because you only have so many devices to connect on and so on. 
With telehealth for example and with our partners in application it works very well. Like I said, it is less appointments and more healthy than before. They have issues with their weight of course because everyone is staying home, but it's advanced now. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Anyone else? 
>> GERALYN MILLER: I'll take that from an AI perspective. I want to echo a sentiment I heard earlier about caution from a technology perspective. I think there is a part of this that's about literacy and people understanding in a context that makes sense for them the technology, pros and cons and making sure that also we have the concept of inclusive design so we are not designing for. Rather we are designing with people. Who will be recipients in receiving the technology. This touches on some of the things happening globally and to prevent possible bias in artificial intelligence. Making sure we understand what's in the data that it is a diverse sample. Making sure teams who build these solutions are diverse in terms of their make‑up. That's super important. All of these are things we need to be aware of and keep an eye on. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Absolutely. Speaking about literacy is crucial. It's not just about literacy of everyone. If we speak about doctors especially the older generation of doctors, their views on technology are quite different. Also the way they think about, for instance, if we speak about electronic health record how we see many hospitals, the electronic health records being approached we need an education about privacy rights to doctors, manufacturers and more. They do need to comply with certain regulations but in the health care sector where the data is representative there is a need for education both at the level of health care professional education, it should be taught at the university I think. We cannot expect every doctor to be an IT person and understand how deep learning is working. How to access the data, speak about it with your patients and so on. Same goes for any regular citizens because I think it is time to teach these things in school. About digital rights, consent, data sharing and other things. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: I know Analia went into this in some earlier remarks. It would be great to hear more if you would like about how Buenos Aires has dealt with the public health crisis and how your office dealt with the crisis. It sounds to me like you were describing how both live telehealth and patient monitoring. The idea that some physiologic characteristic, blood glucose reading, heart rate, something, could be collected and then transmitted to the caregiver for review in an asynchronous way so it is always feeding data in. 
There are health systems in the world and I would love to hear if this is an issue for you or not because whether it is or not, it will ‑‑ I think your experience will be interesting. There are some health systems in the world where payment is enabled for live interaction and not enabled by law for an asynchronous interaction such as a remote patient monitoring scenario. Maybe that's an example of what Jelena spoke to earlier. I would love to hear more about your experiences and some more detail on the practical reflections you might have. 
>> ANALIA BAUM: Okay. I will share my screen. Firstly, I would like to tell you that Buenos Aires is the capital and largest city in Argentina. There are around 3 million people. The health system has three sectors ‑‑ private, social security, and public. The public health system has 117 health care centers. 34 are hospitals and the rest are primary care centers. 
In the last four years the primary care centers and 20 of the 34 hospitals have implemented electronic records and more than 2.5 million people have already benefitted from this. 
We had our first confirmed case of COVID in March. The government declared the lockdown as you can see. Appointments went down. Immediately the minister of health of Buenos Aires city declared a mandatory telehealth services and digital prescriptions to guarantee the continuity of health care. This regulatory framework from the minister given the pandemic were very important. Because this regulation made these practices available. Under the emergency conditions. We have a national law that says the medical prescriptions have to be signed by manuscript and the rules for telehealth services weren't clear until now. 
The fact that we have this culture extended the medical records and mandatory social distancing helped with rapid adoption of telemedicine. Currently the public system, 20% of appointments are telehealth services. Most of the people that use these services are young women and residents of the Buenos Aires city. 
This map shows that all the areas of the city are covered especially in slums that are in the south of Buenos Aires city. 
It is important to mention that in Buenos Aires 8% of the people don't have access to the internet and 20% of them don't have a computer either. However, 90% of people do have a cell phone. The most effective population in this are elderly people. Those with no access to education. These worsen in slums and metropolitan area of Buenos Aires. 
To stop the circulation of the virus we developed software for contract tracing which helped us to create heat maps to monitor the most affected areas around the city. And for remote monitoring COVID patients and their close contacts we used a chat bot in WhatsApp that's the most used social network in Argentina. 3.5 million conversations took place up to date. 
COVID‑19 has accelerated adoption of digital tools like chat bots and telehealth in Buenos Aires. However, we have to face some challenges. First it is necessary to analyze accessibility of telehealth and solve privacy and security issues. We also need to continue working in the regulatory frameworks in telehealth and digital prescriptions. As regarding social we need to focus on skills not only for patients but also for health care workers and policy makers. Thank you very much. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Thank you for the insights there. Very interesting. 
Anyone else want to make a comment or ask Analia a question, please just unmute yourself. 
>> JELENA MALININA: I wanted to ask about ‑‑ you mentioned privacy and security issues. What did you encounter and in what tools? Also, separately I want to ask about your Corona tracing app? Did you use Google and Apple notification exposure? Thanks. 
>> ANALIA BAUM: Thank you. At first we developed all our applications using guidance standards at the national level published. For security threats we used the center for people to call. It's useful for different transactions in the Buenos Aires city. We use it for patients to call. And people can see the appointments for telehealth and the doctor on the computer can see the list of patients for telehealth consulting. The patients can choose if they want to get with the physician by telephone or by video calling. 
Most of the consultants were by telephone because the links to the video, we sent it by e‑mail and we have a lot of problems for patients to access their e‑mail and then for the video calling. 
Patient access to the health system in their own cell phone and applications. So for the doctor, if they ‑‑ if the physician didn't know about the patient because it was a first ‑‑ at the other side of the telephone line. So we need to improve the government. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Thank you so much. Well, something that I think got teased out a little bit. And I know there is a number of experts here for the audience with great insights. The role of artificial intelligence and the future of health care. 
Geralyn, while there is a lot of talk and admittedly probably a lot of hype about the role of AI in addressing this public health emergency, how is AI being supported and leveraged by you all during this crisis? I know you have mentioned a few things already you mentioned 500 ‑‑ that's significant. That's impressive. We'd love to hear more. 
>> GERALYN MILLER: It's hard to decide what to talk about. There are so many different areas. There was a conversation about dissemination of accurate information. I think that's an area where we have seen people building models more on the behavioral side. We have seen it applied actually even to scenarios where people are doing basic research and the nature of the virus itself building models, doing drug discovery, trying to pore through existing databases of compounds and small molecules to find out what might be relevant for the SARS‑CoV‑2 virus. 
Also in machine learning, AI to do things like track the trajectory of the disease, we have work that we do with a global map. Also working with the institute of health metrics and evaluation hear in Washington state. So very many different ways. And then from a direct to the in‑person perspective there are things like we have what's called a convalescent plasma health bot where people who have had COVID can find out if they are a candidate to donate plasma. It's a cell phone‑based app. 
So many different ways. There is also a framework, I think, that extended ‑‑ that's been created before COVID and will likely extend afterwards. Just looking at how you use artificial intelligence not to replace the physician but to augment a physician. Examples of work we are doing under AI for health, one example is diabetic retinopathy, one of the leading preventable causes of disease. Hundreds of millions of people around the world have it. Only 210 physicians qualify to do the diagnosis. 
This is a place where you can use artificial intelligence and models at the edge to be able to make sure the people who really need to get in, get screened, have a referral have access to the technology. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Great. It's really exciting to me that you mentioned the diabetic retinopathy use case. It is very powerful. You're absolutely right about the reach of it. I couldn't agree more. Something maybe worth mentioning and this is a domestic development in the United States right now, but one thing I have been watching with great interest has been a proposal within the Medicare program ‑‑ basically the government‑provided health care program mostly for people 65 years of age and older and people with disabilities, et cetera, to provide payment to physicians with an algorithm to assist in evaluating the diabetic retinopathy data protected. In other words, the picture of the back of someone's eyeball. 
Maybe folks out there ‑‑ I would love to know if that's the first of such a proposal or if ‑‑ has that kind of capability been provided, endorsed or incentivized in other health systems? It's the first proposed incentive like a direct payment to physicians for using an AI tool that I know of. Very interesting. Is that the only one? Are there others out there? Gosh, it may be the only one. That's really interesting. 
Sveatoslav, could I maybe turn it over to you? I know your company utilizes AI to provide nutritional advice and plans to parents and children and other uses you described earlier. Maybe you could talk a little bit about the benefits that AI brings to the table for you and the approach your company takes, kind of running with this theme. 
>> SVEATOSLAV VIZITIU: Yes. Using machine learning and AI, it helps for each family. It helps us to be trained with this system and to provide specific diet for each children. For example, if the child is moving more in the morning, maybe it's moving more in the evening then he needs more proteins in the afternoon. Also maybe he's lazy, staying home. It helps us with so much data from families to provide more information to them. Also some children have some allergies and so on. Machine learning if we are training with more information growing up it will be more easy to have so many nutritional experts to provide more exact information to our families. That's how we are using. Also some parts for Microsoft. Interesting stuff. 
>> GERALYN MILLER: Brian, you raise an interesting point because we are in the middle of a pandemic. Needs to bring nutrition to people still exists. It was interesting. I was on a panel yesterday. There was somebody who was representing a bunch of work in maternal and infant mortality. They said just because we are in the middle of a pandemic, don't forget childbirth is still a thing. We didn't lose sight of some of the other initiatives that are just as important to drive forward including the example you gave. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Rao, thank you. Yeah. I wondered, Rao, I could ask you. I want to make sure to bring you in there. Some of your work at as state centers around explainable AI and discussing if and when there needs to be a period where humans need to be in the loop and able to intervene when AI makes a particularly sensitive decision. For example, AI chat bots have gotten a lot of attention. Can you talk about the risks and what you're working on and stuff? 
>> SUBBARAO KAMBHAMPATI: Sure. First of all, AI has become popular in catching the public imagination, as we talked about. There's already been this issue of AI can be used for everything sort of mentality. Obviously when COVID came along there was significant interest in seeing all sorts of ways in which the technology can be used. In fact, I put in a link to an article that summarizes some of the different ways AI technologies were being used and were planning to be used in managing the war on COVID. 
In general, the issue of AI and health care AI, you brought up the issue of the liability and there is also this ethical issue aspect. The pendulum is somewhere between doctors don't believe this stuff to full fanboys and groupies where they basically assume AI technology is pretty much more than they are able to do. As Geralyn was pointing out, too, there are significant applications out there about diagnostics and chat bots especially being used for mental health and so on. 
The tricky part, I think and this is the academic in me speaking. People understand the success more of AI technologies. Those are things we celebrate. We don't have any clue on their failure modes because the technology is not robust in the way we assume other intelligent technologies would be. If you see a surgeon you don't question whether they will know about elementary age store things. You can have a diabetic retinopathy classification system like one more recently, a melanoma classification system which basically is only optimizing just to be correct on predicting that. Sometimes it can be easily taken by spurious correlations. 
There was a study last year in Nature where the system found that surgical marks put next to the melanoma were actually ‑‑ it was basically focusing on that. It's like saying a dog is an Husky because there is snow on the ground. We realized they must have snow on the ground. This can be a big issue in terms of even the mental health scenarios. 
Some of us say this is the best natural language completion system that's out there. And recently last week there was this news item basically saying some people tried to evaluate it in simple chat bots. And using GPT‑3 as a chat bot is almost using sledgehammer AI technology and even that sledgehammer AI technology has pretty brittle failure modes. For example, the thing that the patient asks, I'm feeling depressed, I'm having suicidal thoughts. This is a fake patient. GPD3 says I'm sorry, I can try to help you with that. He says should I then commit suicide and GPD3 says, sure, why not? This is a level at which the technology to some extent is odd. 
It's important as Geralyn is pointing out, extremely important to view these technologies as augmenting rather than replacing in any sense human doctor oversight because we have no idea how brittle they are. We take for granted common sense which the systems don't currently yet have. 
They are extremely useful for experts but that gets to the point of explainability. Even experts. I'm actually worried about paying doctors to use diabetic retinopathy thing. It looks good on one level. There is a variation for using north point compass system to decide whether people should be allowed what was used in Broward county, Florida, where judges had to take the system's recommendations. But most of the time they wound up taking the recommendations anyway. There is an auto makes bias we tend to have. After a while people just start blindly following the system's recommendations. 
So the issue of explaining the rationale becomes important. Technically, that's a huge area right now. Many of the AI systems don't have vocabulary common with what we have. So they really can't explain. It's like a cat trying to explain what it's doing. That's the level of which we are ‑‑ we can have very smart cats which can do useful things. But the explanation is an interesting issue. Those are very important for miracle scenarios, in particular because just to make sure that the doctors aren't taken by spurious correlations and the past performance to just believe the current diagnostics and so on. 
So that's something we need to keep an eye on. This technology will be used because it's huge amounts of advantages. It is really trying not to be just too much of a fanboy and trying to make ‑‑ have a caution in the back of our heads and that's important, I think. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Analia ‑‑ oh, go ahead, Geralyn. I didn't mean to interrupt you. 
>> GERALYN MILLER: That's okay. I also want to point out that there is a level of education that needs to make sure the data scientists on the grantee sidewalk away with skills. They have an understanding. There have been cases where we have come into projects and they have had to tell people, you need to really sit and look at what the model is doing. It's awareness and a training thing. We can get there. So those are points that are well taken in terms of the caution. 
>> SUBBARAO KAMBHAMPATI: I want to add that it's something that the medical community is saying that much of medicine is about what is right or wrong for white males because that was the data on which basically people focused on mostly and it has happened before. You can put it on steroids now because the kind of data is more directly available. So you wind up training your models on that. Even when COVID came along most of the earliest ‑‑ COVID is an extremely interesting, fast, forwarded history in progress in front of our eyes. 
If you go back only to March and see what people were saying about what this thing does versus what we now know ‑‑ we already know now for example ‑‑ we don't know the causality, but we already know for example African‑Americans are disproportionately affected. These were things we wouldn't have ‑‑ it would be great if, in fact, from the beginning as Geralyn was saying you take into account a diverse set of data and then you make sure that you actually train your models and test them. Something as simple as checking gender of a person from their face it's been shown last year most commercial grade systems just fall flat on their face if you go out of white males. 
Beyond white males the gender becomes close to 50/50 toss‑up. That was a great call. Then people like Microsoft or companies like Microsoft, IBM, Amazon, they actually improved training and now we are in a much better situation. It is not at that level of problems in terms of the ability to do it across the populations. That's a day‑to‑day problem in health in particular. Many things are common in humanity, but also enough things that are different from the different racial backgrounds and so on. It's very important to make sure these things will be checking that in the training part. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Thank you. Analia, I was going to ask, a chat bot is part of what ‑‑ that's part of your system, correct? Am I correct about that? I think you're muted. 
>> ANALIA BAUM: The chat bot is a service of WhatsApp to the government of the city. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Okay. 
>> ANALIA BAUM: It was one of the first cities to prove that. We use it for people ask about different issues in the government. You know? And we introduce them during the pandemic and at the beginning of the pandemic, every people who work from Europe because from here, people after the holidays came back to the country and our telephone center collapsed. So we introduced the chat bot to people to make questions. Then if those questions were similar with COVID symptoms medical attends this chart and decides this person needs to be isolated in hospital or in a hotel at the beginning of the pandemic. 
Then we introduce more algorithms and use for people that we know for our internal record that the person has COVID. We send the text by telephone and invite them to interact with the chat bot to monitor the symptoms. Something similar in their record. All those informations, we send it to the contact tracing software. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Thank you, great. Appreciate that. So I had a topic just to bring it back to something you had initially raised was the worry about additional threats when services that would be transacted in person are now over the internet. I was curious about some best practices that you might know of or recommend or maybe where there is a gap. Maybe that's part of where we are identifying a need for further work or all of the above. But best practices that could mitigate some of these concerns and how would you recommend that policymakers either with a government policy maker or even as an organization. Could it be like a large company, for example? Ensure that patients have privacy and security assurances as health care is digitized. 
>> JELENA MALININA: Thank you. There is certainly a lot of work to be done. I think one of the greatest solutions and one of the most complicated as well is to have legally enforceable rules. We already have in Europe the general data protection regulation which some claim that it's a little bit preventative of innovation. At some point it's true. I would say preventative of innovation which doesn't serve for people. One of the things that must be taken into account is what's done with the data? For now many people do not fully realize what data means. The data we produce that it has value, a lot of value for certain entities and certain entities sometimes acquire this data in quite illegal ways. It can have implications personally and collectively. The personal implications for instance could be that especially for famous people or politicians that it can be personal bullying or cyberthreats. We have seen it recently in Finland. There was a massive leak of the data of patients from a psychotherapy center. The person who initiated the cyber-attack started to blackmail patients because you can imagine what kind of personal data is there. 
He started to threaten them that he will leak certain aspects about their private life and so on. So it's a huge gap as well. Not only having the rules but enforcing them. With respect to IT security rules by design. It's not there yet unfortunately in many developments in many countries as well. Also very developed digitally as Finland we have seen that. 
Collective threat can be discrimination. There was already a mention for instance of the U.S. example of a black community that's discriminated and there are examples especially from AI in hospitals where the algorithm is programmed in a way that it is discriminated by design. It can happen anywhere else.
Depends how we program the algorithms.
There is a huge need to establish the borders, how much we would allow the technology to come into our lives.
What are the new ethics? If we speak about the doctors having the Hippocratic oath and certain norms and values which are established in practice and they are very long term evolving with the societal needs as well then we have to speak about digital technology having the same norms and having also enforceable norms because just saying somewhere this is ethical or not is not enough. 
For now there are many ethical codes especially about AI produced by different entities even at the country level. But all of them are different. If we speak about a hundred ethics codes we speak about a hundred different ethics. 
So how to come up with universal ethical norms, how we approach technology and how much we allow it in our lives is a huge question. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Geralyn, I believe AI for Good has recommendations, correct? 
>> GERALYN MILLER: Yeah, all from a Microsoft perspective we have a framework for security and privacy from an infrastructure perspective when people put data in the cloud. As a software and technology person, I was leaving the Microsoft genomics team when we were going through the prep for GDPR. It was all hands on deck for Microsoft. Every single product had to be touched and looked at. I think it made for better products. It forces you to take a new lens to what you build and really look at every place where data is, every data flow. Not only in the data that's coming in that might be somebody's PHI but where could the data leak out in logs or crash dumps. It makes for better products.
I think it is the flip side. We are better because of that. Then I also want to quickly touch on privacy preserving technologies. There is innovation in this area and we need to continue to push that forward in the U.S. We have HIPAA and high trust. Some of the things that are HIPAA and high trust are almost like hitting a sledge hammer with a nail. It is a pretty macro level way to look at this. We are doing investment work on privacy preserving technology called differential privacy. This is work we are doing with Harvard IQSS. It goes back about 13 years to some work done by Cynthia Davorka and we are doing work beyond research and the Azure team is using it to add statistical noise to data 
There are people looking at things like synthetic data generation using GANS so a bunch of techniques we need to push forward and invest in research in these areas as well. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Thanks. That's very helpful. Sveatoslav, I'm curious to ask if kind of from the start‑up angle how you all have tackled privacy and security? Just to throw it out there, something that I know a lot of people talk about, it's easier to talk about than to do. Is privacy by design, the idea of building in some ‑‑ measures to enable for some kind of scalable risk management, you know, not even just for privacy and X by design, right? 
The real world perspective. I would love to hear your thoughts. 
>> SVEATOSLAV VIZITIU: For example in Europe we have privacy because we have GDPR and each application we are doing or for example the applications we are forced to apply this. 
It is very interesting that we know that global rules for example about if children, any kid wants to create an account they have to be 30 years old. But we know children do and we don't accept this one to be public and to create. 
For example, we have cases in summer school where we tested some interesting stuff. Everyone had Facebook. Everyone has Google account. And everyone is less than 30 years old.
It is important I'm pretty sure. But from the perspective about for example start‑ups, so a company that's early stages, in my opinion it's important and also an innovation. If some user wants to try it and wants to be involved here, I think we need to open these doors. But many rules like Apple store, Google store, they force this one. It's really difficult to innovate in this direction. That's my personal opinion. 
And we have cases about the children when they create it because the application is divided into two parts ‑‑ one for the parents and one for the kids. Kids want to create the account but we can't create for them the account because the application will be banned in the app store and Google store. It's simple. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Thanks. Okay. It doesn't look like anyone else is coming in here. I don't want to cut off anyone of course. There was one other thread that I think might be worth picking up on here that I know has been raised by several people which is it can't be overstated enough ‑‑ am I saying that right? It's a very important angle is what I'm trying to say. 
Inclusivity, accessibility. I'm really glad a number of you raised this so far. You know. What do you think ‑‑ and really this speaks generally to, think, a shared priority across the idea of community about bridging the digital divide, if that's the right phrasing there, I believe it is. What do you all think ‑‑ anyone ‑‑ who is the best way to bridge the digital divide that threatens to leave some folks out of the positive advances being made in digital health and some of the fast forwarding is where I was describing it which I do think is a pretty apt way of putting it. 
>> JELENA MALININA: I think it is very important to forget about the existence of the average consumer and to start thinking about society as a whole and about all the groups which are in this society if we speak for instance about the technology developed for a particular country or region or maybe worldwide. 
What we will see if we look in the society, there are many people with very different needs and very different desires. Some are more open to use telemedicines. Others will be more willing to have their medical devices fully digitalized connected to their doctors. Other people would want to go to the doctor because that's part of their social life. 
I'm coming from Eastern Europe and for my grandparents it was part of their socializing to go to their GP and chat. That also must be respected. Then we should not forget there are vulnerable groups which may not have access to the right technology. Again, I'm getting back to COVID apps. For instance in Belgium it is not possible to download an app on an iPhone which is three years old which is a little bit ridiculous. Not everyone is supposed to have the latest model of iPhone to use the tool. 
So that's one part. Another part we should never forget about people with some disabilities. If we think of people with eyesight, hearing problems or anything else which would prevent them from using the technology. 
So to really tackle that inclusivity we need to think about the variety of people and the variety of their needs. 
Of course simultaneously we have to raise the level of digital literacy and I want to emphasize that it is very important simultaneously to use health literacy. Not only digital but in the context of health care, many people still don't know by the statistics where the heart is located on the right or left. How can we speak about understanding algorithm if we still don't know where our heart is. Many things to tackle. But we need to as a whole the society as a whole should be considered.
 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Thank you. Anyone else? Analia? 
>> ANALIA BAUM: Yesterday's panelist said inclusion is the concept where everyone can be included. This implies access to the internet, access to digital technology and also the possibility to use it in a way that it's empowering. It is worth saying it is ‑‑ to low income families. We need to find the right partner that helps us bring expensive networks into slums to promote capacity building inside the community. 
Meanwhile, the government policy consists in implementing community networks in public schools, libraries and working in digital location for all the education program. 
>> GERALYN MILLER: I would love to talk about vulnerable populations. We need to do a better job of accurately reporting out on data in some of these areas. Some of the work our team has done in the U.S. has noticed that when we report COVID positive status sometimes race data isn't included. 
How do you fix a problem if you don't understand the problem? It is difficult to try to target interventions appropriately. It's a resource allocation problem, right? There is a limited pool of resources we can allocate. We need to know where the problems are. Some of it comes from being open and honest about this from a data perspective. 
So I just want to raise that comment as well. On the accessibility front in addressing people who have accessibility needs I really think this again goes back to the concept of designing with people an inclusive design. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Absolutely. I couldn't agree more with what you just said there. 
One thing I don't think I had ‑‑ I definitely haven't asked about myself yet, but is a really important point you just mentioned I think was data interoperability. How much of a challenge is that there are ‑‑ like HL7 is an organization trying to do this to create specifications for ‑‑ fields, the fields that you would include so that race data for example is always included as information is shared across health systems and things like that. 
I'm curious, Sveatoslav, Analia, Jelena, anyone. Health care interoperability. Has that presented challenges to you in practice? It's one that's talked about quite often. You know, what do you recommend how it be dealt with? 
>> JELENA MALININA: It is a challenge. I can give you a positive example of what was done in the EU because many countries are now introducing electronic health records and because we move a lot from one EU country to another, it would be useful to have, for instance, my own record when I move somewhere or even for holidays if I need the medical care, for instance. 
They are introducing a system allowing interoperability from different systems of the country. They needed to agree on how they encrypt the data, which standards they use and actually HL7 is the standard used for this infrastructure in the EU. 
Of course it is only one fraction of data when we speak about electronic health records. There will be others. How do we agree on interoperability and the standards used for the others? Who knows. 
Another problem in the area of less structured data. So there is using the real world data as a complementary source for any kind of decision making and also it is popular to speak about it in terms of new medicine developments. There will be new initiatives in Europe to apply the data as a complementary source for clinical trials. Then the big challenge is how do we ensure that this data is of good quality. If someone picks up a comment on Twitter about their reaction to a medicine, I turned red like a lobster. What does it actually mean? Is it good quality? Complementary source? Did the patient eat something else which caused the redness on the face? There are many questions to answer and how do we approach it. 
It's never easy.
At the EU, once again there are many health care systems and national rules on how it is approached, especially in health research. Rao, I see you're unmuted. I thought you were trying to talk. No worries at all 
Anyone else? I'm curious about the data interoperability. 
>> GERALYN MILLER: Interoperability is a challenge. It's always been a challenge. I think there is great work happening in the HL7 community to enable that. There is a subtly though. The challenge isn't always technology. Sometimes it's policy. By policy people may not report out certain sets of information. Policy is a little harder thing. Understanding where people are in terms of their state ‑‑ like lockdown or not. Where are they in the spectrum? That's information that's hard to gather. There is no consistent way to capture that and represent it. Most people don't report out on it. It is super important information if you want to track, for example, progression of disease and understand what has been most efficient at curbing the spread. So it's not all technology. There is a policy component to it. 
>> ANALIA BAUM: I'm sorry, it is in Spanish of course because at the national level. They have been working with a lot of interoperability standards for problems. We are a federal country, so each province can decide to adapt their system to this interoperability standard. 
In Buenos Aires City we did it. Our electronic records accomplished with these objectives.
Technically we can exchange information between the public sector or another that accomplished the same objectives 
So we need to define the politics to do that because at the national level there is an application that they can put if they want to share or not that they have information between different province or different sectors ‑‑ health sectors. But the problem is that each government decides to share that information between different provinces. We understand that it's useful for better quality of health but generally they are afraid they use it for political issues. So we are discussing if the formation ‑‑ the patient is the owner of the information we shall know that it's changed. But it's not happening yet. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Well said. Sveatoslav, I saw you unmuted earlier. Did you have anything? I don't want to skip over you. 
>> SVEATOSLAV VIZITIU: I agree with all that they said. I think the main point is the policy and rules of each country. 
For example, in Europe it is a really big advance but Europe has so many countries but it is from the same umbrella. 
At the same time each country has rules about policies and so on. When you want to extend to a new market you have to start with the policies. Only after you can go with technology and go there about the health. Yes, I totally agree that it's very important, the policy to be united or simplified about innovation. 
>> BRIAN SCARPELLI: Well, I know that ‑‑ I had maybe one more ‑‑ just looking. I do not see any audience questions yet here. We are closing on the end of our session here. There was one I can kind of ask a two‑prong question that you can answer both questions if you would like or just one of the two maybe. 
But, you know, one is, you know, is the IGF as an org has told us they are interested in what voluntary commitment or commitments us as the session participants are undertaking or will undertake during the next year to address some of the challenges that we have raised. 
So that's one. The other maybe part of this is, you know, if there was a way ‑‑ one policy that you could change that would responsibly advance digital health uptake and improve outcomes for patients what would it be? Maybe these are linked. These were two questions I wanted to make sure and try to fit them in here. 
So, please, anyone, go ahead. 
>> ANALIA BAUM: Okay. Promoting trust and security in digital environment because it was the most important issues discussed during the telehealth services. So we need to work on that. We are beginning on biometrics and personal ‑‑ the public health sector for better security and privacy for patients and health care workers. 
>> GERALYN MILLER: I want to echo that. I think that's the overarching umbrella. When you look at AI you can't be successful without trust and security and privacy. That would be our commitment. If I was queen for a day I would hope that we can bring broadband to all, frankly, to enable people who may be marginalized and realize what we learn in the pandemic, that access ‑‑ internet, broadband access is a social determinant of health and affects the way we work, the way our children learn. It affects our health care. It affects the way we play. We are not out of the weeds yet from a vaccine standpoint. Though there are vaccines and phase three trials it will be a long period of transition before we get back to normal. A lot of that depends on equal access. 
>> SVEATOSLAV VIZITIU: I agree about the umbrella and I hope the next step when COVID will end that everyone will start to invest in health care. Because we see that each country is not really about the health care. We need to be more in the health care. This is important steps in my opinion after the COVID crisis. 
>> SUBBARAO KAMBHAMPATI: I tend to be a realist. I'm obviously not on the ground like many of my copanelists are. The great Pfizer COVID vaccine requires minus 94 degrees Fahrenheit maintenance. Tell me exactly where outside of the richest places and richest counties can that be used. 
Having said that, I think digital connected health, I see it as a great positive force in reducing inequities. It would be easier to transport it. In fact, one of the interesting facts is Google did a study in Thailand to see whether or not the super accurate system they developed, how is it working on the ground. They learned a lot of interesting lessons, not the obvious ones in particular that do have broadband. But they actually wound up saying the real use on the ground actually changes the kind of accurate images they might be expecting and they are to go back to. 
I see it as a huge positive thing. I didn't really see that in the old days without connected health or digital health. You would be sort of ‑‑ I mean private companies don't have that much interest in making sure what they are doing would be helping the countries that don't have the sort of resources. 
One nice thing is the cell phone penetration is extremely high, even in some of the poorest countries in the world. There is a certain level of health care support that will be brought with respect to this sort of connected health because of those kinds of things. There is an interesting article I read somewhere about this guy sitting in the U.S. is helping folks in Nigeria or somewhere where they basically used the cell phone very bad pictures but that's still enough to give them useful diagnostic health they never had before. 
So I think of this overall we talked about the worries we have. But it's also a question of I think this is probably helping very much the sustainable development in the sense that it actually brings what is happening in the U.S. and countries much faster to be of use to countries which don't have that kind of resources. So, yeah. That part of me is actually less cynical on the connected health side.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-ws287-robots-against-disinformation-automated-trust-building^^

 
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Hello.  It's so interesting to be here, folks.  It's fantastic for us to discuss such an interesting topic with people all over the world or at least across three or four continents from South America, North America, Switzerland and obviously Asia as well, and discussing a topic that is actually something that impact it's all of us.  We are discussing about disinformation, and more specifically, we're discussing about how or what is the role of bots and automated tools in this context.
So, before we dive in in our specific topics, I would just like us to introduce ourselves a little bit like in one minute, so I'm Christian Perrone from Brazil and work at ITS as Coordinator for Rights and Technology Team, and so Deb, one minute about yourself and a little bit about your organization.
   >> DEBORA ALBU:  Definitely.  Hello, everyone.  Good morning.  Good afternoon or good evening from wherever you are joining us.  It's a pleasure to be here together with Christian, which is a fellow ITSer together with me, and also my fellow panelists, it's a pleasure to be here with you.  Unfortunately, we cannot at the same room this year, but I'm glad to be sharing the screen at least with you this year.  I'm Debora Albu, the Coordinator of our Democracy and Technology Program and Institute for Technology and Society.  We are a Brazilian based organization specifically based in Rio, even though that doesn't mean much this year in which we are all remotely working and safely working from our homes.
At the Institute for Technology and Society, our mission is to make sure that the Global South also has a voice in the Internet governance discussion and in the discussion regarding digital rights, and in the discussion regarding how new technologies affect and impact us as societies, and how us as societies can also create more ethical and democratic technologies.
At the Democracy and Technology Team, we are very fond of experimenting with new technologies to strengthen Democratic principles, and so in that sense we take a lot of advantages of the opportunities that are given by new technologies, working on developing civic technologies, and enhances civic empowerment.
However, we do also know that there are lots of challenges in that sense, so such as disinformation which is the topic of our discussion here today, a topic that we have been working and discussing and researching for a couple of years now, and we have been developing a lot of projects regarding disinformation and combating disinformation as well from a Brazilian perspective, but also from a global perspective.  Thank you, and we hope to have a very fruitful discussion with all of you also attending and participating in the chat.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Thank you, Deb.  Can I ask you, Jenna, to say a few words about you and your organization?
   >> JENNA FUNG:  Sure.  Hi, everyone.  This is Jenna from Hong Kong.  I am the Community Engagement Lead of DotAsia organization that is actually leading NetMission Academy Youth Internet Governance Academy for the young people in Asia‑Pacific, and I'm also the Coordinator of the Asia‑Pacific Youth IGF and Hong Kong Youth IGF.  And I've been engaged as an ambassador three years ago and since then I've been actively joining all of the IGF conferences and trying to make a change, especially in these past two years, things happened in the society that I live in, and it actually even encouraged me more to stay more engaged in this community because I realize how technologies and Internet can help people to make a change in their life and to fight for their rights.
So, I really am looking forward to the discussion we're going to have in this session, and thanks for inviting me.  Thank you.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Thank you very much, Jenna.  Can I ask you, Jan, to say a few words and about the committee?  Thank you.
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Absolutely.  Thank you for having me.  My name is Jan Gerlach a Lead Public Policy Manager at Wiki Media Foundation which is the nonprofit based in San Francisco that hosts and supports Wikipedia and other projects of free knowledge.  The organization also supports a larger movement ecosystem of individuals and groups, organized groups and chapters around the world who contribute to Wikipedia to make sure that the information and knowledge included in Wikipedia is up to date, lives up to high‑quality standards, and also promote Wikipedia in their relative contexts in various regions around the world.
I am a lawyer by training, and as high title suggests I work in public policy so I promote or advocate for laws around the world that basically create a positive environment in which Wikipedia can grow and flourish, but where people also have access to Wikipedia and can contribute to it freely without fear of retribution or their own safety actually being threatened.
We come to disinformation with a pretty obvious connection.  Many people go to Wikipedia, actually, when they try to find out what is true and what is happening in their country, what is on the news or just want further information about a thing that they have heard, like who is this person that I see on the headlines, what is this concept that scientists are talking about, et cetera.  So, yeah, Wikipedia is a great place to actually use to combat disinformation in everyday life, and I'm really excited to be here and join this conversation today.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Thank you, Jan.  Chris, now can I ask you to ais a few words.
   >> CHRISTOPHER TUCKWOOD:  Sure.  Hi, everyone I'm Christopher Tuckwood a director of organization called The Sentinel Project and we're an NGO focused on assisting communities threatened by mass atrocities around the world and in doing that we place a strong emphasis on two things, one being direct cooperation with the people in harm’s way and then the other being the innovative use of technology which can take a lot of forms, whatever tools are available and appropriate to address the drivers of risk in a given situation, and the connection with today's topic is that for several years now we've been working on what we call misinformation management because we've recognized that misinformation and rumors, along with things like hate speech and other such dynamics, are really significant drivers of instability in different societies, and can often also trigger violence and other sort of negative outcomes, so effectively countering them both online and offline is a really critical way to reduce the risk of this kind of instability and violence.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Fantastic.  Thank you, Chris.  So, we have all faced bots and automated tools in our trade and everyday lives as well and have seen them being used to support disinformation and to help spread misinformation in general.  But what about using the same tools in order to fight disinformation?  And this is the question of today's workshop.  And I would like to start asking Chris, since he's already started mentioning a little bit about what is the work that The Sentinel Project does, so probably when you're talking about humanitarian crisis and all of the things that you were talking about, like fighting against genocide, you probably have seen these tools being used in order to actually foster this malicious messages, disinformation in general.  So, what made you think about using the same, the very same tools in order to fight?  And what are the tools that you think are important or at least useful in order to actually fight misinformation and to a certain extent, achieve truth?  That's our point today, so can you talk a little bit about that.
   >> CHRISTOPHER TUCKWOOD:  Sure.  I'll take a few minutes to try to address that.  So, I'll start off by saying that, of course, as you probably guess by this point, our experience with this has been primarily in conflict affected countries and also just for the ease of terminology, whenever I say misinformation, that also includes disinformation.  We don't necessarily always make or have the ability to make a really strong distinction between intentional versus unintentional false information, whether it's circulating online or offline.
So, you know, as we've already kind of I think established rumors and misinformation can really drive the distrust and fear and hatred that destabilizes societies and increase the risks of violence.  In our experience, we admittedly don't have any concrete evidence of any of the places that we have worked, having bots or other forms of automation being used as part of coordinated disinformation campaigns and that's not to say that it hasn't happened.  It's just to say that it can be very difficult to identify when it is actually happening.
But so from that perspective, as it stands right now, we kind of just treat all misinformation the same, although it's an open question and maybe something that we can get into later and even hear from some of the audience members on whether or not it makes a difference in how we respond to things, whether it's disinformation versus misinformation.
But I would say that generally speaking our interest in this topic of starting to use, you know, keep using the term "bots" I guess or forms of automation encountering misinformation is because we know that the adversaries, so to speak, the malicious actors who are trying to drive this kind of instability or manipulate populations or insight violence, are using or at least have the potential to use this technology, and especially as the kinds of countries that we work from the start to become increasingly digitized, as is already happening, but as this reaches a larger scale in terms of people's online engagement; and therefore, online exposure to this kind of problem.  The only way to respond to that potential risk is basically to respond in kind.  It's almost like an arm's race I guess you could say.  If there are malicious actors who are using automation to push out this sort of manipulative, fabricated content towards large numbers of people, then the only practical way is to try to use similar approaches, at least for monitoring and identifying those kinds of trends.
How we actually then respond to it at the same kind of scale is another question entirely, but that's basically it.  The interest in this technology is to increase our capabilities, to keep up with the growing problem.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Fantastic.  You are quite right that this is a very interesting way of doing it, and to think of it as fighting fire with fire to a certain extent.  It's quite an interesting approach.  So, now, Jan, so continuing on the same topic as you mentioned, Wikipedia is probably one of the centers that people go to to have information they believe they can trust, so it probably is also a hotspot for people to fight narratives against and probe to a certain extent to foster this information on Wikipedia.  We have seen this in Venezuela a few years ago very strongly, but probably you have seen it in more discrete ways in many situations, but apparently as far as I understand, you also use automated tools and bots to fight this.  So, in this very understanding that Chris mentioned of fighting fire with fire, so how do you approach bots, how do you feel about bots in general, and what are your thoughts on doing it for the good to a certain extent?
   >> JAN GERLACH:  How do I feel about bots in general?  That's a very interesting question, that's big.  I just maybe clarify that Wiki media projects are curated and maintained and grown by a community of people around the world, and as a foundation that hosts those projects, we merely sort of enable and empower people around the world to do this.  We don't make calls about this is disinfo, this is not true, this is low‑quality content and then remove it.  This is the community doing this, right.  And they work together collectively, collaboratively also, deciding what can stay up, what should maybe be rephrased a little bit, what is not accurate, what needs to go, and we try to help them.  Our belief is that technology should do what people cannot do and should allow people to do what they're good at more effectively and more efficiently.
So, there are many bots, actually on Wikipedia that are run by the community.  We don't place them out there.  They are built Open Source by the community.  They go through a process of registration where the community weighs in.  The community sort of does code review and there is a certain policy for allowing bots.  And those bots do various things.  They do ‑‑ they remove vandalism like ha-ha or slur words or just stuff that is obviously not a sentence.  They flag copyright violations.  Others just say thank you and hello to newcomers and yet others make sure that there is no double linking between pages that refer to each other all the time and stuff like that, which are the like smaller tedious tasks, right, that would really be a waste of time for the editors if they did this all the time.
What this means is that the bots actually free up time for the community to do the hard work.  And the hard work, of course, is the ongoing decision‑making about what is good quality, what is accurate, what is verifiable, right?  What is a good way to write neutrally about a person or an event, and that's where the community really spends their time and that's what they want to do, right?  So, we have a very positive outlook, actually on bots to come to your big question.  We think that bots and other technologies can really help humans to do the work that they want to do in a good way and free up time.
Now, going away a bit from bots to machine learning tools.  We do deploy machine learning tools ourselves.  There is a system called Object Revision Evaluation System, ORES that is placed on a few language versions of Wikipedia in collaboration with the community, again, and that flags bad edits and bad articles to the community.  It's sort of like an AI as a service.  People can subscribe to it and then they get flags, notifications of bad, potentially bad edits, and can review them.
And we know that this has reduced the time that the community spends just doing those evaluations by a factor of 10.  So, if they spent 10 hours before doing that, they only spend 1 hour now and they can actually go on and make the ‑‑ they can go do the harder revisions of information.  So that's sort of like just a quick overview of how we approach technology and bots specifically in the fight against misinformation and disinformation.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Fantastic.  Thank you very much, Jan.  You're quite right.  There is also this factor of reducing human overview needs or how many hours of human overview will have, and so talking about that, about hours of overview and how humans interact with bots as well, I would like to ask, Jenna, as you actually are involved in youth engagement, so you have probably seen how bots can have this impact in a positive and negative way.  How do you ‑‑ or what are your thoughts on that and how do you feel that bots can be used in a positive way?
   >> JENNA FUNG:  Thank you.  That is actually basically the focus I was taking and trying to point out.  Earlier before we had the session, I was trying to prep on the question we are having and I was still questioning myself whether using bots for blocking misinformation, if it's a good way to tackle this problem because sometimes maybe lack of the context or any kinds of barriers, that might actually make us ‑‑ you know, that would actually channel us like what are we receiving.
But then when I think about it deeply, I think bots can actually help us to increase the accuracy in so‑called fact‑checking mechanisms when we have these issues of misinformation.  Why am I saying this?  Let me state an example that I was like experiencing with some particularly in Hong Kong.  So, there was a period of time back a few months ago, and with this video of an incident happened last year in 2019, August 31.  There was a raw video.  It's a livestream of Hong Kong police storming Metro Stations, and then it was actually even the captions or the video itself no added or even with the caption it was just about some personal political opinion, which by the community guidelines, by Facebook, it's not going to be flagged as misinformation or forced information.
But it does, you know, in fact it did flag and got blurred by saying that it's a false information because somewhere else online on Twitter or other platform, many people are trying to say that in China, the police are trying to arrest people who got infected with COVID‑19.  So, in this part, it's actually ‑‑ it's actually false but the video itself is not related to it, it was another information.  But in this example, that video actually flagged as false information because of what was actually said on other platforms.  And this fact‑checking platform actually wrote really clear that it's not related, but then there is inaccuracy in this part, and of course we write it to Facebook and then that platform called Boom Live actually responded to it very accurately, but I think that was a thing that we need to eliminate in the future because if similar situations happen in the future, bad players might be abusing this kind of mechanism to try to channel what people ‑‑ you know, try to limit how the disseminations of information because they want to limit what kind of information you're receiving.
So, I think with bots, we can lower our dependence on certain fact‑checking platforms and reliance on journalism in fact checking because that's something that an algorithm can help us to improve in accuracy.  Because like what I'm saying in some territories, maybe those so‑called, by definition, false information will never be able to deliver to peoples in that territory.  They do it very accurately with the AI or the bots, so that's something maybe Facebook or we need to think about because like earlier before I finished my work and headed back home to attend this session.  I was like scrolling on my screen, on my social media screen and I saw a post of people saying whatever Donald Trump is posting right now, Facebook flagged a notice saying that Joe Biden is the potential candidate to be the next President or something like that.  But it's kind of like irrelevant to whatever information on Facebook that is related to Donald Trump.  So let's think about it, of course in some territories, they might want to block everything and hopefully to deliver certain information that they expect their audience to receive, but in some other territories which we have all kinds of freedom of expression and in a very Democratic world, there might be some other extreme that we are actually practicing the same thing in flagging information inaccurately and wrongly.
So, I think that's the thing that we also need to think about, even if we're trying to do the same thing better, we are doing something that is actually the same as another extreme that we are trying to avoid.  I hope that my English can actually put together what I'm trying to explain, and that's something that I want to respond directly to your questions at this moment and I hope we will have some other intersection to respond and I will talk a little bit more on some other aspects later.  Thank you.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Fantastic.  You're quite right, if you're using information to fight misinformation, you have to be careful if you're not in our fight doing ourselves disinformation to a certain extent or at least blocking people's speech, so you're quite right that this is a topic that has to be addressed as well.
So, Deb, now it's to you.  Since we are coming from Brazil, we have seen it firsthand how misinformation or disinformation campaigns even in election time, and we have seen that ITS has developed one specific tool to fight that in a very particular way, so my question to you is; one, why using this kind of tools like bots and automation tools to fight disinformation, and what are your thoughts for that?  Or why to do this and whether it has an impact in misinformation campaigns?
   >> DEBORA ALBU:  Thank you, Christian.  Thank you for the other panelists.  You have already kind of unrolled our discussion here.  To respond to your question, I think the first thing is to consider what kind of bots are we talking about when we are talking about disinformation, and here we're talking specifically about what is called, you know, by a lot of the literature, social bots.  And social bots, they are created to emulate human behavior, they are created to a certain extent transpose themselves as if they were human, as if they were actual people, saying actual things on social media.
So, in that sense, it is very difficult to identify or verify or even place a very specific label on saying that a specific account is or is not a bot when we're talking about social bots.
So, in that sense, tools are methodologies to identify such bots cannot detect 100% of what is a bot and what is not.  Rather, what they do is to identify and analyze automated behavior or to try to create a new word "bot likeness" which is the similarity between that behavior with a bot, with an automated behavior.
So taking this into account, the Institute for Technology and Society has developed a tool called PegaBot which is the name in Portuguese and in English it would be something like a bot capture, and it does work very similarly to other tools that, at least the native English speakers can use more directly, such as botometer or even bot sentinel, but what PegaBot does is not only to give a probability of a Twitter account being a bot or not, we give a percentage result of that probability based on an algorithm.
So in one way, we are actually using automation to detect automation as well, but one of the main things for us with PegaBot is to give more transparency to the use of bots in social media, so we're not here to say that an account is or not a bot, but we are here talking about giving transparency to the use of automation and this sort of automation in social media.
Our rationale is based on the idea that the more people know about the existence of bots online, the more they are aware to deal with maybe such impersonations, right.  And I see a comment here on the chat that is really talking about this from Xavier and he's talking about the idea of how we answer comments from bots is very different than the way we should be answering comments from humans, and our rationale is exactly that.  We focus on transparency so that people understand how the algorithm works, how the results are given, and how this analysis comes to be.
So one of the focuses of our newly launched website, by the way, is a page on transparency in which we literally disaggregate the algorithm criteria and all the parameters that are used to produce those results to give those probabilities so that people can better understand what those results mean instead of just taking a probability percentage into account and saying, oh, it's 78% bot then it's a bot.  No.  The idea is that ultimately, there is a person, a human actually interpreting those results, and as other panelists have spoken, summing up the ability that AI or automated processes, methodologies, and tools have.
So, it's about people plus automation that actually gives us a better result and a better understanding of how to deal with disinformation in social media.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Thank you very much, Deb.  And I think this is a very good segue for a second part talking about different approaches.  You have all mentioned different ways ‑‑ different bots and different ways to fight misinformation with bots and fighting the bots that spread disinformation, and so the question is behind this, there are different ways of disinformation campaigns can happen.  One can be more malicious, meaning disinformation itself.  Or in some ways misintentional or a little like misinformation in general.  So, do you think we should use the same tools, the same automation, the same bots all the time, or they should have different approaches or different ways to deal with those two different levels of misinformation and disinformation?
So, my question will go first to Jan.  You probably have seen it in many ways throughout Wikipedia’s work and in particular Wikipedia, the different ways of doing things, either misinformation with less intentional or sometimes even very intentional ways of changing the narratives, changing and using bots to do that.  So, do you think we should have the same approach of these two levels of misinformation in general or they should be different?  And whether the tools that we use, they should be broad tools or should be very, very specific, context specific, and speech specific even?  Or it depends?
   >> JAN GERLACH:  The lawyer in me will always say it depends, right.  So, on Wikipedia, to bring it back to that, I think it matters little to an editor whether something is deliberate, a deliberate disinformation campaign or just somebody including a false statement from a maybe not so trust worthy newspaper.
The ultimate goal is to provide verifiable and trustworthy information with a neutral point of view as well.  So, I think it doesn't matter so much to the editor on Wikipedia where this really comes, but that may matter from a tactical perspective, of course.  Like are there like 50 sock puppets which are accounts that are merely created to sort of, basically, vandalize things or shift a point of view, are they coordinating to bring up a point over and over again, then you may need a different approach because you may need more editors watching a certain series of articles, right.
Or is this really just like one person innocently trying to edit something which is not up to ‑‑ not up to the standards of Wikipedia, then you may not need such like a coordinated approach.  I think it's merely a question of tactics, really.  I don't think the technology on Wikipedia would be different for that.
When it comes to the bot, I think that the work that they do free up this capacity for the editors either way is, but to go back to a point that was raised earlier about the human quality of a bot maybe, which is something that Debora mentioned with the PegaBot, like is this bot‑like, right.  So I think that is really something that Wikipedia people have taken issue with on Wikipedia when a bot makes an decision, bots don't have patience, bots make immediate decisions and they say yes or no to most things, and that is something that in a collaborative context when people try to give their time and work on a voluntary basis, being said no and just like your edit is reverted feels very harsh, right.  And that's where some people on Wikipedia are actually a little worried about having too many bots around that cause sort of hurt and frustration with others.  And ultimately, can also lead to a situation where somebody who just comes on and wants to help with a certain project is so frustrate that they leave.  That is the big problem with Wikipedia, or the big issue I would say with Wikipedia working against disinformation.  You need a lot of eyeballs to help with this, to help against disinformation, right.
And then when you have people leaving because of, well usually there is a lot of factors, right, but bots can be one and so maybe that is a bit of a negative aspect where the technology helps in one way, but also prevents newcomers from feeling comfortable and actually helping with the whole system.
And so, that's maybe a side where I can see that the technology may need over time like to take a different approach, as it has to fit with a community.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Fantastic.  I think you have a very good point on that maybe it's not a public acknowledgment but a way that we use technology, so it's a lot of tactics.  I find that is quite interesting.
So on this note, I would ask Chris, so in your work in the sentinel project, you have early warning systems that you use new technologies, so do you believe it's different when you use inside the early warning systems some technology that would look at misinformation with a less intentional point of view, or when there is a coordinated campaign on disinformation?  Do you think there is a difference in technology, that there is a different in approach, and whether the tools that you use for this early‑warning system are different to deal with those different topics or different ways of speech?
   >> CHRISTOPHER TUCKWOOD:  Yeah, so as of right now the short answer is, no, that we don't really make a distinction between one or the other or have different tools for addressing one or the other.  Because this is, I think, still a very open question in terms of how we ‑‑ how we address the issue of whether or not something is misinformation or disinformation and whether or not it makes a difference in terms of how we counter it.  So, from the early warning perspective, misinformation broadly including disinformation is very relevant as an indicator, along with, again, you know, something that I mentioned earlier which is hate speech or dangerous speech deliberately inciting violence.  There is a very close relationship between the two phenomena, misinformation versus hate speech, they're not two completely distinct things and they interact very, very closely in some cases in some very dangerous ways.
So, I think for us, being able to ‑‑ the biggest use of technology at this point would be in better being able to monitor and recognize both of those online from a purely early warning perspective and not from a then intervention perspective.  And this is something that we've done more on the hate speech side with Project Hate Base which is basically a multilingual automated system for recognizing ‑‑ for recognizing hate speech online on platforms like Twitter, for example.
I'm really interested in finding out whether there are ways that we can apply a similar methodology to recognizing rumors and misinformation circulating online, although I think there is a significant amount of difference in how that would have to be approached.
Thinking ‑‑ or so assuming that we can do all of that effectively in terms of actually getting, you know, descent automation that can still support human judgment but take a lot of the work off of human analysts or human moderators, if we can get a decent automation just to recognize and effectively monitor this stuff online, that would be a big step forward.
The question then is what we do about it.  And I think, you know, for us there is definitely still a role in technology to be used there.  The trick is doing what will actually be effective.  So I think there is a risk that if we start using this technology too much to try and influence public discord against that itself, so we try to do something that I think, you know, Debora referenced with regard to PegaBot which is to give people the means for themselves to better recognize these sorts of things and make their own judgments.
And, ultimately, that's what's going to address this problem.  Technology can help, but it's a human problem that requires human solutions, and even in the more low‑technology areas where we've worked, we've really tried to encourage more kind of critical thinking among community members to simply question things in the first place and actually think about whether or not something that they're seeing might be true or false, and that can make a significant difference, I think, as well.
But then, of course, they also have to have the means to try to verify it.  So I don't think that necessarily answers your question very well, although I don't want to take up more time from other people, but it's all just to say that it's a very open question at this point, and I think that except for in very extreme or specific cases where it would be obvious that there is a coordinated disinformation campaign that's trying to incite violence or something like that, in the majority of cases it really just doesn't make that much of a difference in terms of how we respond to it.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Fantastic.  You have a very good point.  I think behind this huge discussion is about how us humans will approach and understand what are the coordinated contents or whether it's just a matter of misinformation.  Very specific matter of disinformation.
On this note, I would ask Jenna, since you do a lot of this work and different engagements with different age groups, particularly with the youth, do you think there is a different way of engaging with such tools, I mean, with bots and automated tools in general from different age groups and whether we could have a very broad approach since one of the things we're going to do here is identify what is a bot, what is not a bot, what is disinformation oar what is misinformation or at least to flag out if there is a different approach for the different types of age groups or it is a broad approach that would be okay, or how would you fashion the idea of having a tool for all ages or it should be a tool for specific age groups, or specific groups as well?  How do you feel about this?
   >> JENNA FUNG:  Well, so first of all, I really am not a very technical person so if you are asking me my opinion on how to identify bots and stuff like that, I would say I'm not quite familiar with that.  But then for sure, we will have this part in tackling what we say online or on social media so I can put a little bit on top of that.
I, personally, think and from my own perspective, I do not think it's really necessary to have too many bots in controlling the information that we are receiving because like what earlier the other panelists say, it's actually very important to use the human intelligence to actually educate people to judge whether the accuracy or whether this information is right or wrong.  I think that's the very ideal way in making people think more critically because it's impossible for ‑‑ not impossible, but what's the point of having bots or community moderators to moderate every single information online to decide whether it's violent or it's right or wrong.  Instead, I think the ideal way is to educate people.  But then talking about using bots, I think more urgently, I think using it to underage would be more appropriate because right now especially after the pandemic, very young kids need to get online.  When they're actually under age because they need to attend online class, and then the kids actually get online very easily.  I don't know other places, but in Hong Kong, every young kids even in primary school have iPhone 6 or latest model of the smart phone and then they lie about their age and get on social media and then they receive the information.  And there is another thing if it's young kids or adults, but we tend to ‑‑ it's actually basic human.  We tend to listen to things that we believe we can trust, so what I'm trying to say is whether certain associations, initiatives, or organizations, they're trying to provide trustworthy information to prove this message or this information online if it's right or wrong.  People will still try to choose over something that they want to hear, and then ‑‑ and that's the thing that will still make things maybe misleading because they're just listening to what they want to hear.
And earlier Chris was saying, or talking about using bots to deal with trying to deal with hate speech and conspiracy theory, and bots would try to ‑‑ and of course we're working on it right now trying to improve bots in tackling with all of these issues, but I believe human intelligence we evolve even faster.  People will come up with some new ideas to try to.  And so sometimes I feel like if we're working so hard in designing some mechanism or improving the algorithm to screen out things that we think this audience should not receive, but actually how harmful it is if these people are receiving this information if they can think critically, regardless of their age.
So, I think for sure young age maybe we're trying to develop some system or mechanism to protect them from misleading information, but that's actually an assumption, we're trying to assume that they're in a context that is actually democratic and totally free, so think about the other extreme.  People can actually totally use these bots and mechanisms to screen out what you can receive, and people, especially young age, if they are being taught and educated in the system, they will just believe what they're taught and, you know, whatever information you feed them they think is right.
So I think that's the point we also need to think of, especially if we're in a territory that is ‑‑ that you deserve and you have totally freedom, because think about that some people, they know what is happening in this world, but they can use this kind of system to try to limit certain groups of people on what kind of information they're receiving, and this group of people may not know the information that they're receiving is actually wrong because they're actually being taught the wrong is right.  Yeah.  So, I think that's the point that I want to talk on this in responding to your questions.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Fantastic.  You have quite an interesting point talking about how human interact with the different aspects of bots and all of that and this is a very interesting segue for the question that I'm going to ask Deb.  You mentioned about the tools that are actually for media literacy, so these tools they tend to be taught by being general tools to make them or everyone understand what is a bot, what is not, how to identify, how to monitor them, and do you think this same approach could be ‑‑ could happen all over the different types of tools that we use to fight disinformation?  Do you think all of them should have at least to a certain extent a component of media literacy as well?
   >> DEBORA ALBU:  Thank you, Chris.  I think media and information literacy is definitely not only about disinformation or misinformation so to speak.  It is about trying to make sense of a world in which the information ecosystem is more and more complex and that the volume of information is greater than ever.  If we consider that now classic infograph on what happens on the Internet every minute.  It's overwhelming, so whenever I show this to people that are not from our environment, from our community, people get completely overwhelmed.  So, in that sense, navigating that ecosystem is definitely about-facing disinformation, misinformation, hate speech, and other forms of speech and human expression have not always been expressed.  We're also talking about bot expression here.  So, in that sense, having media and information literacy as a basis or as a skill that we need for the future is not only about disinformation and misinformation, but it's also about how to navigate in this very complex world of information.
Bots and AI, talking about a very, very broad general term for artificial intelligence can help us then curate or select and even digest and consume information making sense of this whole world of data out there, so it's not only about understanding which kind of information do we want to consume, from which areas, from which sources.  But are those filters coming from?  If we do use AI to filter information for us, which filters are we really using?  If we do rely only on algorithms from social media, for example, or social media platforms, it means that we do not have the control upon which or how this AI is working to select or to rate information for us.  Rather, there is a private entity with private interests doing that for us, and ultimately nudging us to keep on consuming a specific kind of information and only in those spaces.
So, I believe that even if we complement media and information literacy with other approaches such as fact checking or even couple that with good regulation and good public policy, it's fundamental to have media and information literacy as the basic approach because it is definitely going to have more impact as it promotes a deeper culture and societal transformation.
So, I would definitely go on the way to say that every tool or process has to be based on media information literacy, not only because of disinformation but also because of the complex ecosystem of information that we live in.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Fantastic.  I think this is quite an interesting segue for our final block of discussion, and there is one question that I find kind of leads us to this direction.  The question is, isn't it naive to think that people always want the truth?  So, my question would go about the social risks of using such bots.  I think Jenna started very well in the beginning talking about the risks of using bots to fight disinformation and the bot itself would actually limit speech or itself move disinformation or spread disinformation, so my question actually is, do you believe it is possible, legitimate to use bots to fight disinformation and shouldn't we be very, well aware, that people might have a right to say the wrong things and have a right to actually look at the wrong information, and how can we actually sort of make an equilibrium between using these tools for what we think is good and how people actually have the rights to, you know, be able to see whatever they want to see, and maybe well why not to say, have a right to be misinformed if they actually want.  So how do you manage using such tools for the good and how do you think whether this is legitimate or what are the social risks of using it?  Can we start with Jenna and then move around with all of us?
   >> JENNA FUNG:  For sure.  I think using bots is a good way to eliminate certain things, such as the accuracy in fact checking misinformation and disinformation, but I think using bots is also important for us to engage stakeholder insight.  Because think about it, if we are heavily depending on bots in tackling hate speech or disinformation, there must be certain groups of people trying, you know, defining certain things ‑‑ to define, let's say for example, to define what is right, what is wrong, how we should improve this bot.
And then in another form if we view this mechanism is actually that group of people trying to make everyone follow that definition, which is not democratic, so if we really want everyone to have the right to decide what they want to receive, I think even if we're using bots to tackle the issues, we have to engage all stakeholders insight to develop this kind of mechanism.  But again, then there is like private entities having these kind of bots or initiatives with tackling these kind of issues, then it comes to that discussion again on these privately owned public space, then it's another workshop we can talk on about it.  But I think in general, I think it would be good to have ‑‑ to use bots in tackling with these issues but not in that extreme that we only depend on that because like what other speakers said, digital literacy, and then I think the participation from all stakeholders is also important in tackling these issues.  Yeah.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Fantastic.  All stakeholders should be a part of that and this is an interesting segue.  Chris, can you give your thoughts?
   >> CHRISTOPHER TUCKWOOD:  Sure.  So, leaving aside the purely technological question, I think I hope that I've established and several other people have also said similar things that the technology should be this to support human actions and just help humans to better cope with the scale of the issue.
But I think the question really takes on different forms whether we're talking about government or private sector actors or Civil Society.  You know, a company like Facebook or Twitter, they have the right to moderate content on their platforms, you know, sort of legal rights to freedom of speech and that sort of thing don't necessarily imply there, although from a philosophical perspective, maybe they should.
When it comes to government involvement, I'm very cautious about the sort of tendency for a lot of governments around the world to want to legislate this problem away, and essentially take away people's right to be wrong, so to speak, through you know, criminalizing the spreading of misinformation that people don't often realize that they're doing and often this is a sort of, you know, really just a sort of sneaky way I guess you could say of cutting down on freedom of speech and dissent and that sort of thing because the government of course gives itself the way to be the person they think is true or what is false and what they think is true or what don't is true is illegal.  And we can go into more detail and unfortunately we don't have time for it but to leave on the note of caution that the technology is there to be used by different parties but we all have different responsibilities in doing that and as much as possible, we should do it in the least restrictive way for sort of the marketplace of ideas.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Thank you very much, Chris.  Jan?
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Yeah.  What to add to that?  I just want to plus one that, actually.  But also, I think that the typical Wikipedia approach to all of this is always transparency, right.  Any article on Wikipedia has a so‑called talk page where you have a little discussion button up there and can you see how people have actually made changes and why, they explain them, and I think that is really helpful speaking about media literacy, right.  Understanding how a decision that has been made about content, the same thing happens in newsrooms, right, around the world.
And whatever technology we deploy, be it a bot that is run by the community or which is the system that we run that I mentioned before, we really believe in explainability as well and audits, right.  So, like it should be open to anyone to like really look under the hood and really understand this, granted you might need some technological understanding.  Right.  But there is this understanding out there and it's not just a black box and people can look into it.  And I think once that is there, once you comply with a few rules around sort of transparency and auditability, I think technology can be a really good tool to help fight misinformation, and it will require a mix of tools, right.  There is not just one silver bullet to use that warn‑out metaphor, but there is really a mix of tools and also people's contributions that will help in this fight.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Fantastic.  Thank you very much.  Deb, can you wrap it up for us?  What are your views on that?  We have about two minutes.
   >> DEBORA ALBU:  Thank you, Chris.  And thank you for the other panelists to kind of laying out the way for me.  I think when we talk about truth and the right to be wrong, we're definitely talking about very philosophical questions and philosophical questions that have been discussed for a couple of thousands of years, so not going on that route because we don't have the time for that.  I think ultimately, it is a manner of power.  Who is saying and who is pointing out what is right and what is wrong?  In what position of power are those people or institutions in so that they can be the sort of like the fortress holders of what is true and what is not?
So, I would ultimately go with a very Foucault approach to this in talking about power and it's important that we take power considerations into talking about the right to be right or wrong.  We're not talking about individual's right to be wrong, but also the institutional right to be wrong.  And I think I'll leave it on that and give it back to you, Chris.
   >> CHRISTIAN PERRONE:  Thank you very much.  I think we had a very interesting discussion.  We have mentioned that there are different types of bots that may fight disinformation, may fight misinformation, and that they may have different approaches toward it, but there might be a general broad approach, and one of the things that the media literacy would be interesting to be is at the bottom of any different approach that we'll have, and obviously, there are different types of actors that may lead to different types of legitimacies on use and deployment of these bots and transparency is probably one of the most important tools we have available to understand whether a bot should be used to fight disinformation.  Thank you very much for all panelists here today and thank you for the audience.  Thank you for the many interesting questions, and please find us on social media and let us discuss a little bit further this important topic.  Thank you very much.  Let's use bots to fight disinformation as well.
   >> DEBORA ALBU:  Thank you, everyone.  Have a great IGF.
   >> CHRISTOPHER TUCKWOOD:  It's been great.  Thank you.
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Thank you.  See you soon.
   >> DEBORA ALBU:  See you soon.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-9-%E2%80%93-ws324-one-size-fits-all-global-norms-as-a-threat-to-inclusion^^

 
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Hello.  Just wait a few minutes.  Take your seat.  There is coffee in the corner if you would like.  We will start soon.      (Pause). 
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  If you like in these meetings in the chat you can introduce yourself to the other participants, know who is in the room.  That's optional.  If you haven't joined an IGF session yet you can check how the chat works and how the interaction goes. 
   >> JAN GERLACH:  I am just hearing from Agustina, she is not receiving the e‑mail with the link.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Mine went to Spam.  I'm trying to think what's the saying of Spam in real life if you were in IGF in a building.  It is like when you put the problem inside of a bag and then you search the bag and you cannot find it.  You find a pen, a notebook but you cannot find it until you click somewhere and you get the problem in another room.      Just two more minutes with one participant having technical difficulties to find the room.  Just one or two minutes more and we will start.  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Is it the academic four minutes?  Four minutes.  All right.  
   >> FRANE MAROEVIC:  For questions people should use the Q and A function.  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Yes, questions ‑‑ for questions to the panelists.  There is Agustina.  Hello.  
   >> AGUSTINA DEL CAMPO:  Hello.  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  One more to go.  Good morning.  Thanks for joining us at this early time for you.  
   >> AGUSTINA DEL CAMPO:  Oh, my God, my face.  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Experience of jet lag.  (Laughter)     
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Just one more person to join us.  
   >> FRANE MAROEVIC:  We already have a question in the Q and A.  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Alex, are you here?  Yes.  
   >> ALEX WALDEN:  Hi.  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Hi.  
   >> ALEX WALDEN:  One link and then I realized the process.  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  You are breaking up for me a little bit.  Can everyone else hear her okay?  A little garbled sound from you.  Not sure why.  
   >> ALEX WALDEN:  Let me close some windows.  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  But glad you are here.  I think we can get started.  Here.      If everyone's ‑‑ yes.  Seems like we have a quorum.  Lots of attendees as well.  In the spirit of a productive session let's get going.  And it is for me to welcome everyone.  Hello and good morning, goof afternoon, good evening, and thanks for joining us at Workshop No. 324; One Size Fits All, Global Norms as a Threat to Inclusion.  I made this joke the last time in the session, you are probably not in the wrong room.  But if you are, welcome anyway.  Please stay.  We are going to have a great conversation here.      It is my pleasure to welcome you on behalf of the group of co‑organizers.  My name is Jan Gerlach.  I'm a led public policy manager at the Wikimedia Foundation which is a non‑profit in San Francisco that hosts Wikipedia.  I am joined by Fabro Steibel.  He is the director at the Institute of Technology and Society.  And also joined with Allison Davenport.  And we are joined by a wonderful group of speakers who will be introduced shortly.  I want to thank everyone who is watching this session and encourage you to help make it a success by asking questions in the webinar feature.  
Let me take a moment to frame today's conversation.  In a nutshell this session really explores the ways that in 2020 still rules for the Internet are shaped in some parts of the world and brought to others.  The Internet today seems boundless and inexhaustible as a resource for speech and knowledge and activity that continues to expand every day.  The child Internet was heralded as a great equalizer.  However as more nations see potential for harm on the Internet and struggle to cope with the volume created by content, by users every day, we are seeing increasing rules and regulations to pin the Internet to a shape that's recognizable and manageable.  
Unfortunately what is recognizable does not mean the same thing everywhere in the world.  And also not on every platform or for every community.  This results in a race to export one single revision for the Internet which to threaten inclusion online.  While a certain platform may band certain kinds of speech that discriminates based on sexual orientation in terms of service, a nation where that operates may pass a law that "promotion" of a homosexual lifestyle.  
Also conflict between the laws of multiple nations when it comes to what be and should be allowed on the Internet.  In practice, this can lead to a hierarchy of rules that must be followed online, which have the capacity to and interest in setting the tone of regulation for the Internet.  Similarly online communities from wealthy regions are often defining on platform norms for other regions.  Think of a sub‑Reddit or a Wikipedia.  The Internet is a tool that has great power to bring individuals and groups from across the globe.  There is a risk that those meeting places are all beginning to look the same in a way.  Meaning that many users do not see their identities or values reflected in the modern online world.      On the other hand, national or local standards set by governments or local communities often fail to reflect the interests of all in those locations as well and can be used to suppress access to information or critical speech.  
In this session we will examine the various sources of globally applied standards and discuss the benefits and real world consequences of local and global standards on various online communities.  From a policy perspective the most pressing questions that arise are the following:  For public policy and community standards but also local content how can we ensure that communities around the world can develop their own set of norms instead of being governed by rules that have been shaped in Developed Countries only.  And from a perspective or jurisdiction but also access to knowledge what is the role of extraterritorial jurisdiction.  
I'm very excited about this conversation today.  And also the perspectives that we will hear from our fabulous speakers.  I want to say a few sentences about the format or the structure of the conversation today which is hopefully interesting to you.  And will also help you engage if you would like.      We want to first in the first part of the conversation take stock, assess the state of play of exports of norms and rules and standards from one region to another.      Panelists will be asked to help contribute and think what kind of norms are actually shaped in one place and then applied elsewhere.  Allison and I will be taking notes during that part of the conversation.  And then respond to the ‑‑ to the panelists by sort of identifying patterns and really identifying the findings.  Based on those findings in a second part we will ask the panelists to assess the impacts that those norms have and what this means for inclusion online.      And we want to ask you to also contribute in the webinar feature if you are able to do so.  And we'll also use those, take those questions in to account as we report back.      And with that, I will hand over to our Moderator, Fabro, to introduce our fabulous speakers and kick off our conversation.  Thank you.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Thank you very much for the introduction.  Hello, everyone.  We have at this moment more than 30 participants, around 35 and growing.  If you haven't been in a session like this before, you can make questions in the question and answer box below.  And there is a closed caption if you need.      So I will kick off with some findings that we have in the Latin American region in international jurisdiction.  And the GRULAC report that says four out of five stakeholders that think about regulation in local contexts do take highly relevant international context when creating the rules.      It sees that we have international, that is global and global norms do matter for most of the stakeholders.  At the same time we have local context that are quite particular and they do matter.  We do have this effect what this panel is all about.  We have three speakers.  We have Frane Maroevic, Alex Walden, Agustina Del Campo.  A lot of them have different hats.  I will ask them to introduce themselves.  
I would like to kick off with a discussion.  What are the norms we have?  What are the global norms that we have at the local?  Is this about regulation?  Is it about law?  Is it about terms of use of private sector?  Is it about broad framework like the GDPR?  What are the norms that we see from the point of view.  In the next session we start to think about why it matters and please ‑‑ so please introduce yourself.  Alex, do you want to start?  Please introduce yourself.  And what are kind of the norms that we have that have this effect?  
   >> ALEX WALDEN:  Sorry.  Thanks.  And can you hear me all right?  Even though my connection was not great.  Okay.  Great.  Well, good morning from Washington D.C.  My name is Alex Walden.  And I lead the Human Rights work at Google.  So I work very closely with colleagues across the company that are focused on sort of data governance.  We are focused on access to information on various topics.  And my lens across all of that work across, all regions where we do business is to ‑‑ is to provide a lens of focus on Human Rights.  And so that's really kind of how I enter the conversation from Google.  What I'm doing is helping to provide a lens that's based in international standards on Human Rights.  That means that we are also informed by regional standards as well.  But fundamentally because we are a global company we try to start with the most global of baselines to ensure that what we are doing in terms of developing standards for our products is something that works everywhere.      An important aspect to our approach to thinking about how we create standards across our products, like our terms of service, but then each of our products have specific rules for what is and is not allowable.      Things like Youtube's community guidelines are an example of that.  In creating those community guidelines what we do there is try to create a foundation for the principles that we are applying globally but, of course, what we have to do is like in reality what's happening is that there are people in particular countries who are users of our services.  When we are looking at what is hate, what is harassment, what is all of these categories, where we prohibit content, how do we ensure that we are taking in to account the local context when we are ‑‑ when we are applying those principles and that's something that we are very reliant on on external experts.  We have regional experts internally, but it is something that's a constantly evolving conversation for us.      And then the last piece is the law intersects with that.  We are a U.S. based company.  And so that, of course, you know, with a lot of U.S. trained lawyers who do the work here but, of course, we have lawyers everywhere, and that ‑‑ U.S. framework underpins a lot of the way that the company thinks about norms and standards and legal obligations.      And so the framework that we developed sort of deals with conflicts of laws issues as well is about how do we ensure that we are respecting the law where we do business.  We have created a framework that allows us to do jail blocking and ensuring that what's governed in one country is not determining what is available in another country.  I will stop that.  I know that's a teaser for a lot of other things.  But just some of the core pieces that are integrated in to the way that we think about this.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Agustina, do you want to take next?  Please introduce yourself to the audience.  And what kind of norms are we talking about, norms/standards from your point of view?  
   >> AGUSTINA DEL CAMPO:  Hi everyone.  First thanks for the invitation.  It is an interesting panel.  My name is Agustina Del Campo.  I direct the center for studies on freedom of expression and access to information.  It is really early.  If I don't articulate, please forgive me.  But I'm due to wake up in about an hour and a half.  So it will be around there.      So the center for studies on freedom of expression is an academic center that is grounded in the law school at the University of Palambo.  What we do is provide legal analyses on different aspects of freedom of expression.  And for most of the time that we have existed we focused on freedom of expression online and what's happening there.      I guess there is two points that I would like to make that I think can contribute to framing the conversation.  I agree with what you said Fabro, first with the results of the Internet and jurisdiction and the Glad report.  That Latin America at least has a lot of ‑‑ it is not direct imports of norms or regulation from other countries.  But it is a lot of permeability to what's happening elsewhere in the world.  And I mainly see this as probably the conclusion of an ecosystem that has very little formal regulation worldwide and very different countries with very different bandwidths to regulate this.      So what I'm seeing at least from a comparative perspective is that few countries are taking the lead on regulation conversations.  And a lot of countries are being ‑‑ are playing very reactively to what happens.      Particularly during the last four or five years maybe which contributes to create maybe more permeability to forming norms for different countries.  And for more direct exports of laws that may not make literal sense in other regions.  And I'd like to refer to two examples on regulation at least.  One is the right to be forgotten that has been exported worldwide.      And in a lot of times while the concept is interesting, the frameworks for the dynamics between privacy and freedom of expression are very different in different parts of the world.  And that dynamic has not necessarily been taken in to account in debating this kind of thing.  The other one also coming from Europe and it is starting to be exported worldwide is the European directive on copyright.  And some of the rules on norms that that directive either directly proposes or indirectly implies or recommends.  So that's one of the points that I wanted to make.      There is a lot of ‑‑ I think there is a lot of room for rule exporting at least from a legislative point of view.  Basically going back to the first point, because I think there is very different bandwidths between states to regulate these kinds of things.  And that bandwidth is related to a number of different things.  The size of their markets, the influence they feel they may have on the regulation itself.  Issues of formal jurisdiction where they have offices of main Internet actors or big players within the country, that contributes to a sense of whether they can regulate these things or not.  
The other things has to do with institutional aspects.  A lot of countries are being very, very reactive to a lot of these issues that Alex was mentioning and not necessarily proactive.  What legislation do we want is not something that a lot of states can seriously think about.  Because they don't have the bandwidth to do that.      Just a quick point I would like to make additionally, I think there is a main expert in this conversation that it is not necessarily accounted for in every conversation.  I think there is a false sense that tech alone can solve the social issues that arise online.  And that's a big northern idea.  It is a very U.S. idea.  Very framed by the First Amendment and Section 230.  And I think that's being exported in different ways both formally through very different means, but also informally through ‑‑ through somewhat social norms.  I feel the Civil Society around the globe has sort of bought in to this idea that tech issues are tech solutionible sort of.  I will leave it at that.  And then we can continue the conversation.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Thank you very much.  So Frane, we already have some ‑‑ lots of interesting topics.  Added to what Alex we have the right to be forgotten, copyright directive.  We have this tech alone cannot solve the problem from a U.S. perspective that in my view organizations such as Civil Society, I'm thinking here about myself as well.  This is really interesting.      And you have wonderful data because I talked at the beginning the regional report and we certainly have the global report and the evolution of it.  So please welcome, please introduce yourself to the speakers.  And what kind of norms/standards do you see happening?  And how do they take place?  If you are participating and you were writing in the chat, we are writing and following, it is easier to reply if you use question and answer.  If want to say something to the participants, please use the chat.  If you want to ask a question, please use the Q and A chat.  
   >> FRANE MAROEVIC:  Thank you.  Welcome to all the attendees.  I am fortunate to be in Europe.  So for me it is normal time to be awake and alert.      So all my colleagues who are having the conference experience of having jet lag, enjoy it while you can.  We are all missing I think the conference coffee as we alluded to earlier.      But as you mentioned, Fabro, we are just about to release a regional report on the Latin American and Caribbean and looking at the European Government.  Thank you for preparing this report which will launch at the Ministerial Conference of Ministers of Latin America and Caribbean on the 24th of November.  
I would like to take a step back because at this time last time year we launched a global status report looking at Internet and jurisdiction issues and challenges across the globe where we combined best research from over 150 stakeholders or companies, technical operators and Civil Society and academia.  I just realized, I'm sorry, I forgot to introduce myself properly.  I am the director of content program at the Internet policy network.  It brings together over 300 stakeholders to look and discuss and find practical solutions to issues and problems of Internet jurisdiction across the globe.  How they impact on the global experience on the Internet.  And that's what we are focusing on.  
So when I look at the global report which was produced last year and some of the key findings are around 80% of the stakeholders consider that there is insufficient international coordination and coherence to address cross‑border legal challenges of the Internet, and a vast majority, almost everyone who was surveyed, 95% agreed that cross‑border legal challenges will become increasingly acute over the next years.  And essentially one of the conclusions is that we do have the right institutions to address these challenges.      And to take a step back to what was said by Jan at the beginning but also by the other speakers as well, I think one of the challenges that we are looking at here in terms of regulation is that the framework and structure that's being created we have the regulation of Internet or the platforms.  We are looking at the regulation by the companies.  So essentially in many cases the terms of service, so‑called community standards are regulating our experience of the Internet.  So this is the regulation of the ‑‑ by the companies themselves and then there is the regulation on the Internet where different Forums, different spheres of the communities are bringing their own rules in different rules and communities.  And this is a very interesting example and the development.  
The bit I would focus on is much more on the legal and divergence of standards across the Internet which are preventing in a way all of us having the same experience of the Internet.  It is clear that we are seeing a proliferation of abuses on the Internet and the Government and the authorities are taking actions, some in good faith but some are taking action in order to stifle freedom of expression and freedom of the media.  And this absence of coordination which I mentioned in terms of bringing together legislation is creating that divergence of standards across the Internet.  So we have a possibility of legal interoperability programs on the Internet where one user will not know whether the content is legal.  They may know whether it is legal in their own country but they will not know if it is legal across the globe.  It may be taken down in different areas.  It may be subject to legal restrictions on those areas.      So they won't know which rules maybe apply on the Internet which could be one of the serious problems.  We are seeing jurisdictions within states where some countries are creating legislation, which goes beyond their own borders.  So they are trying to regulate the global experience of the Internet.  So which problem of this could be hampering digital innovation and growth that we don't all have the same experience of online that we have.  And in a way it favors the strongest, those who are setting the rules and creating those rules are setting the standards.      Agustina mentioned two very good examples of rules that have been exported from Europe to other parts of the world, right to be forgotten, the right to be indexed and the copyright.  The example that's very important in this area is the German NetzDG legislation.  It put the responsibility on platforms for regulating what is illegal according to the German criminal code.      And a think tank, I think earlier last month published a report where they uncovered 24 such pieces of copycat legislation across the globe of copying the NetzDG.  It did have certain problems and implementations in Germany.  It was already subject to amendments.  We can all agree that the law itself did not result in widespread censorship in Germany itself.  But when you take such a piece of legislation and try to apply it in different legal frameworks with different traditions with different institutions that help implement the law and protect fundamental rights I think that problem can quickly appear.  You cannot blame Germany or other countries for copying the legislation.  It is clear that legislation which is copied can result in negative effects and negative structures.  If you look at the list of some of the countries which have copied this legislation you can see how diverse the legal frameworks and structures have made certain variations of this NetzDG.  
I don't believe they have created concern institutions.  What I have found very interesting, for example, in the German NetzDG is the link that law created to a self‑regulatory mechanism which is very little known and actually took me quite a long time to figure out how this part is going to work.  But in order to determine whether something is illegal according to the German criminal code the platforms can turn to self‑regulatory body that is specialized in protecting youth and children to give them binding advice.  And this is an interesting element.  
So it is not always a platform decided what is illegal which is one of the fundamental difficulties I would say with this law.  I don't believe it copies all the elements and the aspects of this particular law which are important when it comes to this implementation.  So I think this is the problem that we have in transferring legislation and legal standards across the globe.  It requires different elements and different aspects in order to protect our fundamental rights to be also exported together with the ‑‑ with the legislation itself.      So that's I would say are the key things.  And I think if I would try to answer these things, the problem and the challenges that we are posing I think we need to find ways of strengthening cooperation and coordination of rule making on the Internet if we want to preserve the Internet as a global resource, that we all have the same experience of the Internet whether we are logging in from different parts of the globe.  That's the key challenge for the next period of Internet Governance and Internet development.  And I would be ‑‑ this is something that the organization that I'm working at, the Internet and jurisdiction policy network is working on trying to find a practical solution.  But I think it would be interesting to hear if there are any other suggestions in this area, how we can do this better and how we can ensure that the Internet remains a global resource and not splintered across different countries or different regions.  And I think it has been referred to as a splinter net, as a potential problem.  So that's from me to kick off this discussion.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Thank you very much.  This is very interesting.  So there is concern here about institutions.  And then I think about data protection agencies, Telco agencies to courts.  I like the comments you make about regulation of the Internet by the company, by the Internet and the Internet, and all the Internet to think about these broad spectrum.      Yesterday I read a good measurable report on Wikipedia.  So the interview with the seven editors who are most responsible for climate change and that brought in my mind the drastic law bill of Fake News.  When you think about the seven editors are working, they have this fact check, which is related to the guidelines of Wikipedia and how you edit and so on.  At the same time they are working as a news company would do, like a television or a newspaper would do.  
And at the same time there is a constant moderation issue here that is to help platforms leave content or remove content.  A simple case can bring to different types of regulation and draft bill of law in Brazil.  We have all these conversations; should we regulate them as Google and Facebook and other big companies.  Should we regulate television and journals or traditional media.  Should we consider we have different a profit.  All of that comes as a regulation.  And we look for inspiration elsewhere on who has done that and how to regulate.      So let me move to a second type of question which is why it matters.  And the panel is about inclusion.  So I will look around for other comments from each one of you and try to think about the first question discussed what are the norms and how do we design them and how do we see them happening.  And then we have all the examples about why it matters.  What are the opportunities here for expanding inclusion and what are the threats or challenges for restriction or limiting inclusion.      I will leave you to accept the order, wherever you want to join.  Alex, you will be the first because we started.  Feel free to ask questions which are as much as you like.  
   >> ALEX WALDEN:  Sure.  I'm happy to jump in and I think, you know, I alluded to this in my initial comments, like why this is a challenge for platforms, potential conflicts in country base and regional norms and how those might ‑‑ how they may conflict, is because we continue to try to create a global standard for how we are operating the platform.  And so companies end up in a position where we are trying to comply with laws that have different requirements for us.  And so we continue to be very focused on how can there be a global standard for what companies should be expected to do.  So that we can best really reach that balance of ensuring that countries can create their own lives and make sure that the norms that are acceptable in a particular place are able to be managed and that we can enforce that technically.  
But also that we are Google as a company has Human Rights values.  So that means that we do want to make sure we are being rights respecting in a way that we are engaging with Governments, engaging with our users and citizens of countries all around the world where there are different norms.  So it is a challenge, but at the same time as you said it is an opportunity because really having ‑‑ having a mode for people to communicate around the world is the benefit of exactly what we do.  That's the thing we are trying to preserve.  And we are part of all those conversations about regulation everywhere around the world and trying to figure out how those things can work for us and what ‑‑ define what the principles are that ‑‑ that will lead us in to what Frane, how do we figure out how it works.  And we are continuing to be part of the conversations because we recognize there is room for us all to evolve our thinking in the way that this is all playing out.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Thank you, Alex.  Agustina, do you want to go next?  
   >> AGUSTINA DEL CAMPO:  Yeah.  Sure.  So I'm going to mention three.  One of the things ‑‑ one of the problems with exporting legislation has to do I believe by what Frane was mentioning, the different institutional cultures that exist in different countries probably will ‑‑ will formally make it look as if the rules may be the same across borders, but the implementation of those rules will be severely different.  And probably as Frane was mentioning with important threats to diversity and inclusion.  Particularly in countries that don't have strong institutions to protect fundamental rights, like data protection, privacy, freedom of expression.      The second point I want to make is I remember when David Kay was preparing the 2018 report on content moderation, regarding terms of service and in discussing whether global norms or regional norms and what the differences were.  One of the concerns that I had and it is in our submission to David in 2018, was that this becomes a sort of race to the bottom where in looking for common ground globally you start going to the ‑‑ instead of following the Human Rights principle of always an interpretation in favor of the individual, you end up with a lot of common language on Human Rights that does not really reach the level of agreed regional Human Rights protections within the different places.      I was particularly concerned for the way freedom of expression protections are drafted in the inter‑American system versus the European system that has very different views.  So if adopting global standards means taking away from the protections that we regionally have negotiated and agreed upon, I find it ‑‑ I find a huge potential to lead to a race to the bottom sort of.      The other one, the third point that I want to make is diversity and inclusion is very often interpreted differently in different countries and in different cultures.  And adopting a one size fits all kind of policy may a lot of times perpetrate the exclusions that exist in certain places.      I will leave it at that.  I'm sure that Frane will address the legal implications and challenges for inclusion.  And I don't want to overlap with his comments.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Thank you.  
   >> FRANE MAROEVIC:  Thank you.  When you were talking to sort of build on that in terms of restrictions and versus one size fits all, it is also an interesting element in the development, how different issues are understood differently across the globe and a different interpretation.  And if I come back to my favorite example of the NetzDGs when the countries which copied that piece of legislation many of them introduced sort of vague categories of content that they would like to be restricted in the ‑‑ in that context.  So false information, blasphemy, hate speech are notoriously difficult to define and implement.  Excitement to generate anarchy or issues of privacy rights.  The question comes how do you ensure that these things are understood in a similar way across the globe.  And I think for platforms it becomes very difficult and challenging who are being tasked to implement this legislation.  And maybe that's something for Alex in terms of how do you ‑‑ how would you understand this across different parts of the globe, where the interpretation could be different.  When we talk about the inclusion, there is another sort of coin, another side to this coin which is very important to think about which is the Internet needs to be also a safe space for people to feel that they can communicate on it.  So inclusion for me is also it is very much about freedom of expression which is an area that I work a lot on and area that I'm very personally keen on.  But also there is understanding that we do need certain rules of conduct and behavior in order to create a safe space.  I mean after all in joining this webinar we agreed to something by the UN to be part of this IGF.  I admit first one I did not read it.  I just said accept like most of the other terms of service community standards and all the other requests that I have ever applied for.      And that's one of the ‑‑ that's one of the challenges as Fabro mentioned when it comes to trying to find the right kind of rules and regulations on the Internet, that we have the old model of media regulation.  And we have models of different aspects of regulation such as privacy rights and so on.  And it is blatantly clear that they don't actually all fit to the Internet in terms of how the regulation has been applied in the traditional offline media.  
We do need new formats, but what we must ensure that we ‑‑ when we are creating new pieces of legislation is that we don't throw out all the good work that's been done in order to ensure our protection of fundamental rights and values when we come to apply new rules and the new legislation of the Internet of the platforms.  The point that I mentioned earlier, an interesting element of trying to develop this new framework for rules of the Internet I think it needs to take in to account different levels of responsibilities by the different actors online.      When I talk about regulating of the Internet, on the Internet and by the Internet, by the platforms, of the platforms on the platforms and by the platforms, I think it is not as simple as just creating different rules.  I think we need to understand the different relationship and different responsibilities between all the actors.  Because what I see quite often now in terms of legal development is that many countries are looking at the big tech platforms and saying okay, you can do this.  You know how to regulate this area.  You know how to police your content online.  So therefore you should just do it.  And that takes away from the responsibilities that Governments and the authorities have in order to ensure that they also protect our fundamental rights and values online.  And they have a responsibility in order to ensure good regulation online.  So it is not just about handing over to one particular entity.  It is a relationship between the users as well, users who have a responsibility.  And I think, Fabro, you mentioned sort of sub‑Reddit groups and Wikipedia editors.  And there is a responsibility by the users, by the groups to implement the new rules.  It is a new framework that we need to look at which takes in to account the clear understanding and the responsibilities between all the different actors to create good rules.  I don't think that we can find a one size fits all but we need to find a one size that ensures that information online and the benefit of a global Internet is available to all and to everyone.      
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Thank you very much.  So we are on schedule which is great.  Sharp on time.  We finished the first part of the session.  We are going for the second part which is good.  Allison, Jan, do you want to summarize what you find interesting so far and maybe give some challenges for the speakers?  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Absolutely.  Thank you so much for the conversations so far.  I found it super interesting.  And I have taken a few notes.  I'm going to try to ‑‑ we have taken a few notes.  I'm going to try to distill sort of what we have heard in to maybe roughly three patterns or so.  So one is I think the obvious, that some countries are taking the lead in regulation, right?  And others follow them.      And sometimes they do that even if the regulations do not make sense for their legal context.  And then they lack certain safeguards for free expression, fairness, et cetera.  Also privacy, for instance.  Examples for this is the right to be forgotten and also the European copyright directive and the NetzDG and the "strongest" nations are favored.  And sometimes however that law doesn't actually lead to censorship in the say original cry.  But it may have bad effects in other places where the same context doesn't exist yet.  Or the culture isn't a good fit for that law.  So the problem here really is that laws are sort of transferred arbitrarily in a way and many aspects are left out.      The second big pattern is that terms of services and guidelines topdown are built by companies with the aim to work everywhere.  U.S. companies often think ‑‑ their thinking is underpinned by U.S. legal framework as Alex has confirmed.  And that doesn't mean that they are not trying to think in local contexts or even regional norms.  But it means they need help on the ground and they need to listen to people who understand local frameworks and local contexts who develop those rules that may work everywhere.      And now the third pillar that I think Frane has eloquently described as regulation on the Internet or on the platform is starting to stand out for me, of course, also with my background working at the Wikimedia Foundation.  Here it is not really ‑‑ it is not really clear to me yet how this will work with a sort of one size fits all approach.  But we are seeing sort of this notion that there is a shared responsibility that users can share responsibility for good rules for enforcing them and certainly developing them in the first place.  And here it will be important to not throw out good work.  I think I also want to paraphrase Frane, good work has been done around regulation of media and promoting Human Rights there.  And I think also community rules that are set by the users themselves will probably have to look to those standards as well.      Now I think that's sort of like where we are and what has struck me in this conversation.  And maybe I'm just slow to realize that and everyone else has already, is the following.  I'm seeing sort of two emerging trends.  Free speech and intermedia liability expressions were originally exported by companies.  They brought their work, their terms of service elsewhere around the world.  On the other hand, restrictions that countries are now applying to the Internet are basically imported by themselves from the EU.  Of course, using the NetzDG examples and the copyright directive example again.  So these are sort of like two conflicting trends that I'm seeing here.  I'm not sure whether the speakers would agree with that or even the attendees.      And then the final point I want to make is that while we have heard very interesting interventions here, one thing that we haven't discussed yet and maybe we are also not the right Forum are technical standards.  The technical protocols underpinning all of what we are discussing now haven't really been brought up yet.  I'm not a technical expert.  And I think it is probably best to like take a note for later or maybe even for a later discussion for other people but I think it is interesting that we shouldn't forget that, right?  The Internet and its protocols have been largely built in the global north.  And while there is a multi‑stakeholder approach in the many standard setting organizations nowadays it is still difficult for people from other regions to contribute in a meaningful way.  Yeah.  So I think that's where we are right now.      And I'll hand it back to you Fabro, to dive in to the second part.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Yeah.  Thank you very much.  The reason why I dislike what you said is just because the frame you did is more interesting than my next question.  So I will give you all the speakers the opportunity to relate to what Jan said and how he understands this conversation so far.  But I lead you out with another question, we said might be of interest, which is the standardization of standards.  And then GDPR plays an interesting role here.  GDPR as this adequacy decision test which will save your country is kind of like EU countries.      And two interesting stories about that, is when the decision was made by Japan with Japan and with Uruguay.  Uruguay is very much like EU.  So kind of I took two years but they did it.  When you look at Japan, Japan is a completely different setting and the consent of privacy doesn't have a proper word for that.  So the regulation is not about that.  What's really complex is to find the standard in some context that was really different.  In the end it works out.  But it was a challenge.      So how do you think about the standardization of standards?  It might be GDPR.  It might be NetzDG.  It might be other things that we consider highly valuable.  But how do you see the standards of standards as playing a role in this Internet regulation.  And if you want to address to what Jan said it is of great interest, particularly the technical standards which something that we haven't touched base yet.  Alex, do you want to start as well or should we reverse the order?  
   >> FRANE MAROEVIC:  I'm also happy to jump in if Alex ‑‑ 
   >> ALEX WALDEN:  Sure.  You go first.  
   >> FRANE MAROEVIC:  I mean I'm very much interested by this idea that you have sort of posed in terms of standard or standards, to immediately say I'm not a technical person.  So while I have been an early adopter of the Internet in '90s I can't claim by any means that I know how it works.  But there is a point in the chat which I will read in a second.  For me an interesting element, Fabro, that you pointed out is the GDPR example.  And I see the example of standards in two ways.  One is what we are discussing is a standard that's been exported where other countries are looking at standards saying okay, we would like to do something like that because it is useful for us.  And they copy it one way or another and adapt it hopefully to their legislation and their framework.  And as we already discussed it has problems in terms of are there right institutions and structures in place for proper implementations of such standards in other countries.      So I think that's an interesting example.  And I think for me on that sort of note, there was an interesting ruling by the European Court of Justice on the case of privacy.  It was a decision against Kanel, the French privacy regulator, whether was asking decisions should be exported globally or only within the EU.  The European Court of Justice looked at this particular issue, it should only be applicable in Europe because the legislation in itself was designed for the European continent.  But there is certain harmony and standardization of what privacy means.  There is coherence what is privacy.  The European Union has decided that that's how it should be.  And therefore it should be applicable there.  And should not be applicable extra‑ territorially or extra jurisdiction outside of Europe.  What we are seeing is through the copying of legislation that's being applied.  
The second principle which is also interesting and important here, I only have anecdotal evidence as a user, but it becomes a standard for companies that want to operate in the EU.  So I have come across a number of websites and I think news websites coming from the U.S., which when I try and access they give me a warning because of GDPR.  Your content is ‑‑ the content is not access.  We are not providing content in Europe.  They have decided it is too complicated, too difficult for them to apply a particular standard.  Therefore they are not going to enter in to that particular market.  We are seeing the fragmentation from that perspective.  So that companies cannot operate in the same ‑‑ on the same terms and on the same basis across the globe.  That becomes a challenge of how do we tackle this as well.  So that's from me on that.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Agustina, do you want to do the reverse round?  
   >> AGUSTINA DEL CAMPO:  Yeah.  Sure.  So standardization of standards, I think this is not necessarily new and this is not necessarily something that only impacts the Internet.  I feel there has always been a movement towards standardization of standards.  And when we speak about Human Rights, there is already a standardization of standards.      I think the main challenge with this standardization of standards is sort of what happens when you propose the direct application of the Human Rights framework to a lot of these issues, where really the more granular interpretation and implications of the same language means different things to different cultures, to different people, to different legal regimes.      So I don't think it is necessarily a new issue.  I think we should look at ‑‑ I think there is very little exercise of looking at how we resolved a lot of these issues in the past as we ‑‑ as we look at the challenges that we have towards the future.  Just I want to go back to the point that I briefly mentioned before, which is the ‑‑ my fear there is that this literally becomes a race to the bottom in every sense.      So in standardizing the standard we started relitigating a lot of the Human Rights standards that we fought for for a long period.  Particularly in regions that had a harder time with some of these rights.  Latin America has a heavy history of censorship.  And it took awhile for us to get to the conception and definition that we have in Article 13 of the inter‑American Convention on Human Rights.      And it is a different solution from the global framework and from the European framework.  Not radically different but slightly different.  Enough that it makes sense to look at it in a more granular way and make sure that in ‑‑ in adopting a global standard, we don't lose the ‑‑ the individualities that we fought for.      
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Alex, do you want to go next?  
   >> ALEX WALDEN:  Sure.  And I honestly I think Agustina and Frane have already raised so many important points that I don't know that I have a ton more to add on the question.  But I will say that I'm not a technical person.  But there are many folks inside of Google and other companies who are focused on the technical standards and how those relate to some of the legal standards and the regulatory frameworks that we are oftentimes looking at.  So I will make sure those folks get back with you, Jan.  I think ‑‑ and maybe I'm a broken record because this is where companies are.  But we are I think ‑‑ one thing that somebody touched on earlier is about the ways in which ‑‑ so companies are focused on how we can comply with the laws where we do business.  Fundamentally we have to figure out how we can respect those laws and comply with them so we can do business in each country where we hope to.      And so that means that where regulations, like sort of those who are first movers, a few other folks have said have an outside impact on the way that companies are going to implement those standards everywhere else.      And we are oftentimes trying to figure out if what's happening one place is now a trend because it is technically difficult to shift everything every time a different country attempts to create a new standard, whether it is just for that nation or if it is something that appears like it is going to become a greater baseline.  And so that's just to say that the companies are also trying to really follow what are the things are outliers and what things are trends and how do we respond in a way that is meaningful to both, what's happening locally and what's being expected of us everywhere we are doing business.      And another thing I will add is about smaller companies and that much of the regulation that's happening in content regulation but also with respect to data governance are regulations that are not simple for big companies but certainly having more resources makes it more possible to comply, to creatively comply.  And I think, you know, that in terms of having a diversity of platforms in the market and making sure that users have choices in terms of making sure that every platform doesn't have the same standards, but if you want a particular kind of conversation you are able to find it somewhere.      And we run in to challenges when the regulation favors the platforms that have more resources and makes it difficult for others to continue to operate.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  It is really interesting.  So housekeeping here, we have 23 minutes left.  So probably have another round of questions.  And then wrap and close up.  If you have questions, if you are listening if you have questions, use the chat, use the question and answer.  I would just mention the previous question and I will address the final question for the round of participants, speakers to do.      What about the standardization of governance of standards?  One thing that IGF has brought to the debate, for example, is multi‑stakeholderism.  Now we understand that when we talk about Internet Governance cannot have one stakeholder only.  We have to have several of them.  When we think about how ICANN defines practices for stakeholders is different from IGF which is different from other players and other Forums.  When you think about what governance means some will stand with a duty to consult.  So you make the decisions and ask and do whatever you want.  You might have a test that you have to share how the process is framed not only consulted.  When it comes to technical aspects we see a strong play on that.  Internet interoperability depends on technical standards to be governed with multi‑stakeholderism.  ICANN might be an example of, Internet infrastructure clearly depends on that.  We see the private sector when we ‑‑ oversight boards and other things.  
So what about the standards of Internet Governance?  How do you think this plays a role and how do you see these evolving in the debate?  For example, mentioning UNESCO members, this is one of the things that has a huge debate on how we define the features and measure them.  How do you see this governance of standards and using Agustina's word, is this a race to the bottom or a lift to the top?  How do you see this process of governance and standards?  Please the floor is open.  This will be the last questions.  Please join the debate.  Do you want to start this round, Agustina?  
   >> AGUSTINA DEL CAMPO:  Yeah.  Sure.  So governance standards, that's interesting.  I think multi‑stakeholderism is maybe the common factor that I see as clearly established everywhere as you mentioned but not necessarily other factors.  About multi‑stakeholderism, what I see is that while the concept is interesting.  And it has been pushed heavily in global spaces, there is a lot to do to actually bring that kind of a structure to the local level, to the region levels.  The ‑‑ the few instances for multi‑stakeholderism that we see locally in different countries.  And there is a number of different studies on this, they kind of show that it is not ‑‑ that the ‑‑ the proposal doesn't cascade down.  Decisions locally are not being taken based on a multi‑stakeholderism approach.      Not all the multi‑stakeholders are willing to go to the local level with this kind of a model.  And that ‑‑ that I feel has a direct or may have a direct impact on the issue of inclusion that this session tried to address and discuss.      As long as ‑‑ I mean multi‑stakeholder governance of the Internet being a global thing needs a global multi‑stakeholder approach.  But that global approach cannot be detached from the local and regional structures.  And right now I see serious challenges to that, to that proposal.  I think if we look at the ‑‑ if we look at least at the last ten years, there is very few places where you can ‑‑ where you can point to for successful implementations of multi‑stakeholder approaches.  And that may have somewhat of a broader impact than we are giving it credit for it.  I think there should be a bit more research as to how much of the standardization, how much of the standardization of standards, how much of the exporting may be attributed to a lack of ‑‑ to a lack of a multi‑stakeholder approach locally and regionally and a lack of a dialogue between the different actors involved.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Interesting.  Alex, do you want to follow?  
   >> ALEX WALDEN:  It is hard to follow Agustina.  I think that everyone that you just said is fascinating and I couldn't agree of somebody who sits on a global team at a company.  While I am participating in IGF, I do Freedom Online Coalition; I do GMI.  I do less today but I have done some work in ICT and what it looks like and how that pulls from and doesn't pull from some of those models.  And I don't see that necessarily ‑‑ that sort of forcing function to have a multi‑stakeholder dialogue which oftentimes slows down the process for kind of reaching the results that policymakers and regulators are interested in.  I don't see it happening at the country level most often.  And so it ‑‑ it creates attention that is where at the global level we are trying to all be in conversation together.  And drive forward norms that can be useful everywhere.  
While at the country level, things are moving fast and it is not always ‑‑ it is not consistent how much cooperation and collaboration and multi‑stakeholderism is happening as national level laws and regional norms are being created.  That's to say the way that you expressed it is very accurate with my and consistent with my experience.  But I don't know what the Resolution is to kind of help at the national level conversations slow down to ensure that we are engaging all of the stakeholders in a way that incorporates those perspectives, to reach the best outcomes when regulations happen.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Frane, you want to join?  
   >> FRANE MAROEVIC:  I can first start by agreeing with Alex and Agustina with what they said.  Absolutely I support the points in terms that we have important discussion on a global level about multi‑stakeholder approaches, discussion debates, IGF and so on.      Now to what extent is this being translated when it comes to legislation being develop on a local level, I would question that.  If I think about my previous work where I worked for in the Governmental organization on a freedom of expression where we did a lot of analysis of legislation that can impact and concern media, one of the key demands that I would say was always made is that any piece of legislation that impacts freedom of the media, freedom of expression, there are fundamental Human Rights needs to go through a thorough consultation process.  
This is a standard procedure when it comes to adopting these laws.  I don't see that to the extent being done when it comes to laws which are impacting our online freedom of expression.  There is not the same multi‑stakeholder engagement.  Not the same kind of engagement of all the people that are important.  This conversation shows discussing technical standards.  And in our panel we don't have the technical people involved.  So we need to bring the technical people in as well.  We need to bring the academics.  It is about ‑‑ it is about getting everybody who has a stake, I mean a stake in this process, a multi‑stakeholder approach is essential.      And I don't see any ways of going around it.  I mean your question Fabro, this is a race to the bottom or lift to the top.  I I'm afraid at the moment we are having more of a race to the bottom rather than a lift to the top.  I think the lift to the top are the internationally agreed standards that we have on Human Rights that have been developed.  And I think we need to keep that top very firmly based.  And ensure that the race starts moving up rather than towards more less restrictions and more regulation.  We started off the conversation with a report that we are just about to publish where it is quite clear that we don't have the institutional mechanisms for this kind of coordination of regulation of the Internet on a global level.      And that we don't have the institutions in order to ensure that there is no legal arms race in this particular field and this particular area.      And I would sort of go back to the point that I made earlier, that it is important to think about the distribution of responsibilities of the different actors in this space and that's something that I think we need to see much more of as we develop standards in Internet Governance, that's something that the organization where I have been is trying to do.  We are trying to do this on a more practical level to try ‑‑ transparent practical solutions because we are not an Intergovernmental institution that can set standards.  We are trying to find places where different actors including the Governments, including the technical companies, including the Civil Society, including the academia and Intergovernmental Organization can find common language and cooperation in order to ensure functioning and workability of the Internet across the globe.      And this is I would say to the extent lacking on an Intergovernmental level which I think there needs to be a more constructive approach in order how to preserve our fundamental rights and values online as well as ensuring that the Internet is a safe space as ‑‑ for all the users.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Jan, we have around 10 minutes left.  You did a wonderful summarizing of the first part of the session.  You want to join ‑‑ jump again and do kind of a summary of the second part?  And then we move for the closure?  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Yeah, I hope I can do this justice.  I think this section of the conversation was really deep.  And I was actually having a hard time sort of parsing all the patterns here.  But I think what we have heard is really that there is a first mover advantage or maybe a follower or disadvantage more actually.  Both for countries and companies.  If you are early on in regulation, if you are early on in ‑‑ as a company expanding to other regions, you really are setting sort of the standards.  The challenge there is to really keep this open for everyone else.  How can you actors move in to the space.  How can you stakeholders actually engage and help with sort of the development of standards that work for their environments, for their contacts, for their regions.  
And then to your question Fabro, is there a standardization of standards and how does that look.  I think it was really interesting to hear it is not just a phenomenon for the Internet but it has been around for other fields.  Human Rights try to do this.  To standardize, to build in, to enshrine a set of rights for all people at all levels for the regulation of law.  This becomes challenging when there is a market fragmentation.  When you have sort of a lot of smaller countries doing similar things at the same time, moving quickly, and sometimes quickly than the safeguards.  Frane mentioned this around I think the right to be forgotten where courts at the European level are trying to build safeguards around this law.  But the countries are copying it faster.  And are going ahead at the country level.      What I found super interesting is this notion of standardization of processes, of fora, of Internet Governance as you brought it up, Fabro.  And here I think we heard that the multi‑stakeholder approach is very helpful but it is very different at every relevant fora.  There is what ICANN thinks of multi‑stakeholderism is different from what ‑‑ how IGF defines it and others.  And I think that was really interesting also to see in the report by the high level panel on digital cooperation who identify I think roughly a thousand different processes around Internet Governance, then share some approach to multi‑stakeholderism but not the same one.  You want to make sure that people can be included in governance as well.  Even if there is a stakeholder at a high level process they are hardly willing to go local to ensure that inclusion happens there as well.  This sort becomes a topdown or remains a topdown approach.  And that to me is sort of a pessimistic outlook.  Is there only a race to the bottom?  I hope not.  And then I would hope that there is still sort of room for exportation or exporting positive protections and inclusive policies.      And I think what we heard towards the end of the conversation is that coordination really matters.  And then the question becomes who can do this.  And just thinking about IGF right now, maybe IGF+ is where this will happen.  Maybe not.  I'm pretty sure there are various opinions on this.      But this role for Secretariats, that is maybe more empowered that can help with the standardization of standards and the meaningful multi‑stakeholder approach seems to be important to me.      And I just want to take the liberty really quick to since I work at the Wikimedia Foundation to plug one process that Wikimedia as a movement has gone through over the last three years.  And I will put the link in to chat real quick for you to check out later.  This is the process towards a Wikimedia movement strategy until 2030.  And this was a three or still is actually an ongoing process, three years of consultations with regional groups, with national groups of Wikimedians, with open channels to listen to everyone who has an opinion and valid feedback and input for how Wikimedia should look in 2030.      Now I'm not saying this is a perfect process.  And it is I think a very burdensome process for people who wants to give input and wants to be heard.  And it is very burdensome for the people who need to facilitate those conversations.  There have been people literally, and I say this here, burned out by the process who volunteer to do this in their volunteer capacity, right?  They are Wikimedians.  They have day jobs.  They know what the Wikimedia should look like.  These conversations are difficult to have.      And to I think Agustina's people to make sure that people feel included in these processes you have to go real low.  It can't be a side note.  It is really a long‑term thing that you have to dedicate yourself to.      I think we are really proud at Wikimedia this has worked.  We know it has not been without flaws and it comes with a heavy price tag.  I invite you all to check out the link that I dropped in there or send me an e‑mail later.  I can put it in the description of the session later.  And everyone can see it.  I will throw it back to Fabro to wrap this session up.  
   >> FABRO STEIBEL:  Thank you.  I have three minutes.  Someone mentioned data portability in the questions.  I think this is a great topic to illustrate what we are talking here.  It is something that is real technical.  Something that we don't know much about and deals with lots of jurisdictions and ownership of data.  It translates to content.  It translates to Internet infrastructure.  And one message that the standards we do have a duty to think about two Internets.  This is how it is in Brazil.  We have to talk about the highly connected that can be one part of the movement and 30% is unconnected who doesn't have Internet.  Standardizations may play a role in the two extremes and two worlds that come together.  It is a topic of great concern.      Two minutes left.  I will stop talking here.  Thank you very much for all the participants.  Thank you for the speakers.  Thank you for the organizations.  Thank you for the moderation, captioners.  Thank you for the questions and so on.  And it is a wrap.  Please say a few last words if you would like and we are done.  
   >> FRANE MAROEVIC:  Thank you.  Maybe just a point out there is a funny cartoon on this point which is posted by somebody in the chat.  So if you want to end on a smiley note that's a good way to end.  Lovely to see you all.  Bye.  
   >> AGUSTINA DEL CAMPO:  Likewise.  Thank you.  
   >> JAN GERLACH:  Thank you.  Thank you, everyone, for the volunteers who helped us in supporting the technology.  And thanks to everyone who stayed up late and got up early.  Thank you.  
   >> Thank you. 
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day-x-%E2%80%93-high-level-leaders-track-health-implications-%E2%80%93-raw^^

>> The captioning is AI technology, right?  Because this is the future for the platform, right?  We already ‑‑ we have experience at AI. 
>> ANJA GENGO:  That is true yes, although we're still Hume.  We have humans there also correcting.
>> Yes, yes.
>> all right.
>> In all languages?
>> Just in English.  So the captioning is only in English.
>> I thought you were doing it.
 >> PATRICK LEUSCH: That looks great
 >> PATRICK LEUSCH: That looks great.
 
>> Patrick, it's 9 cloak here in Geneva, that's our schedule time I'll leave it up to you to decide when to start.
 >> PATRICK LEUSCH: Thank you very much.  If you're all ready we can start, I guess.  Okay
So ladies and gentlemen, very warm welcome to this higher level leaders track in the framework of the IGF.  On health implications of the role of Internet governance in the age of uncertainty.  This is the title of this session.  The session aims at discussing roles that digital public policy can have in preserving and improving the global public health particularly in emergency situations.  My name is Patrick Leusch.  I'm the head of European affairs at director general's Office of Germany's international broadcast based in Germany..  The COVID‑19 pandemic has shown that it makes our societies maybe more resilient to global health threats.  We have been fast learners in the past months I think.  The whole health community but also citizens have adopted to very new situations.  And we have seen grown a lot of digital tools also that could have people and health system to manage this crisis.
However, if technologies are complained as ineffective digital policies, these can can have detrimental effect on society.  So I think we are all in r on the way to something.  And no state on earth, no health system, no operator was really up to see what the digital potential is to manage that pandemic.
My guests will exchange roles on Internet and drij tal technologies and role to improve people's health on one hand.  Challenges and future of is an interesting point that goes far beyond this specific pandemic, and local and global stakeholder responses to global and digital policy for public health.
These are some of the topics that we'll be discussing in the next 90 minutes.
Here is the leading question for the session:  Could digital be the key to achieving Sustainable Development Goal number 3 of the SDGs to ensure healthy life and promote well‑being for all stages and all this under the impression of the COVID‑19 pandemic.  So here are our guests.  First of all, let me welcome Mrs. Anuradha Gupta thank you for being with us.  And Kira Radinsky, chairwoman and CTO of diagnostics robotics in Jerusalem which she cofounded in 2017.
She's an inventor and entrepreneur specializing in predictive data mining.  Kira caned recognition after software predicted the first in 30 years outbreak in Cuba.
We have among us Mrs. Precious Matsoso director of the health rectory science platform at the university in South Africa and also in the World Health Organization director responsible for the development and implementation of the global strategy and plan of public health.  We have with us Mr. Bernardo Mariano, director digital health and innovation and chief information officer at WHO in this role he's responsible for coordinating WHO's digital health vision and strategy for everyone.  Welcome, looking forward to your contribution.  And last, but not least wee have connected to Dr. Anurg Agrawal, director of the institute of economics and interpretive biology in New Delhi India and also am eastbound of the WHO digital health Advisory Group.  This is a great panel wand we're looking forward to your insights..  While we speak I'm asking you to mute your microphones and to keep your cameras on to guarantee smooth running of the digital session but I sca scwa assume you have all become experts in this new normal.  Thank you for taking part in this panel.  Let's start.  In recent times I think we agree that nothing has challenged the health systems as COVID‑19 pandemic and many countries were more overwhelmed with a rapidly growing number of infectious cases with high death rates and we have witnesses eye heroic work of medical workers around the world but also their ‑‑ it's not surprising that many health systems turned to digital very soon to cover these challenges.  Databases created or improved.  Health information systems improved and there has been a range of measures that have been taken more or less assuming more or less power and more or lessees testimony attic approach.  We have seen how digital technologies have been deployed to help fight the pandemic as awe whole.  What is your experience in this regard?  How have digital technologies helped so far the health systems in times of the pandemic.  Give us an assessment how big is the links and how big is the contribution of digital systems to manage this pandemic and I'm turning this question to Bernardo Mariano, director of digital health and innovation and chief information officer of the WHO organization first.
Bernardo, please come in, turn your microphone on and come in.
 >> BERNARDO MARIANO: Thank you, Patrick, good morning, good afternoon, good evening to everyone depending where you are and happy to be here.  Let me start by saying that we at WHO promote the use of digital health technologies.  And appropriate use I have to say.  Appropriate use means it should be people‑centered, trust‑based, privacy and ethical based, evidence‑based, effective, sustainable, inclusive and equitable well as contextualized to where we are using that technology.
At WHO, I wanted to also say that since the pandemic we have missed a great collaboration across sectors.  We had a good support from our traditional partners on the agencies such as ITU, but also most important from the private sector we had good good support from private sector.  But it doesn't need to take a pandemic for us to work in a collaborative way.  We should actually have done that earlier.  Preparedness is key.  If we'd done earlier we would do much, much better in this pandemic.  Now, how do we ‑‑ how did we ‑‑ what was the experience and how it helped health systems.
Let me take you three areas.  One which is the people‑centric and the other one which is existing health system but also how to build a stronger health workforce.  So in these three areas, I just want to say that currently we are working with a number of countries us as well as G20 countries to look at how we can leverage on telemedicine to support health systems at national, subnational level.  The technology is mature enough but we need to adjust policies of regulations to really leverage them so we're working with a number of countries on that.  But early in the year we had a lot of calls from contact tracing asking us to test, track and tracing was happening and digital technology helped.  So WHO with published a guideline on consideration of use of proximities tracking technologies for COVID tracking.  This was a topic that our member states and lots of countries were grappling with.  How can we make sure that those technology have support the current pandemic.  Of course, contact tracing has to be an integral part of public health response.  Because if it is not, then it doesn't add the value, it doesn't ‑‑ we don't leverage the potential that it has.  But as part of that we also started working wees tone yeah to develop a vaccination as we start thinking on vaccination which currently is the vaccine card for some people especially living in developing countries or the yellow vaccination card is required as others perhaps may not know but this is only with adults into vaccination card that keeps coming across borders so we want digitally enhanced vaccination card.  We want a digital clearinghouse to help countries navigate the myriad of solutions that are appropriate to them on innovation and other areas to try to support and help countries to navigate and manage this pandemic well.
The last part which is strong health workforce.  We fast tracked the WHO academy, the launch of the WHO academy which is a strong digital component but also we added a number of trainings on our open WHO academy.  So it's open WHO.org which is a learning platform that provides training and 17 different ‑‑ sore 0, 41 different languages with 17 different topics oncyo individual and has carried 4.5 million users benefiting from that.  So all to say that we've ‑‑ we accelerate these digital technologies in the pandemic but we could do better and we can do much better to prepare for the next one.  Thank you.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for the first insights Bernardo, you mentioned a couple points particularly the people mif centered trust base inclusive.  This is very demanding when you have to cover the world.  So what is the main aspect that you as a WHO organization are seen in this deliverable to people.  Is it more to have same standards from technology bases or is it more to improve the political systems in governing this kind of technologies?  You have said the performance of the technology is there.  The lack is elsewhere.
>> 
 >> BERNARDO MARIANO: Let's recognize that the digital maturity of countries is very important as we look at how do we support countries moving through ‑‑ maturing through the process?  Also we are witnessing a living and digital transmission of healthcare sector.  Within that each of us has a role to play.  And we have an added value to protect and bring to the table.  At WHO we look at how for instance how to address the interoperability challenges.  That every country has.  Health is silo'd by tradition.  So digital technologies to leverage them and really use them to accelerate SDGs related to health we need that interoperability to work.  So we have the mandate.  Yesterday they approved the goal of strategy on digital health.  So within that we want to make sure that the investments of digital health and maturity of digital health allow countries to move from the current maturity level to the next one.  So countries at different stage but then we issued as well in digital health investment guide, investment implementation investment guide which allow us to say if your maturity is at this level, the investment should ‑‑ the path we want to see the added value a year from now where that maturity is increased from where it was to where it should be.  And if not, we may take action:  So yes we understand that country in different phage and we need to work together to ensure that we bring them to a different level that we're all on.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Yes, thank you very much.  I let me pick one aspect that you mentioned also and jump over to Kira as you mentioned that an interesting point here is the collaboration with the private sector that has been obviously boosted by the pandemic from the public health perspective to increase relations with the private sector.  Kira, as a chairwoman of a startup ‑‑ I don't know if startup is correct ‑‑ but private company, that has been involved very raryly in the management of the COVID crisis, is there any detection that you have on particularly that link from public healths to the private sector where things have moved forward to become a little bit more speedy or a little bit more ‑‑ better the link between the industries?
>> Kira:  First of all, we have been building triage systems for the last two years, the way the system worked there were training based on historical 76 million historical medical visits obtained from the healthcare system both in Israel and United States.  The system would ask triage questions and predict the urgency of the patient and where in the medical setting the patient needs to be navigated.  The consequence was to reduce the work doctors were doing for years if not centuries.  And what we've seen especially during this pandemic is that this accountability of physicians came to the maximum.  We understand we cannot continue as we started before.  With shortage of 100,000 primary care physicians in the United States alone we cannot just continue training more doctors and assuming they're going to be enough for the growing population.  Until 2030 we're going to have 3.8 billion people without access to primary care.  It means 3.6 hours that people are waiting right now in the emergency dents in the western world is going to be quickly more than 8 hours and it's not a prediction, it's just a fact because in different locations in the world, this is how long patients are waiting.  And during COVID it became more severe.  You have an entire population in crisis that needs to be triaged almost immediately.  They need to know where to go to the department, stay home, lockdown, what should they do?  There's just not enough call serchters to answer everybody.  This is where the contact applications come into place is this okay to actually monitor people?  Do we actually want 0 monitor all of this clinically?  So what we started doing is extending our triage service, started automating all these processes.  Every time a person needed any interaction with the healthcare system our system would ask the triage questions.  If the system said patients ‑‑ stay at home but most importantly predict for the government which cities are in the very bad.  In other words, differentiations between lock dunes it was at the beginning of the pandemic when we deployed this system.  It was knowing where to send COVID tests because we just didn't have enough.  During the second it was around differential lockdowns so we can make the economy work faster.  I think this collaboration between government and a private sector, the private sector is provide vooing tools for decision making.  It has been accelerated tigly during COVID.
‑‑ significantly.
>> 
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  The question was ‑‑ I understand clearly that the effect of your work.  If you had the impression that despite the fact that you have not started working in this sector just with the pandemic but is there from your perspective, is there any learning or improvement in the relations between private sector and public sector in that regard?  .
>> Kira:  This is a lot we still need to improve.  Right?  The only thing that a private sector like us can do is provide recommendations.  It doesn't mean that the decision Maker is going to follow this.  They have a lot of political aspects that they need to cover that became significant during COVID times that it outgrew some of the recommendations either the private sector or academic center or even healthcare center.  So we need to think at what time do we need scientific knowledge to overcome political aspirations.  This is the main aspiration we saw specifically in Israel that companies predicted that we're debt racing and still not actions taken.  Consideration theories about the fact that there is no COVID, lockdown has not helped.  We even have proves from data from interventions of lockdown significantly caused lower impact of COVID at certain locations.  We saz a scientific community need to also think how we clearly communicate with the governmental agencies to give them this information so they can take action.  In other words, for example it wasn't clear if going back to school is actually causing our non‑deterioration COVID.
Very lately it will show that children under the age of 10 they get COVID two times less than adults.  But still no study shows how infectious they are.  So I still think we need to supply more information, more with speed because it will create less trust between the decision making and private and research community.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Kira.  I think that is a very interesting point the relation between politic, science, digital and relating to trust.  Because as Ben ard 0 also mentioned a couple of questions regarding the use of digital technologies and for health is really the trust, the trust measure.  Both on politicians but also from citizens to my perspective.  Precious, in South Africa, from your perspective, coming back to the question what is your experience, how digital technology ‑‑ sorry, digital technologies have been deployed to help fight pandemic, so what is your experience in that regard looking over the last six to 8 months?
>> Precious Matsoso:  Thank you very much.  Good morning, good afternoon.  The experiences that we started firstly, by having a digital health strategy.  And that was important because we we worked hard to make investments.  Investments in making sure that the digital platforms were in place.  There were a number of challenges and I'd like to start with those.  In that firstly, we're invested a number of years we registered over 43 million patients on our health patient registration system.  Took us quite a while to deploy the systems across the whole country on all clinics.  In fact you could only deploy this in clinics, not even in hospitals because of the complexities of the hospital systems.  So this is the first step that we took over a number of years.
But as we're ‑‑ you know, doing this, when COVID hit, we had to look at various digital tools that didn't exist.  Like for instance we had what you call connect based on our in‑health strategy which was useful in care.  We used this was a platform that was used for information dissemination in that we sort of developed a number of apps.  One was intended for contract tracing.  And I always say that contract tracing must not be techno surveillance which is likely to happen.
Secondly, we also had the tool set that could be used for self‑screening and COVID related symptoms.  At a population level we've had the district health information system.  I think it's a system that is used for routine data collection.  And it's used ‑‑ the risk that you've always had over time is that because of lack of interoperability we had multiple systems that developed to each other.  And I think Bernardo referred to this somehow.
But I'm happy to say that all these platforms that were developed over the years have actually come in handy in that we're able to connect all of these.  But it is not just tools that I use for the health systems, it's also tools that I use for patients themselves.
For citizens themselves to monitor.  To monitor whether they have COVID or not so that they do not, you know, come to our facilities when it's a risk to do so.
But what is happening is that we've also had other tools like ATM pharmacy that have been rolled across the whole country.  And the nice thing about some of these tools that we've developed is that they've actually avoided having people come to the facilities when they don't need to.  For instance, for collection of medicines, they don't have to come to facilities.  The area that we could have done better and you know, we could have invested over a number of years is on telemedicine.  We have, but it's only in selected areas and areas where I would describe as centers of excellence, they're not widely implemented and I think it's a lost opportunity.  For those facilities that have systems in place, it has been very useful to collect data because we're able to see and track patients and to know how well we're doing oncyo individual, for instance the number of hospitalizations, the number of patients that are you know,
positive and number of patients that have recovered.  These systems were built over time and we learned from HIV and AIDS, as you know South Africa has been ‑‑ these have been very, very helpful for us and we've used some of the platforms you know for COVID and took advantage of that.  I want to raise a few points that we need to know.  One, there are too many applications and the risk is that you then get information overload.  Not only information overload but a risk of misinformation.  This sometimes undermines our efforts to contain and mitigate COVID.  So we need some governance frameworks so that we can see what kind of are out there and regulate them and whilst promoting innovation, we want innovation but ensure that it can be trusted and it can be used appropriately and it can benefit society.
So one governance structures are important but we still have infrastructure problems as you know.  Cost of connectivity is a barrier and also interprobable digital health systems and solutions.  Not all of them are interoperable.  And so it's one hurdle we have to address which will have some legal framework and have been implemented and these are intented to do data protection concerns to use privacy and security.  And one thing is to invest in digital skills so that the managements of big data and the capacity to do so exists.  I think.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, precious.  That was very interesting insight.  What I take is what you said at the end, you need a digital strategy.  You need a legal framework and digital skills and I think we will come back also to the point you're saying that how can we avoid information overload and the fact that there is too many applications which we deal and particularly citizens also.
I'm taking the opportunity to call on participants in the quick session, inspiring session to put questions or comments in the chat or Q&A section that you see on the bottom row below your screen.  They'll forward it to me.  Anuradha Gupta, let's look further going a little beyond pandemic.  How can digital innovation help to protect health for people in more effective efficient and accountable manner?  We've seen so far we have looked more in the aspects how to manage the pandemic when it's there, when you have to avoid overload or the health system that is all related to tracking for instance orientating people to the right service, the triage questions we had.  But in the more forward‑looking and more forward‑looking terms, how could digital innovation protect from people from now?
>> Anuradha Gupta:  Thank you for that question.  Actually, I'm not sure whether everybody is aware that Govi has a massive scale of operations.  We support more than 70 countries in expanding live‑saving vaccination to about 18 million children every year.  So in the countries that with support, there are 80 million children born every year who need to be vaccinated and we're looking at about half a billion vaccine shots that are provided to these children because they have to be protected against a range of diseases.  So clearly, you know, these are big investments and big operations.  And some of the speakers actually touched on this whole dimension of private sector and private public sector partnership.  And Govi involves a setup and return of millennium in 2000 as a public/private partnership and the whole idea was to set up a unique alliance that can leverage the comparative advantage of both public sector and private sector and therefore, we have been able to leverage a lot of innovations in taking immunization to those countries and to those households if it have reached without he's efforts and we have indeed, exploited digital technology a lot as we are tried to do this.  Typically, I like to see that vaccination happens when three Vs come together and these three Vs are the vaccine, vaccinate tore and vaccinee.  You need these at the same time.  If you don't have vaccine, you can't vaccination card intate children.  If you don't have it they won't happen.  And the child who has to be brought by the caregiver so the three Vs have to come together.  And on each 3Vs we have exploited a lot of variety of technologies including digital technologies ‑‑ on how these vaccines are traveling.  And how stocks are being managed and really the level of consumption of these vaccines.  There are some very interesting innovations that we have done.  For example, remote temperature monitoring.   You know, this is ‑‑ so we have data loggers and we have temperature monitors that are put in the chain which actually start to send digital messages to managers when there are temperature excursions because what vaccines have to be kept at a certain temperature.  So, if there are temperature excursions, then the potencies of vaccines is lost.  So we didn't have digital things we could actually be vaccinating children but not immunizing them or protecting them because the vaccine could have lost its potency sows these are helping efficiency and effectiveness.  Other on vaccinee for example, one of the biggest tools is by way of electronic immunization registries because a lot of these countries we work in have very weak health systems but not civil registration of births and deaths.  So clearly the denominator is very unclear.  What is the target population?  The children do not have identities.  So therefore, what we are trying to do is to set up electronic registries on immunization is health workers absolutely understand who are the children who have to be systematically reached with different doses of vaccines?  In terms of vaccinators, we have invested a lot in scaling up digital technologies for the skills enhancement.
You know, skills are important.  And if vaccinateor do not not have those skills Dakar particularly as we deploy new vaccines because there are new precautions and regimens that the vaccinators have to be aware of.  So we founds this extremely convenient to do capacity building aat scale in a much more efficient and effective manner.  Last thing is vaccinee.  How do we work with caregivers to spur demand.  So one we have lack of demand in some sectors.
We have S MS and things to make sure caregivers are made aware of the benefits of immunization but there's also a lot of misinformation as you know.  We think that good information is the best antidote to bad information and just making sure that we make use of technology to counter false propaganda
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  From your perspective, what is the point that have deciders all over the world when you look at the global scale, learned first when it comes to the link of digital innovation and digital systems and managing such kind of crisis?  What was the first thing really that triggered people?
>> Anuradha Gupta:  I really think it is lack of a sort of opportunity to have a physical contact.
You know because in a pandemic situation we're increasingly talking about lock dunes and social distancing.  People ‑‑ lock dunes.  One.  Things we realized is there was widescale disruption of health services in countries we support.  and actually among health services that were disrupted immunization was the worst hit and that was because of two reasons primarily.  Because there were fears among the caregivers.  Mothers did not want to bring their children to facilities any longer for immunization but also the health workers were fearful of catching infection.  They were also redeployed in many cases.  So therefore, the whole ecosystem got completely topsyturvy.  And that is what put pressure on the system to start to think innovatively and we saw that a lot of digital tools that we have been deploying but which hadn't been really scaled up, you know, in many cases actually were really sort of adopted at a pace and at a scale that was unprecedented.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.
Dr. Last, but not least same question to you after the intervention of your colleagues and from your perspective, what is the main point where digital innovation will help in the future to make people more resilient to make health more efficient, to citizens, to people?  What is from your pectdive the main point here?
>> ANURAG AGRAWAL:  Thank you, Patrick, I take the point on how digital is making something physical.  When you vaccinate something there's a human and you're giving a vaccine and a physical thing.
There's three more levels that you can see in digital medicine.  The most obvious level is the people are still there there's still a doctor.  There's still a patient but the medium of communication is entirely digital in digital medicine.  If you take another level from that there's a patient.  He's digitally connected but the person on the other end is not a human being.  It can be a check part.  It could be giving answers.  And the last level which I think we will see very soon is digital the person does not really exist for the healthcare.  It's a ‑‑
lots of vices creating additional image of a person that is continuously being analyzed.  Only when they do find something that is both communicated to the physical world does information come to the physical world.  Each of these is possible.
And in the field that I come from, genomics for example, digital is not option.  It is essential.  There is no possible way.
In which a human being can look at anything and figure out anything.  So the way I see digital transforming health is number one for example in countries like India, India does not have Tosh the number of doctors per thousand people is less than 1.  WHO recommends one.  If we take all doctors India barely hits one, otherwise it's less.  Europe for example is typically 4.
And in most countries similar to India, doctors are more well distributed.  So you need digital to create the connections.  And if you can use your skill and upgrade their skills, you don't even need ‑‑ simple intelligence of augmentation pertaining basic guidelines into practice that can be done.
You need smart infrastructure.  That's going to change everything.
An example where human comprehension and ability becomes limited and continuation of medicine the ability at least of assistance, and perhaps at some point there is from this stable additional.  At some point we can't exactly comprehend this.  But we run rigorous tests to make sure the system works faster than digital.  There's nothing more scalable.  The most important part is does it work?  And that's something that we're spending a lot of time on in the time to come to make sure we don't get blinded only by the speed and scale.  We also continue to imagine is it really helping people?  And that's only time there.  I'll stop you.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That's really a far beyond outlook that you present here.  "understand from your inspective digital Kuo‑Wei Wu could be a solution that the classical health services we know in some countries apply to everyone on earth.  I think that is the background from which you come.
How do you see the trust item that we had several times in the discussion here when you deploy this?
>> That is a phenomenal follow‑up question.  Trust is central.  When the time comes telling doctors what when to do ‑‑ it will come soon ‑‑ and doctors not necessarily being known for mathematical skills are unable to fully comprehend the reason but they can only see the data showing outcomes.  Trust is going to be central.
Patients phenomenally trust doctors.  Doctors trust hard quality clinical outcomes, control trials that is data related and governance needs to be lean and balanced.  Sometimes you think these words are impossible.  But it has to be.
You have to figure out a way in which data can grow rapidly, trust is high within the system for everyone.  And the only way it comes is transparency.
In my opinion, when everything is transparent, when doctors know the data from the trials, outcomes and they're sure, every step whether by block chains or any method, non‑tempered, original, visible to everybody.  Then that transparency and trust will bring the progress in the field.  So transparency in the end.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Obviously you are really convinced about the vision that you're presenting.  I'm looking at the chat here and the Q&As that are coming in that are more and more.  And they are pointing to two points.  One, obviously, is how to ensure the right to privacy is respected regarding digitalization of health data.  I think that is really a big challenge and that is a discussion on the whole world.  Here in Germany we've had intensive discussion about a simple tracing app which is completely decentralized.  It's not interoperational with other ones and even here it was difficult to bring it to the people.
And second one is about the link between the public and private ecosystem.  Because the aspect of commercialization was raised.  And I understand when I look at questions that there is a massive ‑‑ I wouldn't say fear but that there is ‑‑ who is driving it.  That is the question.  Is the commercial side driving it or government?  What about civil society?  Who is setting the standards to go forward with digital technology in the howj system.  Maybe let's pick one by one.  I'm turning to Bernardo again because I think you mentioned at the very beginning the privacy issue regarding digitalization of health data where is the challenge here Bernardo?
 >> BERNARDO MARIANO: Thank you.  I think for the first challenge really is the fact that digital and health are two different ‑‑ they have two different cultures.  So you have the culture of monetization of data and digital tech.  And you have the culture of donation. 
We donate blood, we donate organs.  And I think it was mentioning that how we conciliate the two extremes in such a way that we add and we bring ‑‑ extract the value that both in this campaign and bring Ben gets that we all want to see.
So the privacy and data sharing, those are the two extremes where we can ensure that we extract benefit of health data to ‑‑ for health outcomes and also we do not harm people because of health life science.  Do not harm very enshrined in the culture of medicine medical health specialists.
So from our perspective, what we did and we're doing, we proposed in our global strategy in digital health a framework to regulate for international regulation of health data.  It's a framework that we need to put in place that addresses both the privacy but also allow the digital technologies to leverage on that data to bring those health benefits we are all looking for without infringing on privacy or without infringing on ethical ‑‑ now, our strategies say people at the center.  And to build a trust ecosystem we need not just private public partnership.  We need to bring academia, civil society.  I think there's a question there as well.  There are other stakeholders that need to be in the discussion.  WHO will be creating what we call a network of networks.  Because today ‑‑ and we have as a culture and we have to ‑‑ I mean I want to dwell on this culture because we are creatures of habit.  Many institutions were created after Second World War and the framework we work was to address the challenges we had at that time.  We have new challenges, we have digital age.
This is the first pandemic in the digital age.  So we need new rules, new engagement, new normal.
And I think to make sure that there's a trusted ecosystem we need to bring all the stakeholders together.  So the power of WHO is to bring, create convening element, to bring these different entities in the ecosystem and create what we can all trust.  The framework of regulating health, international health data, a framework to create an interprobability or others.
But we have systems and players that we need to bring together to work in the new normal.  And bring the players that we norm ly don't interact with even at WHO, our tradition is not interact with private sector.  So we have to step up and start that engagement.  But the understanding that we have two extremes that we need to negotiate and bring those benefits to the public.  Thank you.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Bernardo, that was very clear.  Precious to hear your experience the most important thing is that you have a digital health strategy, if I understood correctly, and you base a lot of things that were set up now for pandemic on the fact that you already have a kind of digital health strategy which gives you a framework to work and new applications for instance to widen the scope.
So from your perspective, who are the important stakeholders to design that trust in this applications particularly from data protection point of view?
>> Precious Matsoso:  Well firstly, I think we need to have the most confidence to increase.  Firstly, we must have digital health governance.  That recognizes that digital health is not just for the health sector.  It must envelope a different ministries ministries of communication, (audio cutting out) and engaged different ‑‑ a sector like we said public, private civil society organization and academia.  But it is not just enough to engage them.  It is also trying to send for instance in South Africa what we did when we started our work on development of the digital health strategy, we started with ehealth strategy and mhealth strategy.  And whilst we did that, we looked at all the digital tools that were in both the public and private sector.  We came up with a normative framework to assess all the tools both in the public and private.  It was the very useful exercise in that we could see the weaknesses and the strength from both sectors.
Those systems worked, those that didn't and those that you could build on.  So it was a voa useful experience.  But it's not enough to build systems around patients when you don't involve them.  And I agree with the Bernardo that whatever systems we develop, they be in the public or private sector must put the patient at the center.  In fact, I don't see patient because sometimes you're not necessarily sick to use the systems.  It is about well‑being so there must be people centered, people‑centered because when you have patients who are already sick.
So for those who are not sick but need to use digital tools for their own well‑being, they still need to access those digital tools.  So we must make them People‑Centric.
And I think this is an approach that we've been developing.  And the digital tools cannot just be for those who work in the health system.  We need also digital literacy.  Digital literacy so that with this people centered aapproach, those who need to use these tools must also have skills to do so.
Thank you.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, Precious for that.
Is there something that you want to contribute to ‑‑ it's an open question to the panel.  Any contribution to this that have been here.
Kira I'm looking a little bitd to you because particularly the ‑‑ I'm not sure if I'm correct by interpreting the term.  As you mentioned at triage, this is something that from an ethical point of view, can be seen very difficult.  And we're talking here about our digital systems can take decisions by artificial intelligence that has been mentioned in the couple of times.
So that seems for many, many people very, very unusual potentially dangerous also so who is taking the decisions to do that?  How is the system designed as a former journalist I come to the point?
>> Kira:  Very quickly the concept of clinical triage has been deployed for hundreds of years.  Patients should be treated by urgency.  The blesm today is how it's being done.  It's being done by protocol manually.  This is part of the problem in getting healthcare to be streamlined.  Knowing which patients needs to go where is a extremely important for running healthcare system.  Give you an example.  If everybody goes to the emergency department like they do today, we're not going to have enough time for may patients that are acute.  Only in the U.S. there's $200 billion spent on avoidable emergency department visits that could have been handled somewhere else.
However, I do agree about you that when developing artificial intelligence systems and in general any type of protocol especially in healthcare you need to think about fairness.  There was a very nice paper published approximately a year and a half ago about the fact that algorithms predicting which patients areon fair to the African‑American community in the United States.  The reason they were ranked lower is they were receiving less attention for medical setting in general and preef yufs 10 years and algorithm identified that patients that are costly at a higher probability of doing preventable in‑patient visit in the future.  It created a full bias in the way the algorithm did those recommendations.
So it iOS a bleeding edge research topic on how to make the algorithms more fair and it's our responsibility as the scientists here to provide systems that are explainable, in other words, that decisions that are not making the decision and to be as transparent as possible and there's several mathematical algorithms to actually ensure the fairness across several subgroups while not hurting performance.  I definitely agree that in clinical aspects you have to understand how to do it correctly.  It doesn't mean that we should not do it because the problem is currently we're losing the fight in a scale.
As was mentioned it's not far off that we're going to have a system running on thousands of billions of data points and thinking a human can actually do it.  We need to change the way we think and move to a more digital world.  We've already done in finance for example so why not even in healthcare?  It doesn't mean we're not going to have the human touch.  It means we're going to have more human touch because doctors can actually do more face‑to‑face meetings instead of doing administrative work.
A few hundred years ago this he were having 200, 400 patients for primary care physician.  Today it's 2,000, maybe 5,000 in some countries, it doesn't scale.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Dr. Agrawal, I'm sure you also have thoughts about this aspect.
>> Dr. AGRAWAL:  Yeah, I do, my first thought is a very, very local context.  If you look at the GDPR in Europe versus laws elsewhere, it all depends on how you perceive health data and its use or misuse.
The reason for privacy is primarily not one of simple choice.  It's one of preventing misuse.
And how you go about handling health data to make healthcare systems better but preventing misuse is a very dynamic level.  To illustrate the point, if somebody was able to download your data and misuse that's clearly ‑‑ however, if your data was to be secure, better able to utilize it.  Procurement results develop better parameters and nobody has lost anything.
I think we are at the beginning of an age of computer science where many things that are possible are not fully understood by the public.  It is entirely possible for your data to stay on your phone and by federated learning for the laboratories that work on the data to get better and better and better so you get a better experience.  There's nothing wrong with it.  Similarly, genomes can be downloaded.  They can stay on the same place.  My intuit probably has the largest collection of genomes in the country.  We will not want to let people download it because you can always crack a genome to some degree to second level especially in a country like India where people are very illiterate because of lack of communities over thousands of years but at the same time we would want that decision health systems to Indians to become better and that's very important.  Why?  Recently we did 1,000 genomes for Indians.  We discovered 13 million new genetic variants not described in any genomic data across the world at that point.  I assure you if this kind of study 1,000 whole genomes is done in Africa you'll find another 15 million.
The genomic data is very dominated by white western European determinant in America and western European for this purpose.
And yet you must make this data available around the world.
It should not simply become a point of if you spend a few thousand on sequencing somebody.  I think there's a lot more ‑‑ we must prevent misuse, yes.  We must lock data up so nobody can use it.  No.
I'll stop here for the time being.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That's a very interesting point obviously.  I see a very likely debate here in the chat about these questions.  There was a question on have there already been cases where companies, multilateral organizations and hospitals and communities regarding COVID‑19 investigations of patient data that links very practically to how to secure the systems and then there is also this more ethical discussion about who is taking decisions and where is the interface between human being and digital world.  I think that that is something that is really to shape for the future as we see that there is a big potential in digital technology and at the same time it is entering a space where we didn't expect it maybe so much.
It's quite different to be used ‑‑ to use a mobile phone to check your friends and family or your peers or to see your doctor only on the mobile phone and sending some data to the doctor for consultation.  Very short because I want to move to the next step in the discussion to look a little bit in the future and to start developing some recommendations, some points that you want to give to the community to deal with that challenge.  But one point, again, on trust.
Why you have this experience with vaccination which implies a direct contact?  Tell us very briefly what you see the fact that one must work most if you turn more health services into digital?  What is the point to temper to make that work?  .
>> 
 >> ANURADHA GUPTA: I think we have to be very deliberate on how we choose to use them.  The value of human interface also needs to be reshifted so I think that's the point made by Anrag also.  Whatever we can digitize we must for example we're doing it dashboards to understand the functionality of coaching, right?  And to the point that Anurag was making would you argue that countries should not be uploading that data or would you argue that that data is added for global good, right?  That's one debate.  But the second is that the trust that communities repose in front line health workers and their providers should not be underestimated.  And therefore, you know, I think that human intervase and human intervention will continue to be extremely critical.  One thing that I think that hasn't been touched and I is about equity.  So we talked about fairness but I would really want to sort of highlight if we have to make sure that the digital divide that already exists is not exacerbated.
You know?  And that we ‑‑ the pendulum does not swing to the other end and lose sight of the fact that there is highly access to technology and digital technology and that if we are serious about SDG, we will have a, you know, file aspect of leaving no one behind, that is something that must absolutely be kept in mind.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That is exactly the point where I wanted to come now.  We are not equal in our online.  We have discussed that.  Systems are quite set up in different regions of the world.
Roughly half of the planet is still unconnected.  Many are not meaningfully connected.
Most of them in remote areas of the rural areas, digital technologies are not accessible to all and often they're not equally accessible.  And it seems to me that it builds on the situation that we have seen before that many vulnerbles that have been vulnerable to other conditions are also vulnerable to digital improvement somehow because that is exactly the groups that we need to connect?  Now, here's the question:  How to endure digital connection for all and how do we make sure leaving someone behind?  I would turn to a very structured I proach now and give you one by one again two to three minutes to give us some very practical points from your standpoint and your experience how we have to make sure that digital health innovation delivers for all and we make sure that no one is left behind.  Let's start with Bernardo.
 >> BERNARDO MARIANO: Thank you, Patrick.  I think some panelists alluded that the issue about what we ‑‑ the challenge we have in the physical world and the challenges that we have in the digital world and some leaders are already starting to also discuss and I recognize that we need new rules in the digital world because of the trying to trance ‑‑ the rules in physical to digital are not necessarily working.  From equity I also wanted to ensure that we don't fore guest the gender equality in addition to health equity approach but also accessibility for people with disabilities as we create these digital ecosystems.  From our perspective we see it as our role to support countries as they get digital health strategies to make sure those are included.
But I think we ‑‑ today we have a digital divide.  Close to half the world still don't have access to broadband.  So do we work ‑‑ the way we're trying to address that is to ensure that as we promote the use of digital technologies, we also promote the accessibility to those that are not connected by working with the entities that are working on the ground with countries to ensure connectivity.  So we have ITUs, we have the national governments to ensure that ‑‑ and I think even Precious mentioned it's not an issue of health but of finance and technology.  So I think bringing those entities together to address those multiple challenges but also in understand better, we are in the framework to ensure that we have all the benefits in the center of what we strapping issue in global strategy and digital health where we blan to implement a number of solutions, frameworks and technologies to ensure we all have the benefits that digital technology can bring.  So yes, we are recognizing that the fact that there's still the world is not equal.  But also we are recognizing that by working with the all levels, even community level because we cannot forget the community health workers that require the skills and the knowledge to ensure that we transcend and create information on digital that we can bring benefits.
So working together is key.  Working together in a different way of that we've been working in the past is very key to ensure that we bring those benefits.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Bernardo.  Precious?
>> Precious Matsoso:  Yes.  Thank you.  We have to address the fulcrum of inequality and inequity.  And to do that, we have to reset and reform our health system so that we can meet the challenges of digital health advances.  As we do that, it must be with the explicit purpose of improving access.  And ensuring that regulation safeguards are in place.  Now, in resource con trained settings, the investments in human capacity development are important.  They're important because they they need to match this digital revolution.  What Anurag was saying in countries where the basics are needed, we need to ensure that you can benefit from both high‑tech technology and the basic day‑to‑day things that can help us improve access to quality healthcare.
So this must ensure that the health system is transformed.  The health system as we know it, it must be transformed in such a way that service delivery is improved.
But it must be done in such a way that the users of services are empowered.  They're empowered to manage and monitor their own health.
So that they do not run to leather facilities for every small health problem.
And if this is the case, it must help us reduce costs and ensure that health is affordable and accessible.  But that extension of services is also for the benefit of those who are in remote settings.
Those that are in rural environments.  It cannot be that when you have a particular address then it is a access and geographic location must no longer be a barrier to access.  So we have an opportunity to improve our outcomes and an opportunity to improve the effectiveness of our patient management with these digital decision tools that refer to that area.  Of course, this will improve our targets for the SDGs and SDG in 2030.  Thank you.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much, precious.  Let me point a little bit on this.  I ‑‑ do I understand you correctly that your hope is that with digital technology if you organize the skills you can overcome the injustice and access to health services.  That is your perspective?  While when I understand Bernardo correctly, he's fearing a little bit more that digital health ‑‑ digital health based services risk to mirror the circumstances that we have fl the physical world and are not necessarily overcoming this injustice.
If I'm correct, there is a risk of mirroring if you're not looking at the whole infrastructure in the country.
I know Anudhra, I'm hunger to you now.  Which side do you have a little more to Bernard or precious.
>> This is something here because we're working on understanding inequities immunization and we've been trying to study why 11 million children in GOVI supported countries do not receive a single dose of the most basic vaccine.  and for that we call that child zero dose child is actually an acute marker of inequity and you would be surprised by what we discovered.
You know what we discovered was that contrary to this popular notion that these children are living in remote areas, you know, it is all about delivery, actually a lot of them are living right under the nose of the governments and capitals in urban slums.  And a lot of these children actually existed in every village and every town because actually, the barriers that are operating, you know, against access to these populations are embedded in poverty.   You know, 2 out of 3 zero dose children live in households that subsist on less than $1.90 a day.  So there's a connection again extreme poverty and zero dose children.
Ethnicity is a big barrier.  And then gender barriers.
You know, because the mother is not educated, mother is not empowered.  So there are complex predictors and strat fires of these inequities.  So my first humble plea here is not to synonymize inequities with geographical locations which are difficult to access.
Now the next insight I would want to share is therefore, it is possible for us to actually use big data.  And artificial intelligence to try and ‑‑ very complex data sources to understand where exactly these marginalized populations live and what exactly are the latent profiles.  Why is it that they're missing all those?  So it's not ‑‑ this is not directly linked to connectivity issue on the issue or challenge of digital domain.  We can still use our leverage technologies to improve access for marginalized populations.
And the last thing I would say is that you know the level of technology that exists in some some of the remostest areas that is not connected is highly variable.  So we really therefore, have to think about differentiating and contextualized approaches.  For example am some of the countries we found that the use of mobile phones could actually access the gender divide because women did not have ownership of mobile phones.  Some other context be found there was high ownership on the part of women, of mobile phones.  So I just think that just retaining that ability to actually study habitation by habitation community by community some of the barriers and then making an intelligent sort of decision about how do we leverage technology would be extremely important.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Very good example.
Anurag, again, how to ensure digital healthcare delivers for all.
>> ANURAG AGRAWAL:  Thanks.  I'm going to start with a comment for the most precious comment today was made by Precious 57D how do you keem from unnecessarily visiting healthcare systems?  That is absolutely critical in most systems.  In India the average time for a patient to be seen by a doctor is under five minutes.  Of that 50% of time is in prescription refills and basic measurements.  Proof you want to extract the maximum value of every time, every patient, spends with an experience the medical personnel and minimize the wastage of time otherwise.  So you must alow people with non‑specific complaints to get advice in their own houses or community such that numbers of doctors.  You must enable the system with digital health codes they have to be built by the government.  How the government will pay for them is a question I leave for smarter people like Bernardo.
On the other hand, after these basic health services are taken care of and internationally we have to find models, on top of it you need the private sector to create innovative ecosystem for more and more high quality products.  So I see both Bernardo's vision in the end there will be high cost differentiated products not available for everybody.  Whether you stay digital or not.  I don't know.  But essential good services should be available to everybody by public distribution of goods and commitment towards making sure that basic medical advice can be given to people without having to leave their houses, without having to waste time in which they could have gone.  Huge number of people get into poverty because they're unnecessarily going around all over the place wasting ‑‑ getting answers that could have come to their houses.  I'll stop here.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much for this contribution, particularly on this human interface that you're mentioning.  I could share from Germany that the impression here the study between patient and doctor you see many, many visits are from a health perspective, obsolete.  It's more obviously a social thing.  So it's more kind of to have contact which applies obviously to many elderly people that are doing kind of doctor hopping also.
And that is filling the waiting rooms and that is challenging the system.  But on the other hand it's needs.
But the question is there ‑‑ is it the right place to fill that need obviously?  Thank you very much and very interesting point I think.
Kira, how to make sure that digital healthcare delivers for all?
>> Kira:  I'll touch on several points.  One is there's algorithmic methods sowing that an AR algorithm is fair.  But I think let's talk about virtual care.  Actually brought the notion democratization of healthcare, everybody can get a doctor no matter where they are and which home they live to get the best doctors to where they are.  The problem is access.
Even in virtual care, 75% of the population even the western countries doesn't know they have the possibility of using virtual care.
And I'm talking not about poor people.  Most people just don't know they can have this.
So we need to work a lot about education around this.  Maybe this would be part of the education in school.  Aus virtual care at least once, know that you have the possibility of using something that's going to change your life dramatically.  Number 2.
And number 3 is Gwyneth indication even for physicians, physicians at different countries have different education times, different training.  And I think building decision support systems across all the data in all the world in the best institutions and giving access to those decision for systems for physicians during training an other countries is going to help us supply the knowledge in a much more equal and fair way.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  That's very clear.
So last step in our panel ‑‑ I'm asking you to be even more concise than you have been in your contributions so far ‑‑ now when we look at what we have said, what would be the policy message or the concrete action point or recommendation that should come out from that panel when we look at the points that we have discussed before?
So I'm really looking at the clock now.  You are all very experienced in shaping policy messages or knowing what one should do and what would be the message that comes out of that panel to challenge what we have ahead of us to make match the digital world and the health world for best purpose for best purpose for the patient.  So what is what you want to see on the document when we close this session here?  Anurag starting with you, max one minute
>> Okay. digital health is not just usual health.  It requires a comprehensive strategy that takes into account local consideration, infrastructure and goals.  Each country should have a national health mission subject to its own preeptness in a digital world and health needs of its populations and I'm glad to see a mission.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Very good point.  Anudhra.
>> I think a good healthcare delivery has to be applied and focus now followed by efficiency and accountability.
And digital health actually is an enable letter and we have to stay ‑‑ enabler and we have to stay focused on these objectives and exploit digital health technologies to allocate resources much more prudently and equitably to make sure that we actually leave no one behind and we constantly improve the quality of services that are provided to population at large.
 >> MODERATOR: Mm‑hmm.  Thank you very much.  Kira?
>> Kira:  So in addition to all the topics we raised about equality and better collaboration between government and private sector, I want to raise the concept of data sharing.
I think on a global level if they would have shared data from medical conclusions that made during the pandemic we could have saved more lives in the country.  I think getting to a pint we have shared resource or all researchers can work on the same data, all government have visibility even to other countries can bring lots of healthcare and treatment.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  Very interesting point I guess.  Bernardo?
 >> BERNARDO MARIANO: Thank you.
I think from a key recommendation will be for certainly to reinforce some of what the other panelists mentioned is every country should have a structure ‑‑ a digital health strategy.  With that strategy we shall address a number of issues including health data, interoperability, and equity and all others such as ethical and privacy that was mentioned.  So that's first thing.  Second, each country needs to understand before the country is in that ‑‑ in the digital health and maturity.  So ensure that the third part that the investments are addressing ‑‑ taking that kind of maturity from where it is to the next level.  So my understanding that the maturity of the country in digital health implementation use the digital technologies, then we can drive investments into appropriate areas to enhance that maturity.  And last, but not least, is that the digital health or digital ecosystem requires a constant improvement and enhancement.
10 years of digital technologies is equal to 60 years of human life.  So let's make sure that we do not create strategies that are sit there for 10 years and five years thinking it still work, if a country vild a strategy five years ago, it needs to develop a in you one.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you I think this strategy must be argyle if I have gained any understanding of change that has occurred by data in our world sm so it's more like you know, design thinking process than having a five year strategy.  I have to understand that.  Okay.
The last, but not least, precious.
>> Yes, we need good digital health governance and improved access.  But of course for that to work, we must invest in human capacity development.
So that we can match the digital revolution and ensure that you've got a sustainable infrastructure that is expandable and maintainable.
It's not good to just say infrastructure.
It must be expandable and maintainable.
Thank you.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  You made very, very very clear points I guess and I'm looking at what you have said earlier.  And I think these six recommendations or points that you've raised is really at the key of the challenge.  I particularly took in mind a subtopic that ‑‑ or a kind of kroses cutting issue that ‑‑ crosscutting issue that was skills.
Skills on all levels to know more about how digital healthcare, digital systems can work, what it can do.  And skills is not only to know ‑‑ to manage them but also to understand how they work which is linked to transparency that was mentioned several times and Anurag also said if the systems are transparent.  Kira came in in the same point that is very important.  And somebody said digital list receipt which, obviously is a challenge in many sectors but I keep this is really key when it comes to health because as Bernardo said, we are ‑‑ we are bringing together here two very different cultures when he said that on one hand the ‑‑ the health, very much is based on relations between humans and on the other hand you have digital world and he described how far from culture they are one from each other that was for me a very interesting point when he said that is something that we barely need to address how do we make that match for any operator for any people that is dealing with it, be it in the role of a doctor or physician or scientists or in the role of a patient and even in the role of governance.
I would like to thank you very, very much for that very, very inspiring high‑level panel.  Thank you very much for your time, for your contributions.  All this is recorded and will stay on the YouTube channel of the IGF on the UN web TV from what I understand.  You also can follow the chat.  Thank you all for your questions, your remarks that are in the chat.  Some of them we could address and others are self‑explang and interesting to see because you can see what people think about this very, very complex topic.
I would like to thank the organizers, the team behind it.  And have a great day wherever you are.  And I hope that the next IGF, despite the fact this is very interesting format ‑‑ I really hope that the physical aspect will not completely drop out in this pandemic and while have the chance to meet in person and discuss this further as we'll keep really the topic will really be kept on the agenda.  Thank you very much.
 
** 
>> Do we have captioning working?  And ready to go.
 
>> Good morning, everybody.  Good afternoon and good evening.  Wherever you are in the world.  Welcome to our session profession or participation child rights in a new normal.  I'm Natasha Jackson representing the GSNA, the global mobile organization.  This session is provided by both the GSMA and, you know, ENICEF and we have UNSIF on the lierch as well.  And we are having a debate session today.  So hopefully we'll be able to get good interaction with all of you participating wherever you are in the world.
We have got an amazing panel of people who are going to talk to us today about the issue.  Really we're focused initially oncyo individual.  And the global COVID‑19 crisis which we know has brought into sharp focus many challenges related to children's rights in the global context and particularly around participation.  And profession and that's been pushing the considerations that many people, many child rights stakeholders and those who have been interested in child rights from very different perspectives have been pushing over the years.  Issues like digital inclusion, on line safety, youth participation and so on.
And whilst it has been in a very difficult time in many countries in fact I'm sure in all countries around the world, I think there has been one positive coming out of COVID‑19 in some way and that is that the need to address the digital divide that children face the need to address is much more widely acknowledged and understood.  And I think that's one of the positives as I said.  But there are also of course many, many concerns and many issues have come up and those concerns include of course Internet safety issues.  We know many parents and careers and oirnlz have had to climb a steep hill on this period.  That's now the opportunity for us to get this child rights agenda up up up on the policy agenda and we have to use this and we need to get ahead with policy makers of any sort of knee jerk approaches whether that's by policy makers or parents or careers that these sort of knee jerk approaches that can favor protection for children over participation or even vice versa and look for solutions which maximize the opportunity that children have while also combating the risks.  UNICEF released a report oncyo individual in July.  Josi will put that on the links in the chat so anyone when wants to see it can access it.  It identified the 10 key rights issues that they see thrown up by children's engagement with a digital world and those are the particularly pressing in the context of this new COVID normal.  Is in that document there are business and policy maker messages on each of the tep points and also lots of other sources of information.  So please do go have a look at that if you haven't seen it together.  Our objective today is to have a deso we're going to bring together the collective experience we have in the panelists and insights they have and hope to bring in also you sort of the wider group, anyone participating to propose a debate on workable solutions to issues that have been eye lighted during the pandemic.  The way we're going to structure it is that each of our four panelists are going to have the opportunity to outline the issues that they've been encountering relating to children and young people during COVID‑19 whether that's closing of schools or educational settings, the role of information or disinformation and keeping children safe and healthy as well as impact of social ieses lation.  Social distances, and we will have two panelists speaking from the protection angle and two from the participation angle.
Participants, anyone watching remotely, you'll be given the opportunity to ask questions and debate any of the recommendations for messages they're giving.  Please can you euses the chat function on the right for any comments any reactions to things that panelists are saying to share any research or studies or own experiences and use the Q&A panel for questions for the panelists.  We'll be monitoring both of those at the same time.  My eyes might be darting around as we're doing that.  I apologize for that.  And we will post them back.  After the opening statements we will open it up and we will ask panelists your questions, get into a bit of debate on that and then we will close with some closing statements and also because of the IGF this year have asked for voluntary commitments.  We will be also be asking panelists if there are any voluntaryr commitments related to IGF2020 that they want to share with us.
So we will kick off on the protection side.  So our first panelist is Uri Sadeh, the coordinator.  Uri Sadeh trained as a lawyer, worked on various human rights top ibz in Israel including trafficking human beings, asylum seekers and Palestinian human rights and in 2007 after obtaining his master's degree in human rights from the London school of economics he joined INTERPOL focusing contentious crimes against children.  Five or six years ago he went on sabbatical and returned to Israel Florida to take part in the creation of online crimes against children unit within the national police there before he led investigations into online child sexual exploitation.  So he has really hands‑on experience in investigating these crimes and bringing child sexual exploitation and criminals to justice.  In in 2019, so last year, Uri returned to INTERPOL and now heads the crimes against children's unit.  So Uri, welcome to the panel.  We're delighted to have you here.
I'll give you about five minutes to give some opening statements on your experience during COVID‑19 and messages that you have from INTERPOL.  Welcome.
 >> URI SADEH: Thank you very much, Natasha, and thank you for the opportunity to present during this and participate in the panel and present during this event.  Ten seconds I'll sail INTERPOL is the international criminal police organization bringing together 194 police forces in different countries around the world seeking primarily to provide for international cooperation between them, help build capacity on different topics and provide operational support for those ‑‑ to those police forces globally.  Crimes against children unit within the organization is in touch with numerous specialized units around the world working on crimes against children predominantly online.  Crimes against children to build better capacity in the same manner, deliver trainings, create cooperation in this international crime and ensure victims and offenders are identified and either safeguarded or arrested.
What I'll focus on today is the COVID report that we've issued early September.  Trying to look at what the pandemic is doing to law enforcement's efforts and phenomenal in general of online child exploitation.
Now, see if we can have any lessons from what we saw over the first or the half a year of the pandemic.
The sources for our report which is available on the Web site of INTERPOL were predominantly law enforcement information.  Some private industry and partners, information whether they work on childhood expectation international NGOs provided input and obviously the open source.  And we look at it obviously the setting nor this interest and the peculiar situation is the fact that schools have been closed largely for extended periods during this time adults spend on line.  The home environment and restrictions on international travel.
So with the limited minutes that I have, I'll try to focus on a few of the findings which again people are interested can be found in the report.  So, if we look at law enforcement itself, we saw law enforcement around the world reported reduction in the number of reports they got concerning child exploitation cases from the public.
So it was obviously the limitations have affected their ability of the public of children or perhaps of caregivers to report incidents.  There's also we noticed a reduction in the usage of our specialized toads for investigating this specific crime area by law enforcement, colleagues in our member countries.
We saw a change in the level of reporting that industry is providing on a regular basis.  So many industry platforms, Internet platforms report regularly to law enforcement incidents that are expected as being child sexual exploitation and there was reduction in the reports and sometimes a change in the manner and the depth if you want of the reports due to the work from home environment which gives less access to different systems.
Also the cases for law enforcement where we saw the ‑‑ in some cases some of the force was diverted to other policing tasks related to the COVID pandemic.  Therefore, having less access to specialized network providing access to international child exploitation based in INTERPOL which was hindering their investigations.
If we look in general about the phenomenas as we saw it, we saw a significant increase in exchange of child abuse materials, videos and images depicting children being sexually exploited.  It was done in peer‑to‑peer sharing file sharing networks.  We could see an increase in discussions on dedicated pedophile forums which exist in abundance, especially on the dark net where often it is our sharing experience and material and discussing the crimes they're committing.  We saw an increase in that.  There was more time and more activity spent there.  We saw the significant increase in viral content circulating.  So police forces reporting more and more cases of videos that go viral and actually revictimmize the children that are depicted within this material and also exposes more people that are not necessarily seeking such exposure to child abuse material.
We saw pretty natural an increasing self‑generating materials.  So victims, minors producing child abuse material on behalf of ‑‑ or at the request of offenders that are contacting them online.  And these going ‑‑ being distributed.  We didn't see actually ‑‑ this can be revisited ‑‑ all of those findings I'm talking about are initial because data available was still limited.  We wrote this over summer which was worth looking at a few months or even a year down the road.  In the gaming industry where we know there is abuse as well children in online gaming are being groomed into abusive situations or extortion situations, we didn't see ‑‑ there were no reports of increased incidents.
We did see suggestions that there is more online payment for wild exploitation material and that's linked to streaming that's phenomena of offenders sitting in one country and paying someone else an adult elsewhere to abuse kids live on camera for them in exchange for payment.  We saw indications of increase on this phenomena.
And we saw an increase in natural increase in obstacles for victims to report where children are not in school and don't have this route of reporting or teacher or caregiver being able to detect abuse and therefore, reported ‑‑ expose it.  There is obviously less access to medical care and social services because of lockdown.
In a nutshell these are some of the findings in the report I encourage you to go and read the full report.
We have questions later on.  I hope I'm within the time limit.
 >> MODERATOR: Great.  Thank you, Uri.  Quite sobering stuff there in the report.
Really all of the issues in there are really, really upsetting as well.  I have a question for you, you mentioned this reduction in reporting of cases.  With schools being closed and children being confined much more, that's been the case.  But how do you think those sort of barriers and vulnerability they create for children can be mitigated?
 >> URI SADEH: It seems crucial now that we have lessons of the first confinement and some results of the nature it had that hotlines for example must remain open.  Hotlines reporting ‑‑ hotlines ta are served oftentor reporting incidents material and actual cases should remain open and accessible to the public.
There's other technological solution that's can be put in place even on law enforcement side.  Find online reporting mechanisms allowing children to put their complaints or initial complaints in online to reports can be a toll‑free texting service.  It can be integrated channels within the social platforms where children are, that sort of thing.
gaming, again, messaging applications.  The online environment should be exploited to that end in order to ensure that we have continuous service.  And the same goes for social services and medical services related sexual abuse, those must be seen as essential services that must be ‑‑ must remain open and people should be able to access them.
 >> MODERATOR: That is a great link to our next panelist.  Thank you, Uri.  Our next panelist the general director of the SOA organization in Palestine.  She's an experienced trainer in gender‑based violence.  Developed anti‑violence programs, published manual on eye eliminating violence particularly against children and women.  She's helped establish five help lines for women survivors of violence and child protection in Palestine and in the wider Middle East region.  She's also a consultant, published research.  And of course has been running a child protection help line which is part of an international network of child help lines called child help line international.
So welcome to the session.  We heard just now from Uri about the importance of hotlines staying available all the time.  And accessible to children.  Perhaps you could talk a little bit about your experience over the COVID period with the help line for children and women that you've been running in Palestine.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  Thank you.  Yes, I will share my experience.
>> Your video is not showing yet. 
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  I don't have the choice to open.  Okay.
 
 >> MODERATOR: There you go.  Nice to see your face.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  Okay.
As an organization we are running child protection help line.  And with the support of our partners we continue to provide our services remotely during 24 hours by 7 for children during the lockdown.  As our services were not affected during lockdown and in particular the protection system doesn't work and doesn't function as usual during the emergency situation.
And there were increase in number of children that contacted the help line services.  Mainly they reported physical violence, sexual exploitation, cyber harassment, attempted suicide.  And the high percentage of calls was from male and young men.  Increased 20%.  Many children didn't get basic needs as a result of economic situation for their families.  Some children didn't have enough food or they couldn't continue their study because they don't have the ability to attend the e‑learning.
And also the protection was very weak during this time.  I will relate this to the mainly poor countries that many families lost their job and they didn't have also enough space in their houses and the number of families is very big.  So it makes a lot of clashes or a lot of stress inside the house and the result of that children were suffering from different types of violence and especially we can ‑‑ as I explained before, it's for cases of incest, suicide, we started to hear, like, children report more about these cases and it talks the country and government a few months until they scatter to give services and I mean here the protection systems start to be active and we have like the first two months of the lock down it was really difficult.  To prefer children to the protection system we have in Palestine.  We find there is a big need to have help line and the help line givers an opportunity for children to raise their voices and we can hear their voices and give them space that they can report and talk about the difficulties they face inside the family.  So the help line was like a window or open the whole for children that they can call the help line and get the psychosocial support to continue on their life and also when they have any problem inside the family they will find a place where they can get help.
And I can say from our experience that we published a lot of FAQ sheets during this time.  The FAQ sheets give us a real information about the ground and to what's going on the ground with children.  And because these FAQ sheets result from our database that we document the cases that we receive on this database can show us what the ‑‑ what the needs of the children are.  Is we can see the difference between each month between the needs of the children like from the beginning of the lock down until today.  The graph is different each month but the FAQ sheets gives us rich information how to address our services and what to add.  And how also to prepare our staff for the response of the needs for the children during this time.  Yeah, so this is mainly what I like to share with you and I'm ready to answer any questions you have related to our experience.  Thank you.
 >> MODERATOR: Thanks very., OHAILA.  Again sobering message of the experiences you've noted for the first hand from the help lines.  You talk very much about how governments were slow to follow‑up.  If you took away the participation side of the equation and just focused on the protection, what would be your key recommendation or ask if you just focused on that?  .
>> It's ‑‑ I mean it's very important to have the communication with the government and with the protection system.  Because as I mentioned, after two months we tried to advocate a lot for that.
And we succeed to function the protection system and we get for example, a training for the government and the mainly for minister of social development, how to continue thif services through the online services.  How to be prepared for any emergency situation.  So planning is very important like to have a plan for emergency responses is very important.  This is what we tried to do with the government institution and with other referral systems in the country.
 >> MODERATOR: Okay, interesting.  We have some questions coming through.  We will get to those questions.  Also, just for remote participants, if you have experience from your countries that match what Ohaila is saying or if you have even different experiences, please feel free to comment in the chat and we'll monitor those as well.  It will be interesting to see the experiences from other parts of the world as a commonalities and differences.  So thank you, Ohaila.  I think your overview has been really interesting and helpful and is ‑‑ I want to now turn to a student himself at the University of Johannesburg in South Africa.  He's studying politics and international relations there.  He's a student leader and also amen ter for students in his department and he's representative for the South Africa for the commonwealth student association.  Bongani also volunteers for UNICEF South Africa and directed and produced a short film for UNICEF Africa and he's the limited youth reporter.  And he uses films and other methods to spread information and the stories and talk about from a youth perspective.  You can see his story on the GMSA on the youth site there's a video there I made at a workshop with Vodac ooh m at a photo storing workshop.  Bongani welcome to the panel today.  I think you are closer to school years than anyone else on our panel.  We're delighted to have a young voice on our panel as well.
And I think we'd really like to hear your experiences.  What have you been hearing from your community of young people, your network, how do they match what what we heard.  Please share your information with us and your experiences and those of your colleagues or compatriots.  Thanks.  Are we getting B or ngani.  He's having laptop issues.  That just shows that that is a key issue on keblghttivity that is not ‑‑ r ‑‑ connectivity that is not unfamiliar to many of us during COVID‑19.  So he's going to sort those outs and we'll switch to him later.  We'll now move to professor Amanda Third, codirector of the young and resilient research sefnter at western eurch varsity in Sydney.  She's an expert in child centered participatory research and lid child centered projects for children in the digital age in over 70 countries around the world.  She's worked with partners on corporate government not for profit sectors, children and young people themselves.  And she's part of the team led by the five rights Foundation that's drafting the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child general comment on children's rights in the digital environment.
So Amanda, sorry, she's also professional research fellow in institute for culture and society at western Sydney university, faculty associate in the center for Internet and society at Harvard.  Wow.  Great credentials and most recent book is "young people in digital society" which is published by Hargrave..  So Amanda, you do this research directly with young ‑‑ with children and not just young people but with children.  Perhaps can share some of your experiences and the trends and threats that you saw during the COVID period compared to prepandemic.
>> Amanda Third:  Thanks very much, Natasha and UNICEF and GMSA for organizing this panel.  It's wonderful and terribly sobering to listen to the perspectives being shared so far and clearly there are lots of challenges ahead of us.
I want to begin by engaging with the title of this panel.  Protection or participation?
And I thought I would throw out a challenge to organizations that facilitate children's access to and use of technology around the world.
The con vks on the rights of the child, which is still the most widely ratified human rights treaty in history ‑‑ calls on states and other duty bearers to respect, protect and up hold children's provision, protection, and participation rights.
So from perspective of the convention then it's not a question of either protection or participation but in fact of provision, protection, and participation.
It's our task as stipulated by the convention, to realize all three in con srt.
And this is a very complicated necessary and indeed urgent task in the world we've suddenly encountered.
Children are not particularly vulnerable to developing COVID‑19 and emerging evidence is suggesting that children around the world are not particularly concerned that either they or their loved once will contract the virus.  Nonetheless, children have been seriously affected by the crisis of the every Dave that's been brought about by the pandemic.
They say they've feeling intense and omp new emotions like anger, grief and anxiety and I worry that they're not equipped to deal with those emotions, they feel disconnected from peers and activities that support day‑to‑day well‑being.
And many are experiencing heightened tensions and even violence at home as families grapple with the very really infects of the pandemic on job losses and financial pressure.
So like many adults, children have a sense that the world will never be normal again.  It's quite likely that they're right.  In short, children are experiencing a crisis in the social f social worlds and this will potentially are long‑term effects on their lives.  My concern is that under these conditions because thrair not seen as a group that's vul theirble to the virus, their needs, rights and aspirations have remained under the radar.  They are, if you like, the invisible victims of this pandemic.
Now more than ever we have to make a concerted effort to address children's needs.  We have to keep their concerns front and center as we take decisions to deal with this crisis.  Which also means that we need good ways to listen to what children need and want.
Throughout the pandemic technologies provided many children with a vital point of continuity and connection.  It's really helped to structure their day‑to‑day life and give life under the pandemic order and meaning.
Of course this is not true for all children as Natasha noted in her introduction.  We urgently need mechanisms for addressing the digital inclusion of those children who don't have regular and reliable access to technology and the Internet.
But for those with access, technology has been key to tir well‑being through the pandemic and this is reflected in the sharp increases in their use of technology.
By virtual of being online, ever more children are more exposed to risks of harm as by fellow panelists already pointed out we've seen escalating rights of forms of violence that range from cyber bullying at the more pointy end of the child protection challenge alarming increases of child exploitation and these require urgent remedy.  But at the same time I want to suggest that we need to expand our thinking about protection beyond conventional online safety risks because children are experiencing a crisis in their social world that's compromising their well‑being.  And they need protection from these factors.
We need to keep children safe emotionally as well as physically in it the broader lives beyond the online world.
While we have been quite good at providing children with child‑friendly information about how to protect their physical health from the virus, we've not yelt learned how to leverage technology to protect children's rights to other vital rights of information and support to deal with the other dimensions of the pandemic.  Indeed, we're net to imagine all the waises that technology can be Han esed to shore up children's broad range of rights beyond those that play out in online spaces.
Technology if we're smart about it could be a much more powerful part of the solution.  But some solutions need to be driven by children's own insights and experiences about what they need and this is one example where we see that participation is not only critical but interconnected deeply with their protection.
Many of our responses to the pandemic to date have been driven by the sheer requirement to respond at speed.  We've seen a massive movement namely for example to get children's education online and on the surface it looks as though we've begun to recognize the possibilities of online education, making the kinds of changes that some educators have fought for for decades overnight.
And yet, many children are reporting that their experience of education is less than adequate.
Although the evidence is yet to come in, I do think that in our rush to get education online we've not stopped to think about what good education in online settings needs to look like.
Despite the massive efforts of educators all around the world, we haven't had time to think about how we might need to rethink education for online delivery.
And as with many other domains of children's lives we haven't stopt to involve children in the project of reenvisaging education for 21st Century onhine world.  Indeed, you might say that children's participation has been one of the big casualties of the pandemic.
If we're to take up the challenge of protecting children's rights seriously, we need to urgently prioritize children's right to participate in the decision making that impacts their lives.  We need to recognize that children have important insights.  That they're an enormous resource in helping us respond toe this new normal.  But to tap into this, we need to really rethink our structures and processes of governance.  We need ways of engaging children effectively in times of physical distancing.
And we need to make space for children to contribute to those processes of decision making not in one off kind of ways but as an ongoing and integral part of our processes awlings remembering that their protection and participation rights are intertwined.
Thanks, Natasha.
 >> MODERATOR:  
>> Thanks, Amanda, really interesting I have a question for you actually.  So you know you talk about how we really need to we think but how do we actually engage with children meaningfully?  And you know I'm talking particularly, you know, as GSMA, our members are corporate.  So how do we engage with them?
And how do others engage with them meaningfully rather than lip service or in any other ways?
>> Amanda Third:  Thanks that's a great question and one that ‑‑ a question that many people have because children's participation rights are notoriously difficult to realize, much more difficult to realize than protection rights in many senses.  Yeah?
And I think there are lots of things to take away from experience to date.  Obviously things ‑‑ it's best to reach out to children in the spaces that they're already in.   You know, speak in child friendly language, et cetera, et cetera.  There are lots of good principles for engaging children effectively that we can turn it to for support here.
But I think the major challenge is really to move beyond tokenistic participation as your question subjects.  And to me that really involves a radical rethink of the ways that we set up our decision‑making processes.  It really involves corporations thinking about well, okay.
so we make decisions about children's lives all the time.  How do we invite them into those processes in ways are meaningful to children?  And in an on going way, how do we expand the possibilities to interface with children?  I think there's wonderful examples of the ways that's been done.  For example just a non‑technology one is that I'm part of an entity called the 216 site children's Parliament run by the Liverpool city council in western Sydney university.
And the council has set up a children's Parliament which sits alongside the adult Parliament and members of the adult Parliament attend and listen to the decision making that children undertake and then there's a series of advocates who advocate for adults to take those decisions up in the broader world if you like.
And I think these are the kinds of examples that we could turn to to really think about more meaningful forms of participation for children.  In all kinds of practices governments and civil society to private enterprise
 >> MODERATOR: Okay, great.  That's the perfect segue to move to Bongani who I believe has fixed his laptop issues.  So Bongani already gave his bio.  But actually talking about corporate talking to young people so Bongani we had invited this GSMA to come to world Congress earlier this year and talk to business leaders there so start getting that communication from young people to the corporate sector.  Unfortunately, of course, COVID put an end to that and we had to cancel the conference.
But Bongani, please give us your perspective of the pandemic in terms of the experience that you have had personally or experiences from those you're connected with.  And also perhaps afterwards maybe you can touch on how the sort of youth voice and listening to young people and engaging them more in all the issues and responses and the measures that can be taken to improve the situation in these times of pandemic and other challenges, thank you.
>> Bongani:  You're still on mute, Bongani.
>> Bongani:  Sorry about that.  Thank you for having me.  I'm not sure if I'm audible enough?
 >> MODERATOR: You just need to speak a little louder and then I think you're fine.  We can see you.  Just a little low on volume.
>> Bongani:  Am I audible enough?
>> Yes.
>> Okay
hello?  Oh, perfect.
Thank you for having me.  It's really important for us to identify or recognize that there's more dangers for kids being on the Internet as opposed to not being on the Internet.
And as we've seen, things such as child trafficking which has already been spoken about, cyber bullying which has also been spoken about, we've seen how drastically increasing those things have been during the pandemic.  But with these incidents also being highlighted, I think it's also important for us to also ensure that young people ‑‑ that regulation that's are put there in place for kids and young people to be able to actively engage on Internet and online platforms.
Ask
 >> MODERATOR: It looks like we've lost Bongani again.  Such a shame.  That's one of the key challenges we've come up against is actually what do we do about children and young people who don't have access to the Internet?  Now, we'll get into that with the panel ‑‑ Bongani, you're back.  Please if you can take yourself off mute and continue, that will be great and I was just saying that this is sort of lack of connectivity that a lot of people are experiencing is one of the key issues and I expect with children it's even more so whether it's because of technology or because their parents or others are trying to protect them from what they perceive as the dangers online.
>> Bongani:  Thank you.  Sorry about that.  But as I was saying, I think most of the work that I do at the moment with UNICEF when volunteering with them so it's going to schools around the country, facilitates workshops on capacity building.
And what the pandemic has basically done is that now because of lockdown everything we're unable to reach out to the kids and have the normal workshops we have with them and I think a very critical thing with these workshops is also being able to provide some of the kids because they come not having any form of food.
And so amart from this, what we kind of do is that we've taken the workshops to an online space.  So now we have workshops on using Zoom an engage with them kids remain to creating we need to engage or have young people and children in online platforms regardless of the danger that may be there.  As I stated earlier on we need to have regulations that ensure that kids are safe online.  Regulation that's ensure that parents as well are involved on their kids online activity.
Another thing that I think the pandemic has also taught us is how unequal society is.  Inequality within our society.
So with the pandemic and lockdown happening, most of the kids who had, like, proper resources were able to continue with e‑learning, online learning.  While kids who come from disadvantaged backgrounds weren't able to engage online with the education and reed.  With academics, this speaks to the need for us to ensuring that kids to go to schools in different communities have the same opportunities and resources as kids who are offered better advantage.  And apart from this, I think another thing to also take note of is Amanda spoke a bit on this ‑‑ the need for meaningful engagement of young people within decision‑making processes.  And why there is this critical need for children to also be involved.  This speaks to representation.  And it also speaks to people's experiences.  So, if there are decisions that are to be taken that speaks to the Internet and also speaks to young people's involved, we can't take any dispitions without involving those people who will be affected by whatever decisions that will be taken.
And apart from this, I think another thing that we also need to take note of is the fact that when addressing issues of
 >> MODERATOR: We lost Bongani I suspect he'll be able to come back in a minute and join on the panel.  There were really interesting and quite clear messages from him there about regulation not everything stopped they were able to continue with the workshops.  We have quite a number of questions on the Q&A and also chat.  People have been sharing experiences.  I'm going to just open up for wider questions.  Hi, Bongani, I see you're back now.  We're going to open up to the panel and give you an opportunity to talk.  Don't worry if you go off and on, that's fine.  We'll keep bringing you in.  I'm going to bring Sosi from UNICEF who what particular questions do you want to start with to direct to the panelists.
 
>> Thank you for the introduction sessions.  False dichotomy has been picked up.  We wanted to get the debate flowing and once we come to the end come to concrete ways off course protection and participation need to be both upheld onlien so it's great to have that kind of picked up on instantly.  I see a question here that talks about right to privacy during COVID as consequence of children's increased participation online.  What does this ‑‑ the impact this has on collection of children's personal data and sews yated risks.  I just want to take the opportunity and thank you, Natasha forgiving me the chance to quickly jump in and share a brief that was published recently on the record impacts on child rights dimensions of that which I recommend to everyone but I wonder if any panelists have comments to pick up own this dimension of children's right to privacy during lock down and increase the data collection and associated issues with that. 
>> Sorry, would you mind repeating the question in brief.
>> 
 >> JOSIANNE GALEA: Sure, we had a question in the Q&A that disoomedz in on the right to privacy and the increased data collection on children during COVID specific issues there and potentially some solutions as well.
>> Yes.  Certainly, thanks, Josi.  So privacy is just a key challenge to by virtue of the fact they're spending more time online and also interfacing with variety of different platforms.  So privacy is really being challenged, I guess.  One thing I would draw attention to is that I've just recently done some work in fact working with 700 children around the world in 28 countries.  To try to understand their rights in the digital age.
And when it comes to issues of privacy, for the first time in my history of working with children in this kind of way, children have really been sensitized to the issues around data protection and privacy.  When we talked to them previously, they tended to highlight interpersonal privacy as key challenge.  Watching what they're doing and feeling surveilled by the people around them.  But I think you know what they're atune to and it's no doubt connected to the fact that around the world we have begun to have deeper conversations around data protection, as a consequence of some of the events that ‑‑ or breaches I guess you might say of data protection internationally.  And those conversations that adults have been having are indeed filtering down into children's consciousness and they are ‑‑ I think the only word for it is out wage.  People might collect data in ways that are not transparent to them.  They're worried about who collects data, what they collect it for and why.
And yeah, lots and lots of unanswered questions.
But I think you know what we need to really think carefully about ‑‑ and obviously there are things that can be done by governments to enforce data protection laws and you know the GDPR legislation is obviously critical there are 24EU7BGZ going on in a similar way beyond legislative protections and what's happening to our culture and the level of culture.  Our children have been taught that it's normal to be surveilled.  And it's ‑‑ you know, you're ‑‑ there are constantly under someone's watchful eye whether it be a parent or a private company who's willing to exploit them for economic section.  This is not just a breach of I right to privacy but a breach of the right to freedom of thought.  We're teaching Ching children not to think and do things that might come naturally to them because they live in this highly curated world.
So I think the challenges run very, very deep.  But I also think talking to children that there is a rising call.  I think they're going to be demeaning more from their platforms because they don't think that having a free social media service is a fair trade for privacy.  So watch.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Amanda, that's really interesting.  And speaking from the more corporate side, we have seen a few companies already started to have youth panels I think Talia, the operator that operates in Sweden arpd parts of the Nordics and other countries has a youth panel where they have young people coming and talking directly to the business and hopefully that's a trend that we'll start to see more of and certainly at GSMA we're encouraging all that and our commitment will be along that.
I want to stay with little bit about this idea on the data protection angle a little bit and also move over to Uri on this.  So Uri.  There were two anglesser hoo.  One of course is the debate that sometimes comes up which is the right to confidentiality and privacy that can also impede law enforcement investigations into criminals.  So the fact that you know they also have a right to privacy and a lot of the forms on which some of the ‑‑ you know ped files and others are interconnecting is encrypted and law enforcement don't have access to it.  So there's one sort of policy debate on that which I know the European mission and others are starting to think about in a vexing law enforcement.  Other of course is the fact that children are only really many children are finding the tfdz to turn to the hotlines and help lines when they're away from perpetrators.  And what sort of evidence there is and that's a question I'll ask for you.  And what sort of evidence you may have for insights from other countries on that.  So sort of two questions there.  Take both or take one.
 >> URI SADEH: I'll answer the second first.  It is an interesting aspect that we didn't see in the initial data we received.  There wasn't a lot of data from hotlines at the time.  So that might be something interesting to look at now or a little later.  It is logic that gives it suddenly find ourselves at the home environment especially if it's supportive home environment.  Away from abuse if the abuse is in school or kindergarten have the chance to disclose the chance to break away a little bit from the routine abuse they're facing so this is in fact a beneficial side of it.  Obviously there's the other side some victims must have been locked up with their abusers but there's a whole variety there.
Actually I should put in more details after I saw the comment in the chat here.
Another aspect we should be aware of we talked about privacy of children putting on those platforms and educated that's the way to learn or to communicate is the early exposures.  And it has been put online and earlier than they would have otherwise now because schooling and social communicating within their social group has moved online due to lockdown so you have a whole group of children who have been predictive arms.  Earlier than I think how do we ‑‑ can you then stop it at that we go back to normal school or how you have kids that are as lounge as first graders that are communicating online and therefore, exposed to abuse very early before they have protective mechanisms.  This coupled with the fact that while we are in remote studying if you're not online you don't exist.
The question about encryption obviously the encryption privacy while we of course want to protect protect, the police work to protect privacy while we talk about child sexual exploitation on line, you very often depend on the service providers providing some information about the abusers active offending against children online.  There is an increased usage of encryption on platforms which indeed blinds not only law enforcement but provides service providers themselves to the abuse that they know and we know and numbers are enormous is occurring on the platform and indeed stand on this if you're providing a platform where children are becoming ‑‑ are being abused this is not an assumption, this is a fact and you know it and we're talking about millions of reports coming out of platforms.  Going encryption going blind on it doesn't solve the problem.  Only serves the offenders.
And of course again, European legislation which is some aspects of protecting the privacy must take into consideration the need to protect vulnerable relations online there predominantly children and they leave some leeway for industry to work with law enforcement and try to detect chimed abuse and try to filter out child abuse material which is what this revictimizing the children that were once abused and NOI consumed again and again by offenders that gain reviewing.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you, yeah.  The question on balancing rights is always there.  Participation in any of these crimes and disadvantages.  And I just want to quickly before we start summing summing up to go back to issues there, bs, Bongani if you're there put the video on and then I know when you're on.
Because I think both Ohaila and Bongani it would be interesting to hear quickly one of the other issues that we've heard of, which is around misinformation.  So you know whether ‑‑ or disinformation even where children have come across information that is false or misleading or deliberately so.  Any of the issues that you've seen coming up in the help lines and that's ‑‑ Ohaila if you could say something first and Bongani is this an issue disinformation and fake news type issues in relation to COVID.  What's been your experience there?  Thanks.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  I want to add I mean more about what what my other colleagues mentioned.  We start to receive calls from children that they don't want to continue also the e‑learning because they face a lot of bullying during the class session.
Because they're using the e‑learning through different social media and like Zoom or other programs.  But the children use this program in a bad way.
So children should know how to use these channels as a safe channel for each child.  Not to use it as a channel to bullying or to attack other children.  Because children are afraid also to enter to the e‑learning and we received some calls in the help line like this.
The other thing is children spending a lot of time on the Internet.  So we don't know which area they are chatting or getting through.
And some of the families they don't have the knowledge how to use the digital ‑‑ I mean digital knowledge.  And how to make it more safe for their children.
So I think it's very important to have raising awareness to parents and to the children and use digital channel and if we are not to any other children or also to protect our ‑‑ to protect their sons.  It's very important.
 >> MODERATOR: The morns of education is always something that has come up.  I mean, children often also learn from each other as well.  And Bongani, do you have a particular message on that or experience on that in terms of learning to be safe online?  You're still on mute?
>> Bongani:  Sorry about that.  Technology is really getting the most of us today.
But yeah, I think there has been a lot of miss information going on during lock down and during this entire Pablo Allietti.  And this guys back to a point I made earlier on.  Rejust touched on it the issue of education, what I wanted to bring up is the need for partnerships with grass root level organizations.
I'll be engaging with meaningful sharing information with not just schools but parents as well.  How to use the Internet on the safe ways of using the Internet.  I think as much as children and kids are exposed to their Internet, not all parents have safe information or knowledge on how to use the Internet or how to not regulate or say but guide the kids on the safe use of intreft.  So I think that's one key thing that is really important.  That partnership between the private sector government as billion as grassroots level organizations.  And another point I wanted to make was on the kinds of information that organizations such as GSMA and UNICEF for instance put up on the Internet.  So with some of the work I'm doing which is taking short films ands raising awareness, I think that's another really important thing.  Ensuring that organizations also come in and share good information and basically two ways of to raise awareness for kids in the Internet on how to best use the Internet.
So yeah, I think those videos by different organizations kind of raise awareness are they important.
So best way of engaging with kids who are already on the Internet so yeah, I think that's my contribution to this question.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you, Bongani, that's really interesting because was we know from a lot of research, children are spending a lot of time watching videos and that's where they get a lot of the informal information and Amanda do you want to jump in and talk about what you see?
>> Amanda Third:  I just warchlted to echo Bongani's points about the importance of parents.
it's very true that a lot of children have not had adequate supervision during the pandemic because even though parents are not in the home they're preok pied can dealing with the fallout of the pandemic.  And I think there's real scope for us to think creatively here.  We also know a lot of parents don't have their own digital lit rasies are not strong enough to be able to support their children adds quatly and that's been bowrn on in the study on on online safety in the Pacific where parents often didn't have an understanding of how the Internet worked that they could communicate to their children.
And so I think children do have a tendency to explore technology and use it intuitively.  And find its strengths and limitations, they're very keen on doing that.  So I do wander if there's actually a really strong opportunity for us to think about how to use children as educators inside their own families.  To think about how we promote children to teach across generations some of those digital skills.  I think these are ‑‑ you know, I think if we come at these questions with a child participation, sometimes we can find little worm holes that open up perhaps different opportunities
 >> MODERATOR: That's really interesting.  And one of the things we've brn thinking about at GSMA is also on inequality side, it's ‑‑ you know we've heard about how in countries where there is ‑‑ there are less people connected so where there may be coverage but there are a lot of barriers to people going online, one of those is often fear, fear of the parents who are worried about letting their children go online and also the fact that they don't have the literacy there.  And GSMA is a quick plug on development we have a program that deals with mobile Internet tools and trainings which is a mechanism by which mobile operators and some of the subSaharan Africa are doing this.  I have people out in the shops or communities who are helping adults learn more about how to use some of the tools.  And that's a first step.
If that were to be complimented with probably some kids who may not have access all the time to those technologies if they also can sort of double up that by teaching within the home, I think that might be a good step to start filling in digital inequalities.  Across different parts of the world.
 >> MODERATOR: Natasha, I think there's another really interesting phenomena that is going on in many parts of the world and that is the device sharing phenomenon where families don't all have every member of the family doesn't have a mobile phone.  And I think you know device sharing comes with certain kinds of risks and pressures and children certainly speak about di device sharing as a constraint on their time online and they can be exposed to content that's not appropriate because they're viewing it on the device that's shared with all the family members sm but again, device sharing if we thought about it from a strength space, perspective, could really be Han esed to build lit rasies across generations and so I guess I'm quite interested to hear Ohaila and Bongani's views on device sharing and how that works and whether that might be a possibility. 
>>.
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  I can quote an initiative we're wawnching right now and that's ‑‑ I mean we try to launch an initiative to collect devices, like people can donate these devices. we can get devices for children at schools because there is some schools they do research about the children that they have access to e‑learning and we find that many children male and female young girls don't have access to e‑learning because they have one device in the home.
And if there are more than one child so they will use the same device it will put them at high risk to use the same device as the parents use and children use and also keep ‑‑ I mean it will not give all the children the right to continue the e‑learning.  So we try to have this jish tiff to have one device for each child and we talk about families that are going to have large number.
This is what we try to do.
 >> MODERATOR: Great initiative.  Bongani, device sharing.  How many ‑‑ how much is that been an issue people having only intermittent access to devices and how have you ‑‑ what have you come across on that aspect?  .
>> Bongani:  Please repeat that.  Don't worry.  Actually we need to move to closing statements.  We've got about 10 minutes left of this.  We'll come back to you Bongani at ‑‑ in a minute.
But perhaps we can move first to Uri to see finally what are your recommendations and closing sort of messages for participants here listening and you know what is the most important thing you want us to help move forward on these issues?
 >> URI SADEH: One of the main things to remember is while COVID is a good opportunity to highlight issues we've discussed here today, especially when we're talking about child sexual exploitation online, this exists before COVID and it will exist after COVID.
it is not bad.  This has a lot of if you want media and got closer to people and awareness has been raised as to the extent of the dangers online for children and need for services to be accessible for victims, parents to be aware, et cetera, this is a very prevalent phenomena that is happening regularly.  We're talking here about the need for access to devices, access to Internet and indeed from the points of view of investigators working morning to evening on trying to save children who are sexually exploited using those devices.  This very same Internet and catch offenders that are spending their time onthose devices and network to try and harm kids.
It's not necessarily ‑‑ there's conflicting interests for the good and for the bad of children and youth in this connectivity.
I think the key things that we need to keep bringing up is the need the need to spend the funds or allocate the funds necessary to address child sexual exploitation on line to ensure that the law enforcement is equipped for it.  That it is accessible to children, that there are mechanisms in there for victims to raise their abuse to complain, to seek help.  There's clearer need for continuous cooperation between industry and plans if you want and law enforcement around this because there is no ennorse ourselves arrest ourselves out of this phenomena this is huge and collaboration of all of those to raise awareness, equip children with the tools they need to try to prevent more of the abuse and enable them to complain and enable law enforcement to then try to identify and bring an end to the abuse thank you.
>> Thanks, Uri.  I've just been reminded by the colleagues that we actually finish at 10 past so we have a little bit longer.  That's good.  My apologies for that.  But I but I wanted to then move back to Amanda actually.  Amanda, you heard UUri's call there for the technology, the cape be cts for law enforcement, for children to be online.
If you were to be extreme in your ask and request what would be your wish list, your really extreme wish list?  And how do we take more realistic steps to get there?  Right?  What are the small things we can do next that will start us down the path.  Sometimes the first step is the most important.
>> Amanda Third:  Yes.  Natasha,, I do hear Uri's call and indeed, I would echo his call in the sense that I think what the pandemic has really highlighted for us is that we require urgent action to address some of the challenges to children's rights increased use of technology during this time.
And I ‑‑ you know, I think it's very clear that the risks of harm for children are real and they're distressing and to be frank with you, I feel quite overwhelmed when I think about what it is that we need to do to resolve those problems.
But I also think that whilst I know we are all looking for a simple straightforward and immediate solution, actually, much of the work that we need to do is difficult and it's going to take time and thought.  And, of course, good solid processes for engaging children.  And we really have to commence this long term work now.
That's the urgent thing is to think about the long term future and commence the work now.
I think the issue of digital exclusion ‑‑ and I see that's coming up in the chat ‑‑ is a really critical one.  Regulatory and legislative frameworks.  Parents having access to meaningful resources that support them to guide their children.  Technology companies undertaking threat assessments and ensuring that children have what they need and children having the information and support that addresses the social and economic impacts of the pandemic on their lives.  But that's ‑‑ with that said, I think there's also an important opportunity in this pandemic for us all to ‑‑ this would be a big bold audacious hope, Natasha.  It's sometimes suggested and I think one way to think our way into this is that they want us to reflect briefly on the moon landing.  I know that sounds like a bizarre thing.
But what's sometimes suggested about the 196 soafn moon landing it was a pivotal idea of globalization around the world.  Broadcast live on television and in the process of being broadcast, the moon landing assembled something of an international audience and broadcast images of a globe without boundaries back to the international audience.  Compelling us to imagine ourselves in the part of a global community.
So in the same way under the pandemic children are engaging online as an international audience if you will to do every day things like going to school.  So for the first time in history there's a mechanism for children to think of themselves as a global constituency.  And I think there's a really radical and unprecedented possibility in that very fact.
Imagine if we could enable children to unite to address their common concerns, so imagine and enact social change at school as we see them begin to do around the climate change challenge.  What a powerful movement of change that would be.  And I guess we can only realize that by taking children's participation rights really seriously but it's tapping into that power that would be my one great hope for our current generation of children growing up in a pandemic.
 >> MODERATOR: That is a really exciting prospect.  I must say the idea of children uniting for change.  Bongani, if you're connected at the moment, put your video on because you are in a way, one of those youth leaders the idea of children coming together and uniting around areas that can ‑‑ like climate change.  What do you think you can do.  What would be your call out to your fellow sort of youth leaders in terms of that.  And what can can we do as industry or academics or civil society to help bring that about and bring that about in safe manner.
 
>> I think it's a really great point that Amanda brought.  We need to Royce that the world is evolving.  The role of children and young people within the senior order has been evolved.  We've seen the youth activists how they're able to organize the Internet as a way of organizing themselves.  And also getting more people and more momentum in the activism.  So I think what's really important at the moment is for us to ensure that we'll be really ‑‑ we put everyone ‑‑ we champion the slogan of leave no one behind.
I think the slogan is always being used but when it comes to decision making platforms, young people only use as a token if I can say.
So organizations such as GSMA, UNICEF as well as government the way though have more engagement consultations may be with young people making decisions ensuring that young people do have seats at the table and yes, ensuring that young people do have a seat on the table and apart from that a critical issue that also came up on this discussion of issue of security as well as resources, I think as we've seen with this engagement that connectivity is a critical issue.
So we need to ensure that there is enough effort that I've been young people from across the road are able to engage and have proper connectivity in order to engage on the Internet.
And maybe my last point will touch on the issue that more kids are being involved, more kids are being ‑‑ starting their own YouTube channels and all that.  Hence, there is a drit Cal need, a role that government needs to play.  So it's not only ane issue of government doing things only but it's an issue of everyone understanding that they have a role to play and they need to come to the table.  So I think I'll leave it there for now.  And yeah.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Yes, leave no one behind.  That's a really nice segue to UNICEF.  JSosi, if I can bring you back in you heard what Bongani was saying and I know UNICEF's idea that no one child is left behind is quite key.  Do you have any additional comments or findings sort of closing thoughts from UNICEF that you'd like to share with us?
 >> JOSIANNE GALEA: Thank you for that.  Very, very briefly.  Mostly to thank the panelists for your contributions.  It's a very valuable to hear directly from you this terms of what you have seen Ohaila your work and Uri seeing those trends in that report.  Bongani thank you for sharing your directs experience and helping us think through what meaningful involvement really looks like and what the different roles for stakeholders are.
And Amanda, all the insights from your research.  It's great to hear such hope in some of the proposals andoid I can't see that we've heard that really seizing the opportunity and in this crisis while also being very fragmentic about the real risks and harms that are taking place and it would be great to follow up on parties pafnts.  Sorry we dptd have time to address everything that's come up in the chat but I've seen really interesting comments about curricula and digital and things I'm keen to continue this conversation and thank you for engaging in the topic and framing of the debate we put forward so looking forward to continuing this debate in the future.
 >> MODERATOR: Okay.
Great, we're not finished yet.  Oaila, I want to bring you back in.  Okay.
So in terms of your closing statements or your really extreme wish list, what would you really, number one, want people to be doing, not just from governments and policy makers but also as industry and everyone listening on the call.  Please go ahead. 
>> OHAILA SHOMAR:  Thank you.  I think it's very important to keep the child help line running in each country.  It's the children trust and children can talk with the high confidentiality.  They can express themselves so keep the child help line running and support them to continue their work is very important.
Also, to help low income governmental to empower the education system.
E‑learning efnlg indication system that children can continue their learning and to see children dropping from the school and not continue their learning.
Also for the parents, like to to be more close to your children, to listen to them, to talk to them and not to talk above them.  Because children, parents spend a lot of time talking about their children but listening to them.
So to listen to the children is very important.  I hope that we can move in a safe way from the pandemic because I think the word of the child will be will be different for the future.  They are with a lot of information to be safe in this world.  Thank you.
 
 >> MODERATOR: IGF has issued a voluntary commitment that will further the golds of the IGF and also the digital cooperation roadmap.  Is there something that either you as an individual or your organization will do in the next year as a sort of new commitment that you are ‑‑ that you'd like to share with us?  .
>> Yeah, I talked about the initiative of the laptop or the iPad for each child.  And it's an initiative that we launch as voluntary work.  I mean it's not as part of the organization work.  So we can share this niche tifer with you.  And give you information how we did this.
Because we try to ask that inside the community to support this initiative because it's important that each child have access to learn.
And this initiative is voluntary work that I do with other colleagues, you know, so I can share this experience with you.
 
 >> MODERATOR: All right.  Thank you.  There is actually a link on the IGF2020 site.  I think Josi will put it in the chat where people about can record their commitments as well.  I think the panelists here we'll talk about our commitments but also everyone on the call please have a look at that and share any commitments, even now and in our chat or also on the IGF link.  So Uri, just closing over to you, briefly, on voluntary commitments.
 >> URI SADEH: Is there something that you as an individual personally or something that your crimes against children unit voluntarily in this way? putting him on the spot there.
 >> URI SADEH:   We can will continue our daily restless struggle for this ‑‑ in fact as I stated, everyone is overwhelmed with the amount of protection that is needed.  And we do it daily.  I commend my team for the having to face the material that we have to face daily, they have to face daily, which is not something your brain is prepared to face.  I think.
And takes time to cope with.
And I think what drives us all is the knowledge that we are actually struggling to safeguard the child at the end of the road.  And to put an offender behind bars if needed so they do not harm further children.
So I would ‑‑ my commitment would be limited to that, to promoting the protection of children and their rights.  And through continuous work of INTERPOL's crimes against children unit
 >> MODERATOR: It really is terrific work and full admiration to you and all of your team and all those around the world who are working through the sorts of material that you have to deal with.
Really, it's really appreciated and another thing I would say is the report that you put out in September of this year was really interesting and as things change, if they change that would be really welcome by all of us so can keep on our side assessing what we're doing and see where we need to do more.  So thank you very much.  I'll pass over to Amanda, Amanda, do you have a voluntary commitment or something that you'd like to share?
>> Amanda Third:  ICANN Uri I'm feeling on the spo the but gut instrifntle we need to find ways to realize children's partition pace rights under the children's physical distancing, so my commitment would be to explore that question between now and the next IGF and to report back.
 >> MODERATOR: Okay, thank you.  I think just to share with the audience as well am I personal commitment.  I'll come do you Bongani.  Great to see you're still on.  My commitment is similar to Amanda is around participation and listening to the youth voices so within GSMA continually encouraging our leaders to get young voices on the agenda and at our events to listen to them and to encourage business leaders and CEO tion of our members to do more to listen to young voices and hear directly from them about what they need.  That would be my commitment.  So Bongani, I'm going to leave you with the final say as the youngest on our panel.  So please just give us some insight into any voluntary commitment you'll be doing also think wider with your university, thank you.  I think you're still on mute, Bongani.
>> Bongani:  Thank you, once again.  And I'm really sorry once again for the technical issues today.
 >> MODERATOR: No worries gives us a reminder of how important it is to keep you and others like you connected.
>> Bongani:  True.  I think I have three commitments that I'll volunteer to.  One is continue sharing and creating stories.  For raising awareness on the Internet.  So being in a different social media platforms.  This will be engaging directly with young people and issues that they face as well as safe to use on Internet.  My second commitment is hopefully continue having more road shows with around the country with UNICEF.  That way I get to engage more with young people and kids.  And utilize that more on sharing very important safe use of the Internet.
With kids because they're the ones who are more volumenerble to the Internet.
And basically share positive information with them as well.  I think my third and last commitment is I volunteer my time for organizations such as GSMA as well as UNICEF and other organizations in consulting with them, sharing our experiences as young people.  And what we can possibly do moving forward.  So yeah, those are my three commitments and yeah, thank you so much for having me as well today.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I think that says it all so we ask for voluntary commitment from everyone and from our imrowng youth speaker we get three commitments.  I mean what more can I say?  Thank you so much Bongani.  And thank you to all our panelists.  Is it has been a really great session.  I hope you found it interesting.  And please get in contact with us if you want to share more.  We will continue to be talking about these issues.  So thanks all, very much.  And I hope the other IGF sessions go as well.  Great, thank you.  Bye.
 
**  WS 289 Women and the platform Economy(Looking for Zoom link) testing for captioning.  Had to recognize some safety delivery workers that have trade union are represented by that and then we have floarnlg new type of which is called app which is process that is really interesting because it's workers that are struggling to have a new a new union be registered in the ministry of labor that is for representing all the apps.  Nonetheless one thing that is really ‑‑ that it's really bringing hope in the trade union process of the platform economy in Latin America is how they are becoming regional.  We have some ‑‑ we have had some experiences of trikes that are all over the region at the same moment in the same day.  And so we have strikes coming from Ecuador, Klum Bongani, Argentina and Chile, all the same day making a regional movement to protect the working cons of these workers.
Bogota.
>> Their their representation of Argentina and Ecuador is remarkable how women are leading the process of manage who have the trade union being shown and having demands of workers being put out so government tried to find a solution for these workers public opinion started talking about workers because they are in really bad conditions.  Leapt with struggles and need solution to the state.  In Argentina we're preparing a law to find an answer for workers and this will give them collective rights but also will do if you work less than 32 hours a week, then you have a more flexibles what you can do for timetables and what you can choose and also you have minimum coverage and if you work more than 32 hours, we're trying to prepare to put it in Congress and approve it in the next couple months they should be rights as worker but also the representation as a trade union improvement in artificial intelligence teefn ain Chile also the struggles and organization of workers is really answering some of the demands and they are also gaining some right but it's all through the judicial sector.  They have to case the file and have to make it a trial and gain rights, case by case.  And there's not ‑‑ even though there's some projects of law going in the Congress they didn't find a solution yet.  In some countries like alcohol ba this is not in the table.  The governments do not want to speak about ‑‑ Colombia.  They say they're entrepreneurs but I think ‑‑
>> Sophia, would you rap up in a minute.
>> Yeah.  I'm wrapping up.
>> Okay
S occasioner FIA:  I think the reg nam struggle is bringing flowers into this struggle because some countries do not want to answer to these demands and to the trade union boom and in general in Latin America the regional union, the regional strategy that these workers are having with the feminist movement specifically is going to bring answers I think in the next couple of months and years to come.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you for that Sofia overview of worker strategies as well as some gains made in the Latin America context which you already pointed out to give some kind of hope for workers globally.  So next we have looking at issues around autonomy.  So researcher, social entrepreneur and coordinator of social law project at the University of western Cape and she's also project manager for digital platform cooperative project.  Over to you.
 
>> F AI RU Z: Mullagee *   It's afternoon here and thanks to the previous speakers, I wasn't entirely sure how the program was run but I'm pleased that I've been left for the last input because I do believe that autonomy depends access and action that will determine the nature of ought on me.  Access and agency.  As I preparing this I thought it was necessary when we look at how to imagine social protection of platform work, my background, my research has been with domestic work sector in South Africa mainly.  And familiarity with domestic work in other parts of Africa.
And I think it's important also to note that you know South Africa was one of the few countries to have legislation specifically for domestic workers as early as 2012.  Played a very important role in the adoption of convention win eat 9.  That as a background alsos in terms of when we're reimagining social protection in the age of platform work, we assume that there has been a shift.  And I felt it's important to just reflect on what that shift has been.  We talked about you know we come from a kind of organizational work ‑‑ organization of work in terms of what we referred to as standard work.
Somebody goes to an office or whatever the case may be.  And legislation has been sort of very much developed around standard work and organization of work in a very standard kind of way.
Then we saw a shift to non‑standard work with agencies, sort of intervening in that relationship process.   You know, so taking the direct relationship between employer and employee away.  Until we find ourselves in this situation referred to as the platform economy.  And bear in mind that my you know what sort of lies behind my thinking is very much the domestic work sector which is predominantly women in South Africa.
So what has been the digital impact.  I think there's a lot of mist fiction of technology which I think also clouds the issues that we've been dealing with.  And so the challenges and over time from standard work to platform work what we've seen is the evolution of labor acts and Social Security rights.
So that is sort of permeated the shift that you see to where we are now.  And what does that really mean.  Economic and social exclusion, unemployment, poverty and hunger.  And sadly, the pandemic has amplified those issues and the cracks in our society.
At the same time we do believe ‑‑ and having worked in the sector which has often been described as hard to organize sector, we see the technology as an opportunity as a tool for transformation.  So on one hand we see it as a tool for transformation.  And on the other hand, we see it as an opportunity for reorganizing work and society with improved collective bargaining because we've seen out collective bargaining has also been eroded.  So.
So I'm pleased to hear what's happening in Latin America.  And the kind of solidarity which has been both among platform workers there.
One of the big issues and it's come up here.  I think Sofia mentioned it.  Is this notion of misclassification.  The misclassification of workers as independent contractors.  And that obviously revolves around the relationships and it's about ‑‑ we talk about misclassification in terms of relationships based on existing laws.
So we see with platform owners, the obfuscation of employment relations.  They've given up the responsibility as employers.  They argue and we've seen it in our platforms with domestic workers as well.
They are kind of driven by algorithms, and they can turn you off if they establish a patterns of organization so they just discontinue or disconnect you from the platform.  They found that the same would apply for workers who become ill, you know, you just get deactivated from the platform.  When you inform your company that you've ‑‑ that you're pregnant.  And in total contravention of the laws.  So those are relationships.  The misclassification enabled platform owners to have the kind of power that we've seen exerted over workers acrosser the world.  But we've also seen challenges to that kind of misclassification.
So in terms of this relationship you have a platform owner, and you have the end users.  And you have the providers of goods and services what we would refer to as workers.  I've spoken about some of the deficits, the social prediction deficits created by this new way of work.  Exclusion, we see greater unemployment.  Digital inequality itself is exclusionary.  Many platform workers are less skilled, you know, your more informal workers, exclusion is a big problem.  Remuneration another big problem.
You know, platform workers are made to be we are told constantly, in terms of the domestic work in this country the minimum wage is very, very low and platform companies will tell you but we pay our workers way above the minimum wage.  They don't tell you that they have now excluded ‑‑ may seem like you're learning a lot more on a gig by gig basis but you've been totally excluded from the kind of social predictions that the law and labor law in the country and constitution allows for.  So you're made to believe that you're earning more when in fact you're actually have been excluded from other social benefits.
Working conditions again it's made ‑‑ workers are made to believe that you have great flexibility.  But what is not communicated or it's kind of how people are fooled to believe that you're flexible.  You can work when you like.  But what in fact happens isation of work ‑‑ fragmentation of work.  On one hand workers are required to carry the cost between gigs which doesn't happen.  A standard employment situation.  For that to organize another deficit which you know curtails the ability to conditions companies name an algorithm.  It's all about the tick.  In domestic work in women's work we also we very diminishment reducing work we see this constantly cleaning services and perpetuating old cleavages.  So you know, where do we go from here.  How do we ensure greater protections.   You know, based on literature, based on our domestic workers of the year's ‑‑ I'd also like to point out that the issues that domestic workers have faced in the 10 years that I've been working in the sector, are exactly the same issues that workers are facing today.  Definitely of organizing fragmentation.  The fact that work is so optimized, which makes it hard.  You don't know who the employer is.  You are running to create and ensure that you have an interim that organizing ‑‑ you know becomes secondary to your survival.
So in terms of going forward, what kind of regulated frameworks can be designed to protect platform workers.
And you believe promotion of rights and protection should be the underlying feature of the new ‑‑ way regulation isn't adequate when new regulation is required.  So a pushback against this super exploitation that we've witnessed with platforms in recent times.
So promotion of rights and protection which actually seriously pushes back this super exploitation, appropriate regulation of work especially platforms, and then that needs to be placed on the agenda once again it doesn't matter whether you are in a platform or what is a platform anyway?  The issue of misclassification ‑‑
 >> MODERATOR: Sorry, just ask you to wrap up now in another minute, Fairuz.
>> FAI RU Z MULLAGEE:  Just quickly in terms of principles that should govern such a prork, preliminaries of fair work, principles that counter act monopolistic behavior.
And if I can just wrap up, you know, and say again, autonomy based on principles of fairness as the outcome of access and agency would require organized and empowered platform workers.
And thank you for the time.
 
>> Thank you, thank you for taking us through some key structural challenges around the needs of work ‑‑ nature of work as well as some of the solutions and ways to go forward.
So I would just request all the participants to type on chat if you have any preferences for the breakout sessions that you want to join.
So there are three breakout rooms and each of the speakers will be in the breakout rooms that they spoke about.  So there's one on agency.  There's one on autonomy and one on access.
You can just type in the chat if you have a preference for any of these.
And I would request Maria to just assign randomly if there are people who haven't shared their preferences as well.
So we have about 20 minutes left in the session.  So we'll take about 15 minutes.  And I would ask Maria to bring us back with five minutes to close.
(Breakout session) the law gives you all the rights of the national law but with the flexibility, let's say if you work two hours, then your employer should be putting the amount of money to the Social Security that corresponds to those two hours.  And if you want Social Security, you need to pay the rest.  And if you want to enter to healthcare system for example.
And for example vacations, you have vacations but only for those two hours that you work.  So it's like they give you a personage of the amount of hours you work in a month.  And the salary also it's a calculus made by our minimum wage law.  And it's a little bit above the minimum wage but you need to have the salary according to the amount of hours you work.  And the only thing that we did is that we put a clause that says you cannot reflect assignment that the platform is giving to you because otherwise the problem will be that workers will say I have a minimum wage but I do not take any jobs.  And the company has to pay me nonetheless.
So we said that you can't unless you case a file ‑‑ you file a case saying that you don't want to do some specific delivery because the customer is really bad and harasses you or ever.  In that case you can but can it not say no.  You are too far away and whatever.  If you work more than 32 hours a week, you work more than 32 hours a week, then you have the right to ask for all the coverage that our national law has.  And so in that case, the company has to pay you full Social Security, full healthcare, full full wage, you have the right to have vacation as normal as any other, woulder in Argentina and you have to work more than 32 hours a week.  If you work less, then you have this flexible type of system where you get paid by a percentage of what you work.
And .
>> Sorry, Sofia, I wanted to know about the women workers.  So this law is for all the workers.  But what about ‑‑ what are the issues and concerns about women workers there?
>> With women workers there's a specific clauses in the law that says that the algorithms cannot discriminate against them and that the ministry of labor can see the algorithm and source code whenever they want to.  To check if there's discrimination against women and if there's an algorithmic bias.  And also you can choose your schedules according to your care work that you have at home.  Even if you are into the more than 32 hours a week system, you can choose your schedules.  And you can conciliate the productive and reproductive work.  In case you work more than 32 hours.
So that's the answers that we gave to women.  To check the source code and to check the algorithm because there's a lot of algorithmic bias and that's the answer that we gave to women.  This is being discussed.  It's not approved yet.  You cannot say that this is the case for the Argentine law because it's in this discussion and they're preparing this to send it to Congress.  It's not in Congress yet.  But we're trying to make a solution for them in terms of technical issues and in terms of care work.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Sofia, do you think this will address the issues that were highlighted in the presentation around unfair pay as well as company policies that are disallowed women workers from designing schedules where they can take up work in the night for example. 
>> SOFIA:  Well I don't think a law can answer all the problems but, if the ministry of labor closed the right to check the algorithm and check evaluation system, maybe you can stop some of the problems like the pay problem and algorithmic bias.  But the fact that women tend to choose night hours because during the day ‑‑ thaptz not something the law can solve.  You need a more social and national policy to address that.  That the problem is that you don't have care networks to give ‑‑ to leave your kids.  That's the problem.  You cannot go through a law and platform workers but it should be solved in another way trying to build care networks.
Because that's the main issue that women do not have a place to leave their children so they have to work in crazy hours.
And so I think it's not the answer you should not be looking at the platform law but to other type of instruments.
 
>> We have two more minutes if anybody has any other questions or things to discuss?  If not, I can just talk about another issue that we were looking at in the Pakistan i context.  We found that there was a solution to the fact that platforms often outsource, there's a message to return to the main session.  But I'll just quickly finish.  We saw that in the Pakistan i context a lot of women were continuing to remain with on demand platforms because instead of outsourcing indirect costs like transportation, the main platforms there specifically for domestic workers are covering those indirect costs such as transportation such as using data packs in that.  So that actually went the long way in retaining workers on the platforms.  And we hadn't seen this before in other countries.  So I wanted to mention that as a strategy.  Retain women workers.
As a message to return to the main group, I think we can just click on leave room and we can return to the main session.
Thanks to Sofia and everyone else for this discussion.
 
>> Can we take an extra five minutes?
>> Okay, thanks.
We'll just wait another minute for everyone to come back.  And then we can start with the report back.
So just for people who are joining in now, we are doing a short report back.  Because it's okay for us to run over by around 10 minutes.
So we'll start with the session on agency if that's okay. 
>> TANDON:  You want me to speak.
>> We'll just do a short report back, I meant access, not agency.  Sorry.
>> SOFIA.
>> AAY USH:  Yeah, so one of the key questions that came up was around sort of what skills would be important in especially in light of the sort of barriers to ‑‑ and then sort of enabling effect of participation in the platform economy.  And none of us were very well placed to completely answer that question.
 
Yeah.  We spoke about how we have the ability to do financial transactions continues to be an important problem.
Someone spoke about how learning for government when it comes to getting for using digital application is different dpr that for men and women.  That is smag that needs to be factored in.  We spoke about how it is important to further non‑technical without which they receive ‑‑ more and more unavailable to men especially ‑‑ and this is a finding especially from our experience at the grassroots.  And then we spoke about what can we do to make sort of access to the platform economy more sort of equitable in terms of design the platforms or behavior or even government action.  We ‑‑ the group specifically about how we need to talk about ‑‑ talk more about how accessing it is not regularly helpful and as someone pointed out in presentation does not lead to effective participation.  And yeah and how the experience ‑‑ how sort of the offline norms sort of that country existed and structuring of society already precludes access to phones, access to financial agency.  And how the SNG model could be an effective one and someone else talked about an interesting point again on how men learn from other men but the rest of the thought was we got interrupted by us coming into the main.  If you'd like to finish thoughts on chat, please do.
 
>> Thanks for that would Sofia or anyone else want to report back on the second group on agency?  .
>> I think you can go ahead
>> Okay. great.
>> Tandon:  Great.  So there was a session on agency we were largely discussing Argentinean law and soaf I don't was telling us about how the process actually came about so there was a lot of national coverage and attention paid to workersish eufs in the platform economy and after that gained traction there was some discussion and consultation around not putting workers in the sort of national law because that might be the easiest solution the national labor law that might be an easy solution but but a lot of workers were migrants or students and they wanted the flexibility that the platform economy was bringing.  So the draft law that came up after this consultation process sort of prorated some of these benefits such as taking or getting social security contributions from employers.  These are all ro rated and salary as well, of course, are prorated to the number of hours that you are working.  If you're working more than 32 hours a week, you get all the rights that are available in the national labor law.
And with regards to women workers in particular, there is a provision for an audit which would allow ministries to look at whether or not there are gender biases and women workers can choose try to make their schedules more flexible even if they are working for more than 32 hours.  They will try to balance the productive work.
So this was all insight on the Argentinean law by Sofia which was very useful.
And yeah, we briefly discussed some industry strategies as well but this was a lot of our discussion.
I'll hand it over to the third group to do report back as well.
 
>> Hi, everyone.  I can report back ‑‑ if Fairuz if that's okay with both of you.
So we had ‑‑ we mainly focused on the question of what kind of regulatory framework could we design to make platforms more accountable.  It was generally agreed that regulatory frameworks are essential.  But only if their implemented properly and yeah, the implementation of such frameworks was raised as something that's quite difficult to do and there was a focus on South Africa context where it was mentioned that in South Africa particularly for the domestic work sector there have been specific laws created to protect domestic workers.  However, these laws haven't had the best implementation which kind of limits their effectiveness.
There was also a discussion around kind of what Fairuz mentioned in her presentation.  We really need better working agency and access to improve laws under implementation.
So both workers and users of the service need to be empowered to demand more equitable use of the services.  Unless that level of organization is improved, difficult to implement the kind of changes we'd like to see.
Moe mentioned there's been a lot of movement in the platform economy organization space particularly in India over the past several years.  Also in other countries as well.  In India there are several unrecognized worker collectives for gig workers.  But still without improving worker agency these laws are not going to change.
At the end Fairuz mentioned that fair work's code of good practice is a good starting point for considering how to improve the platform economy in terms of contract management pay and representation.
And that, like, discussing the fair work principles in kind of such a setting as this with like minded individuals is a good place to start to kind of push for better regulatory frameworks.
I hope I covered everything, if not, then please step in, someone.
 
>> I think that brings us to the end of our session.  And it was really interesting.  The presentation about the nuances of women's access to platform work you know the way access doesn't guarantee good work.  Thank you to Sofia for bringing us insights from what's happening in Latin America and how worker agency is being rethought of and immunization efforts going on there.  Thank you to Fairuz telling us about autonomy and how access and agency is really needed to forward that and the principles of fair work need to be followed in order to improve working conditions for everyone.
Thank you, everyone, for joining us and participating in the breakout rooms and for all your contributions as well.  I do have to ask if anyone would like to make voluntary commitments for the IGF.  If you would like to we can put the form in the chat box where you can sign up.  This will run for the next year.  So until the next IGF session.
Thanks, everyone.  Thank you.
Mawii
 
** Main session.
Testing for captioning.  Testing for captioning.  Tatiana Tropino.
 
 >> TATIANA TROPINO: .
>> I'll kick the ball and give it to Hunan he'll be Hanane but over to Hanane.
>> Thank you very much.  Tatianna.  I'm just waiting for I'm waiting for the sign we're ready to go.  If we're ready to.
>> HUNANE:  Welcome to the main session on the IGF coalition.
My name is Hanane Boujemi and I'll be comoderating this with my colleague Tatiana Tropino.  The main session of dynamic cocollisions which is part of the intersessional work of the Internet Governance Forum in its first virtual edition will focus on a theme that is basically closed to all of us at the moment we're all battling a local pandemic and it becomes evidenceds that the Internet plays a key role in our lives in general.  So this session will focus on the socioeconomic recovery after COVID‑19 and more specifically the role of dynamic coalitions.
Without further ado I'm going to go through setting the scene for this session will include four phases each phase is focusing on a specific thing.  So we have digital divide.  Following education and empowerment and the last one would be the future of the IGF.  So this is pretty much a multi‑layered discussion because we were trying to identify the future of the Internet and its role post pandemic and the role of BCs facilitating the work needed to make sure you know that's all the issues at stake.  Abeing addressed and input of the dynamic coalitions with regards to the future of the Internet Governance Forum.  And the role it can play there as well.
We do have most of the dynamic coalitions substantive papers to contribute to the session represented in the panel.  Each speaker will have two minutes to ask specific policy questions.  We do have a timer.  Myself and my colleague Tatianna which will be displayed on our iPhone.  I hope you can see it.  It's literally two minutes.  The conference is structured in an organic way.  There's also the opportunity for the SM D attendees to ask questions after each phase.  In terms of the format, was highlighted earlier but by the secretariat that this session is broadcasted live on YouTube on Facebook Live as well and on the U.N. channel.
Sth this is a webinar format which means most of the participants are not able to see who is on the list of the participants in this session.
But I'm pleased to inform you that we have 87 participants.  Fifty‑two attendees and 35 technical staff, panelists and support team and translators and the interpreters, thank you very:  We do have the opportunity this session is actually interpreted into the main seven languages of the U.N. 
Right.  So without further ado, I think we would like to give the floor to our panelists and maybe I'll kick off by asking one of the key questions on this session is the need ‑‑ what do we need?  Obviously, COVID‑19 highlighted a significantly a number of beyond the usual digital divide that we were talking about.  So we realized that the Internet is crucial but it came with a huge disadvantage to a number of communities and luckily we do have many DCs representing these communities across the world.
So inclusion is crucial in this case.
And the barriers that we're encount ring beats at the heart of the work that is being done by the dynamic coalition on gender.  So I would like to start with Sumita because we tend to give priority to access equally to gender and maybe she can take us through what are the first priorities the governmented should focus on worldwide when can comes to sack tackling the issue of gender digital divide in the context of COVID‑19.  And I'll take the opportunity to remind you that all the sessions, the panelists are advised or you know ‑‑ it is good to voluntarily contribute with a policy recommendation towards the issue that you are speaking to.  So we can gather all this input and present it later on to the Secretariat.  So, if you can, consider that in your answer, that would be great.  So you can speak to now from your experience, what are the first priorities that the government should tackle when it comes to addressing the issue of gender digital divide in the context of COVID‑19?  Smita?
>> SMITA V.
>> .  Thank you, I hope I'm audible.  I'm having a power issue here.  Thank you for answering this question and it's a gh way to kick start this conversation because in all honesty, you can guarantee meaningful access to everyone how are we talking about Internet governance and information for that?
>> I think in the context of COVID‑19, what has happened is that a lot of lived realities, a lot of realities around access to digital spaces has just become amplified.  And saidly it's a spotlight on it.  It's not that these issues came up now.  It's just that you're noticing it now.  The governments are feeling the impact of lack of access for example.  It's not access.  Right?  For example, beyond that there's a gender digital divide.  But the thing is that one of the impact of this?  And also can you really tackle this only at the point of COVID at the point of a crisis.  One of the reasons behind the digital divide is not the lack of access, yes, I did participate in last year with the Internet.  More importantly we need to have issues which govern lack of access.  Right?  And important issues of patriarchy of misogyny, of you know language divides, language barriers, all of these are core issues and of course much accessibility.  Of accessibility for persons with disabilities.  Without addressing these issues there's no point on distributing orn laptops that's been done it didn't work for a reason.  Another thing is when we talk about the digital divide, we often start the conversation with a binary agenda.  Right?  Where we talk about men and women.
Gender is not just that.  There's more literature now and more conversation lived realities that say that gender is not just ‑‑ it's a whole universe.  So when you talk about gender divide can we stop is another question.  And what happened when we stop the binary.  One of the big issues happening and it wasn't acknowledged is that a lot of ‑‑ I know this for a fact in India ‑‑ suddenly lost access to very important medication that is positive people who lost access to medication and transfer who were transitioning and lost access to HIV medication but none of this would be spoken about publicly.
This is small organizations which were working to then bridge this divide.
And finally, in the situation that COVID where information is key, and a lot of the governments took the route of the Internet or apps, so‑called apps as a way to curtail COVID‑19.  But how will that work when so much of the country is unconnected and doesn't have meaningful access?  So many people in your country don't have ways to access mobile phones.  Small cities would rely on small mobile shops in a day there was a lockdown and they didn't have aaccess to charge their phone.
>> Thank you, these are very good points and I hope we'll have the opportunity to come back to you so you can elaborate further on the points you mentioned.  I just would like to remind the attendees, we have around 70 people now that we have the opportunity to ask questions and to the panelists.  But you can use I think the Q&A screen that you have on the ‑‑ on the Zoom window to ask your questions if you have any.  We will try to make this session as interactive as possible.
So without further delays, I'll just kindly like to ask the panelists to stick to the 2002 minutes I'm going to move immediately to Gerry who 12 working on DC and how the COVID‑19 crisis highlighted for the issue that speaks to this DC.  So what do you think the priorities of the governments should be in the light of the current crisis?
>> Thank you.  As I ‑‑ 20 or 30 second warning so I don't go over my time.  I'll break that question down into two things, one of course is discriminations that people with disabilities have built over the last while and then maybe advantages including people with disabilities.  And after that we'll come to policy questions.
So first let's say that there are 1.3 billion people with disabilities in the world.  That's about 1 in seven people or else the entire population of China, equivalent to the population China.  That's a huge amount of people.  As we know that access to digital services and products disproportionate advantage to those who are strong access but there are eye disproportionate barrier to those who don't.  This is true for everyone but particularly people with disabilities because we typically do not have access to alternatives.  COVID‑19‑related lockdown has moved the whole society more on to digital areas but we want to highlight areas where we as people with disabilities really don't have access.
So there's inaccessibility of key Web sites, of key services over the Internet the likes of online shopping sites and we don't have access to the alternative.  Public information including COVID‑19 related information is often created very quickly so normal accessibility scrutiny doesn't take place and we don't often have access to that.  Terms of support education and employment, very, very key because if you can't work or you can't get your education during COVID as other people do, then you lose out and that can be a lifelong disadvantage.
People with disabilities are often poor and have less access to the likes of broadband and the latest and greatest tools.  Particularly in rural cells geographically.
>> Thank you, Gerry that was two minutes on the dot if you'd like to stop there.  But you raise important points about the importance of having accessible Web sites.  I think that is a very good point and I hope that you know the different providers take the lead to adjust their platforms so people with disabilities can access them.  Thank you very much for your contribution.  And I'm going to speak to another maybe related topic which can loop us a little bit in terms of the educational aspects that the libraries provide especially in an era of a pandemic.  Valencia is representing the D.C. on public access in libraries and maybe she'd like to elaborate further on the efforts deployed during this time.
>> VanENSIYA.
>> .  Thank you, looking at the difference ways that libraries and public access facilities have adapted to continue to support digital inclusion even when they're doors were closed has pointed to possible considerations and for us actually we could see these as falling alongside three key elements that empower people to make full and effective use of the Internet.  That's connectivity, that's skills and that is content.  So in terms of connectivity, one possible consideration is the continued demand for and use of public access facilities across various countries, different measures from lap toch and mobile hotspot loans to reopening public spayings was public Wi‑Fi when possible or free computer use for essential purposes during lock dunes with an employment.  These are measures that have been taken to support and speak to the demand and help meet users' needs and these can be important for groups who are more vulnerable.  They're often used for job seeking for benefits and other essential tasks and priority that we'd like to draw attention to of course is supporting users who may not always have decent quality connection or devices to carry out essential tasks at home.  Second r second consideration as you have pointed out digital skills of course.  We have seen promising examples of how traditional skills programming in libraries can be delivered remotely from Trinidad and to be ago 0 weekly library ‑‑ virtual 2020 in London able to offer many, many others.  With digital skills clearly essential, focus and a question and a priority for us is having and supporting entry points, additional skills skills, learning alongside formal structures, this can help reach a lot of people especially adults who may not have access to such learning opportunities elsewhere and finally the third element is digital content.
In so many countries where connectivity per misted libraries saw a steep growth in demand for digital content and they significantly broadened their opportunities for demand.  It has been a key resource for study, research, work, you will skilling, and simply well‑being during the pandemic.
 >> MODERATOR: Excellent.  Thank you.  Very good points.  Very concise and I will invite the tendies to use the Q&A window please to ask your questions.  Take this opportunity to have an interaction with the speakers, I know we have other DCs represented and I think they can speak to the possible recommendations to governments and what should change actually in the context of COVID‑19 when it comes to the specific work they're doing.
And we do have June Parrish with us from IRPC coalition and I wonder if you have any input with this regard.  June, you have two minutes.  Thank you.
June Parris:  Can you repeat what the input is.
>> It's about what do you think based on the work you're doing at IRPC the government should prioritize to guarantee digital inclusion.
>> June Parris.  The IRPC is based on human rights and we focus mainly on ‑‑ in our charter and this is human rights and governments are corrected ‑‑ connected in a very strong way.  I mean as we're going into lockdown and online environment took life, the fundamental rights and freedoms in a virtual space is paramount.  Tackth the digital divide is no urgent need on access and it becomes crucial being able to work, study and social engagements so it's vital to ensure that government responses to the crisis go hand in hand with international human rights and norms so as to fulfill the obligations to promote and up hold fundamental rights and freedoms both online and offline.
Unfortunately, many governments have seen the outbreak as an opportunity to implement more repressive measures from using artificial intelligence, increased surveillance and data collection to restrictions on freedom of expression and information and discrimination online.
We in the IRPC are looking at all this and covering what is going on with COVID and hopefully we can make some sort of change in regards to this.
 
 >> MODERATOR: Excellent, well thank you very much, June, for this contribution and that was two minutes, bang on.  We will wrap up the first phase on digital divide and just to sum up quickly the contributions we had so far from Smita which highlighted the societyal influences when it comes to addressing issues such as gender, digital divide.  We did have also hear how important it is for Web sites to guarantee accessibility to people who are ‑‑ who have limited accessibility issues.  Also the importance of public spaces and libraries generating energy and raising awareness about specific issues and finally the human rights based approach and importance of digital rights in a crisis and the phases like COVID‑19.  So I invite these panelists, our esteemed panelists to write their recommendations so we can pass them on as an outcome of this session later on to the secretariat and that brings us to 25 minutes that we dedicated to the first phase of this session on digital technologies and I'm going to give the floor to my colleague Tatianna to take the lead on phase 2 which will speak to the fundamental rights and freedoms in the phase of COVID‑19.  Tatianna, the floor is yours.
>> Thank you very much Hanane.  I'd like to provide a wrap upup to phase one.  There is a question on the Q&A.  I think this is from Vanncyia what has been the extent of libraries and community centers during COVID.  If you have the ability to type up the answer, please do.  If not, we can come back to this question later because we do have another aspect where coalition of public ‑‑ on access to public layers is going to be included.  The second phase we have is actually focused on human rights.  Fundamental freedoms and protection of fundamental rights.  And we wanted to ask the coalitions working in this area.  I know almost any work of anyone would relate to rights and freedoms to some extent.  But some of them are dealing with these issues directly like for example, you heard from June intervention.
How governments and private industry are dealing with handling and promoting human rights during the COVID pandemic and they're not always doing well.  So based on the contribution provided by June, I would like to move here to sustainability.  Your paper focuses a lot on the post COVID recovery.
And on journalists and what you call info demics.  I wanted to ask you from your perspective, what are the main issues during the pandemic and hopefully on the road to recovery.  I believe that we have Michael who is going to speak from this coalition.  Michael, you have two minutes.
>> Michael:  Thank you for having us.  Essentially there are a few things to stress in this particular time.  Oghia.  And that is that indeed, journalism at the moment and news media in the world are facing really an extinction level event where, according to one survey for instance that was just very recently released, essentially even though readership audience reach has been up over the past ever since the beginning started, almost 80% of small and independent journalism outlets around the world are reporting a significant drop in revenue.  Why is this important and why is it relatedded to Internet governance?  It has to do with the, one, so much of what is happening online is as it relates to journalism and news media, it means ‑‑ includes the fact that funding is under threat because of changing advertising revenues and market Dynamics that impact the journalism sector.  But also there's a critical ‑‑ rather ‑‑ there's a critical lack of good.
>> We lost Michael.
>> Michael OGHIA:  One thing we say ‑‑ can you hear me?
 >> TATIANA TROPINO: Now, yes.
>> .
>> One thing we like to say a lot, an axiom we like to a is that you cannot have press freedom without the press.  So one of the things we're dealing with at the moment is the fact that ‑‑ but in order to actually enable press freedom, we need to have sustainable journalism and that is exactly what I'm trying to ‑‑ is our point that it is under threat in part and we need support from governments, technology organizations, technology companies, advertising firms in order to shore up the sector as a whole.
Hanane:  I can't see how much time I have left.
>> Zero.
>> That's a start for now.  Happy to take more. 
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you.  I'm sure you can see if there are questions, I hope there are questions for discussion.  Olivier you will have the floor and you're going to speak about digital di viet and connected to fundamental rights so you have the flow of the session here.  Before we go to Olive yay, I would like to give the floor to child online protection because we're talking about human rights and fundamental freedoms but there's a big debate going on about how pandemics actually affected children.  So how do we protect them online.  What is being done by your coalition and in general.
John Carr, the floor is yours.
>> John CARR:  Thank you very much.  I hope we get a chance to come in and strongly support the things Michael was saying in the previous session because that absolutely raises questions about clirn and young people's rights..  Just briefly I say you sometimes hear it said that professional journalism is not dead.  You just have to pay for it now.
Well, you know what?  I have a number of subscriptions to the economist, new scientists.  They cost a lot of money.  Children don't and can't pay to hear the truth.  Would they rely on professional journalism, governed by the ethics of journalism and governed by the laws of liable and slander that have always governed NORCal newspaper outputs ‑‑ libel.  These laws simply do not apply to online platforms which is where children and young people are increasingly getting their news from?  So this whole question of journalism is a human rights question.  And it is a human rights question which is particular in children.  I just want to briefly say I very much agree with what Smiti was saying at the beginning.  What the COVID crisis has revealed is nothing new.  It's just put it all on steroids.
The number of children calling help lines during the lockdown has gone up by 50%, 60%.  The number of children who haven't been able to connect to school remotely in England was 1.34 million.  They didn't have adequate Internet connectivity or device at loam that would allow them to do their homework.  By the way equivalent figure in the United States is 9 million.  If that's the position if two of the richest countries in the world you have to wonder what's been happening to children elsewhere in the world in less affluent countries, having a mobile phone is no good if you're trying to do your chemistry homework.  Having a mobile phone is no good if you're trying to write an essay about war and peace.
So COVID is revealed stuff that we already knew but it was magnified and amplified it if I can borrow the phrase that Smiti used in her opening remarks.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you, John.  Time.  Thank you.  We'll get back to you, thanks.  We're just saving time for discussion.
Now I would like to Olivier Crepin‑Leblond.  This is the core anything on the Internet.  We know there are different from principles.  We hold these interventions about human rights, fundamental rights, rights of children, journalism, media and support.  So how can the work‑related to core Internet values support all these and maybe bring these issues together?  Is there any chance?  Olivier, the floor is yours.
>> Olivier Crepin‑Leblond:  Thank you very much.  I've heard a lot of sensible points being made here.  The dynamic coalition on core Internet values focused on technical issues with regards to the Internet and core values, technical values in which the Internet was built on, TCP/IP, all these technical things with end‑to‑end principle and Internet being open, being non‑discriminatory, et cetera.  Unfortunately what we're seerg here at present that governments are doing is exactly somehow the opposite of what they should be doing.  We've heard from so many DCs here that the primary problem is going to be access and access for those children and grownups that do not have access to the Internet at the moment because the COVID‑19 has just brought so much business online and if you're not online, you can't have it.  And instead of doing that, governments have been focusing on exactly the opposite.
To the extent that the dynamic coalition of core Internet values and other dynamic coalitions have released a statement on Internet on excessive Internet control which touches on suppression of political dissent because technologically this is something that's being done and can be done especially with artificial intelligence, national firewalls which are now being rolled out for some reason.  National shutdowns, fragmentation.  Internet and data prioritization and shaping.  And we understand there needs to be traffic shaping for maybe new services that come out.  When it's being used politically, in order to provide this sort of edge, this competitive edge to the biggest companies out there, the expense of the smaller voices out there that we really have a problem and that completely breaks core Internet values.  So that's where we stand at the moment and several DCs have assigned this dynamic coalition that went on to Internet of things, Internet principles coalition and youth coalition on Internet governance, thank you.
 >> MODERATOR: Thank you for being short and on the spot.  And this gives us some means for discussion and for maybe some of the panelists answering to the interventions of each other.  But before we go there, I think that many of the fundamental rights and freedoms problems, I see on the chat as well, we're talking about gender, we're talking about boys and girls.  We're talking about how gender is affected and I see that the chat is actually bringing some of the issues and I wanted to ask Smita, listening to the first three panelists talking about fundamental rights, protection, core Internet values, do you have anything to add here?  .
>> Hi, yes, thank you.  I think one of the things which we talked about is what I put in the chat is one thing that you talk about access to education and information who is prioritized to whom is another question.  What happens once you enter the digital space and start losing technical is another question.  Right?  One of the things that's happened during scween there is a sudden dramatic increase in online silence and this ‑‑ and this is you know you can actually trace it lock downs happening in different countries.  And what this means is that once again this infringes on fundamental rights against discrimination.  Education because it is the access to technology and monitored council and whether they are the ones subjected, the fact is that Kay, this is happening to you so stop using your mobile phone.  Right?  And these are ‑‑ you know, the nuances of individual needs to be spoken about.  And finally, when we talk about access and you know the right to access, what also happens to spaces like IGF why we need to have these conversations, is it easy access?  Is it welcome to persons or people who do not speak English or the U.N. languages because more people speak in spaces ‑‑ there are a whole bunch of languages which are not in the U.N. list of languages as well. 
Also when you come here how easy is it for me to join a panel?  Am I clicking in five different spaces and then coming here?  What does this mean to people who want to talk this and have a lot to add, for example school teachers, college professors and journalists in small cities who don't report in English have a lot to say here.  But, if I have to click in five different places just to find a log in link then happens?  Are we making access easier.
As a queer person I didn't like the registration form which when I had to register for IGF because after man, woman, there was other.  Am I so fluid that it's all or another?  So I think when we talk about core values, these are things which we need to reflect on by ourselves and see how we can do better by communities who want to bring their own questions and are we doing the actions required for the same?  I'll stop here for now.  Thank you.  Tlt Tatiana Tropino thank you, Smita.  I know you see John's excellent intervention on the chat.  Do you want to add anything else because I see that the issue about access fundamental rights, children's rights.  Gender issues are coming together in this panel.  So John, over to you.
>> Not much to add to what I said in the chat.  John CARR:  I was very impressed by Michael's presentation.  It's a shame we don't have longer to talk about it.  Set up systems where apparently we're now expected to pay for the truth.  Children can't pay for the truth.  So when they go to Web sites that say the Holocaust never happened, or when they go to Web sites that tell us that won the Second World War and the Soviet Union had nothing to do with it that's a human rights question, a child rights protection question and if the Internet governance member nims questions can't address it, we're wasting our time.
>> Thank you, John.  Actually, we do have time to talk about this because I was cutting off brutally.  So Michael, now over to you.  Do you think Internet governance can address these issues?  .
>> Michael OGHIA:  Yes, when it comes to journal system sustainability there are crosscutting issues not just one specific group of actors that need to be included in the conversation in order to drive change.  What we really need is concerted multistakeholder effort.  If anything, that's one of the exact reasons why we need to be here at the IGF, why the IGF can facilitate those kinds of connections and cross pollinated ‑‑ that kind of cross pollination.  I talk about that with environmental sustainability.  It's just as much of an issue within journalism sustainability.  And one thing that we've done for instance earlier this year is we actually released and emergency joint appeal that was signed by now over 180 different organizations calling on recommendations for across ‑‑ for stakeholders from across the sectors.  Talk talking about what they can do.  For instance advertisers and technology organizations need to stop black listing certain kind of advertising from journalism article or journalistic articles that for instance talk about COVID‑19.  Earlier in the year a lot of advertisers were ‑‑ stopped allowing for COVID‑19 related posts to include their branding and their adverts.  That obviously hurt journalism organizations even though those ‑‑ you know that was something that was meant to be ‑‑ that was something that could help support that.
So that's a one instance.  But of course there are so many others to highlight including the need to continue expanding access.  That is something that is absolutely critical for the up take of journalism in new media especially in global south and hard to access areas.  There is a need to discuss how ‑‑ what for instance governments, technology companies can do to help facilitate the kinds of support that is needed.  I mean especially financial support and things like that.
So there's quite a lot that we can do here and that's exactly why the DC sustainability thinks that it's so important for journalists and news media akters to be involved in the digital policy discussion else specially that historically we've been we've been relatively excluded not necessarily on purpose but we're makeing that concerted effort to make our community heard.
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: We still have a few minutes left in this session.  I wanted to ask, John, did you want to say something.
>> on CARR:  Michael, where is the vast majority of money that used to pay the advertising that kept journalism going?  Where is all that money going?  It's not going to anybody who 12 in this session or anybody listening to the IGF?  If a government were to legislate to tell Google and Facebook to give money to support professional journalism, what would you say?  That the government has nothing to do with governance?
>> Michael ooh GHIA:  I would say we do need significant market‑based mechanisms for how to address this.  Because you know there's a clear imbalance between what publishers and what not ‑‑ what publishers, journalism organizations, what they're dealing with at the moment and then what especially large technology companies without naming any names per se are now reaping the benefits of that.  I mean there's a lot of interesting regulation and a lot of interesting developments happening in Australia now within the EU and also within the U.  Is.  I don't mean to just highlight northern examples but those specific examples are where there's a lot of ‑‑ where a lot of this conversation is being driven.  And I would say that I mean it's ‑‑ I really don't see ‑‑ of course, I welcome dialogue but I don't really see any significant changes happening without more ‑‑
>> John CARR:  Michael you did see that Facebook threatened to draw all its services from Australia if they promised to go ahead with those laws.  You know we need to be realistic about this.  Two or three small companies are doing all the damage and they are not involved in this discussion.
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Hello, dear panelists.  I'm going to wrap up the discussion right now and Mariana you got it right in the chat.  I was going to give the floor we still have a couple minutes left to DC on human rights and principles and I was going to call either Marianna or somebody please, the floor is yours for the next two minutes.
>> Marianne Franklin.  Is that okay?  We haven't cued ourselves off this line.  Thank you very much.  This issue around right of access to the Internet as Michael quite rightly sh sorry, had I, as Michael quite rightly says these are cost cutting issues and why this DC main session is so important and underscores how important the issues are.  Access is more than pushing a butted unor entering details.  It begins once you enter your detail.  The other A word is availability.  And Michael ising the fact that we have less and less availability and rich diverse forms of Dev Anand Teelucksingh 10 years old underscores this within its article six freedom of expression by including the right to information.  A 5‑year‑old has a right to information.  As that is made up by you in ‑‑ so this is what the problem is and we know that governments are reneging on their actual human rights obligations by allowing private sector actors to provide emergency provisions and using pandemic as a cloak and this must stop and we must be firmer and clearer for governments to comply with their own human rights standards and intervene in ways only they can by avoiding private sector domination of all forms of information.  And finally, that with information comes dismissed skewed information with all this availability becomes difference, diversity, contradictions.  It's not about all saying the same thing at the same time.  It's about being able to discern the difference between rubbish, bitter rushish, worse rubbish, truth, fact, fiction and all the rest.  That's the concern.  I don't want us to get locked into an either/or situation, we have to allow diverse information and let people who want to spread lies spread the lies but come back with truths, our own truths, substantiated truths and Internet can provide this but governments have to step up to the mark.  I'm getting increasingly impatient.  Thank you very much.
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you, and with this this is basically a perfect wrapup for this session on fundamental rights and freedoms because you made a point which leads us to the phase 3 about awareness, about education and empowerment.
And I will give the floor back to Hanane who will moderate the next phase.
>> Thank you very much very shall Tatianna and all the speakers about the passionate plea.  We do have various contributions which touch closely on the key issues that we're facing as humans and Internet users so the role of the media is very important and that takes me to flip the coin and take us to another important segment of the society.  And that speaks to you know the next phase of this session and specifically the role of youth when it comes to how they have been you know tackling the area of digital inclusion and I'm happy to invite the conversation what is the other side of the coin, you know, of you know this pandemic from the perspective of the youth.  So Gustav is representing the coalition of youth in the IGF, not sure if you can hear me.
>> Gustavo Paiva:  I already have my time here, first of all, I have to agree with the points represented before.  If anything I would really highlight that maybe a way to sum rye what was discussed so far is the COVID pandemic potential liced three existing inequalities across tle board.  All of them.  Economic inequalities.  Age and even in access.  Mainly in access.
And not only that, when it comes to the youth in education in particular, political issues, national political issues, election issues.  Took precedence over the essential things that are important for youth to our education.
Basically, the youth became absolutely secondary.  The whole next‑generation became completely secondary to all these political issues going on around the world.  Mainly and we can see this in elections even today.
Not only that, one of the things we identified in a workshop in Brazilian IGF is that going forward, Internet governance as in the holistic understanding of what the Internet is and the role it has in society and professional world is no longer something which people cannot know.  It is becoming increasingly pressing that educating people about what the Internet is, how it works and even platforms and all these issues we're facing with disinformation, this is necessary.  This is necessary in universities in basic education.  This is no longer something which we can keep in a specific (audio cutting out) all across the globe and in families.  This is going forward and essential life skill.  Thank you. 
>> H anane:  Thank you Gustavo.  Good points.  I'd like to ask Christopher Yu connecting the connects and unconnected.  I think through your paper that I read you play the key role during the pandemic addressing the key issues that have arisen due to COVID‑19 especially in the health sector so you might want to share with us you know what role did you play in terms of raising awareness.  Educating the authorities about the needs of citizens.
 
>> She ‑‑ he has to be here in a minute.  Chris, I hope you can unmute yourself now.
 
>> Christopher, I'm not sure if you were able to hear  
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: Me.
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: 
>> Hi, you're muted so I don't think we can hear you.  .  We'll sort out your technical issue and come back to you.  with regards to raising awareness on these issues.  I have to go back now to Gerry.  Gerry, so I now that you're doing a lot of work on the ground.  Meanwhile, Christopher is back.  Gerry if you would like to take us through your efforts to raise awareness and play your educational card when it comes to addressing inclusion issues?
>> Gerry Ellis:  Thank youin.  One of the things that we want to raise awareness is that we're not the only people who are saying that inclusion of people with disabilities are good for society.
All of society is saying that.  I'll give examples of that.  U.N. general secretary Antonio Gutierrez launched the disability inclusion strategy in 2019 and stated from a remote in 2 or or tackles for people with disabilities the whole world benefits.  Accenture launched a report in 2018 called ‑‑ let me just check the name.  Getting to call.  What that showed is the economic benefits of organizations of including people with disabilities as employees and making their products accessible to society in general.
There's an economic benefit to those organizations.
Of course, U.N. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.  Of course, people with disabilities are mentioned 7 times in the sustainable development goals.
The roadmap to equality and sustainability includes the 1.3 billion people with disabilities.  It is a benefit to all of society.  And that's one of the main things that we're raising.
Let me Geoff you a small example just before we go.  This IGF that we're attending, there are hundreds of sessions.  And if that was ‑‑ if you were trying to watch all those on video to get an idea of what's going on, it would take you three years, two years, who knows.  But because there is captioning there which was originally done for people who are deaf, you can now search through those.  You can do deaf mated searches, you can search for common themes through different things.  Much more easily.  That benefits everyone.  Not just people with disabilities.  I'll leave it with that for now.
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: I'm going to go back to Christopher we'd like to hear from you in the role you're playing in terms of raising awareness with the communities you're working with.  Hi Christopher, it's good to see you.
So the floor is yours.
>> Christopher Yoo:  Can you hear me now?
>> Loud and clear.
>> Thank you very much we're delighted to be here representing the dynamic coalition on innovative approaches to connecting the unconnected.
We continue our work trying to gather to try to avoid reinventing the wheel, to learn from the wonderful work that people all over the world but are convinces that unfortunately, very little information or data is collected on a success of failures which means that everyone is pretty much starting from scratch and unfortunately, also what little data is being collected does not allow for cross project comparisons.  The heart of the work is a database with a mass of over 1100 innovative ways to connect people to the Internet both on increase of connectivity but also of overcoming demand side obstacles such as digital literacy and the like.
And gender disability access as Gerry mentioned, senior access, any one of a number of dimensions.  We then reaped out to all 1100 of the initiatives that were identified and have now conducted case study interviews with everyone who convented they're in 125.  All of these are available on one world connected.org.  And we're trying to create an information base that will help to give insights to people all over the world, give a new ideas about ways to try but also information on what's working and what's not working.  Because many people are too busy, people are doing this in the field don't have time to document what they're doing.  And what is documented often is perceived success stories without much often attention to failure stories and this is important for learning project to project.
Based on my understanding of this meeting ‑‑ and I apologize if I got the time wrong ‑‑ because I thought I was joining just before it began.
I was asked to address in particular issues surrounding education.
Which has been one of the focuses of the dynamic coalition's work.  In fact, what we participated in two major efforts one is initiative to connects everything in school by UNICEF for the ITU and the educating project led by Tim Unwin a professor in the U.K. called education for post in the nallized in post COVID‑19.  What we learned is a case study of importance in the work that the IGF is doing is that the Internet connectivity is critical.  If that's ‑‑ anyone who has school‑aged children involved in education have become aware that the pandemic nearly through a huge spotlight on the necessity of Internet connectivity.  And that's a really wonderful chance to understand its importance and what we learned among other things is that the pandemic is actually exacerbated learning.  In July Kenya admitted that they had lost the ‑‑ and conceded that they will reopen in 2021 but have no real way in effectively conduct education for its students for most of that year.
So there are alarming problems but at the same time we've seen the number of very innovative responses and solutions which have been tremendous ‑‑ it's a wonderful chance to learn, wonderful chance to try new things and mother of necessity ‑‑ necessity being the mother of invention what you see is an outpouring of fascinating efforts to expand into connectivity with urgency of need to educate people.  Many joint efforts with private sector with edge tiffs being launched all over the world but for example in South Africa alone, they ‑‑ additional spectrum to wireless broadband.  Spec data, provided laptops, tablets to make this possible.  And a very common phenomenon all over the world South Africa zero rated content to make it easier to access.  These are all very interesting, innovative responses which we thought was incredibly beneficial.  Interestingly also we learned there are a number of prerequisites for delivering educational.  There's a bunch prereq easiest one for all of us to understand is the necessity of Internet connectivity for students.  And so first it has to exist and it also has to be affordable.  But we also learned that quality matters a great deal.  We see in the middle of pandemic because of the multiple use there was a spike in usage and that would cause slow downs in a number of countries. 
And in fact we saw even countries with connectivity ‑‑ the story is Italy.  They have a good base level connectivity but not enough to support the video learning, submission of assignments and all that that brought things down.
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: Thank you, Chris fer.  I don't mean cut you, you're doing great work and I invite everybody to read your paper on the IGF Web site but I have to cut you because there is another aspect that I really want to touch upon before we broke up this phase and see a few questions and I invite people to keep an eye on the chat window because there's a very interesting discussion and input consistently and constantly added by the panelists and different participants we have.  We also have three questions and I hope we answered a few of them through the different interventions that we have.  But the last item on the agenda speaks to the role of empowerment which we know empowering people to join the conversation on Internet governance integrated into national policy processes is not easy.  So we thought that having our work done online will help include more people in important key policy processes.  But I think one panelist I'll have to turn to Stuarh to speak and Gustavo if he has anything to add to how do we empower least represented communities in processes such as Internet governance so we can have actually a dlary view of what's at stake exactly?  So Stewart?  Maybe.
>> Stewart Hamilton:  I have to confess I was coming with research and learning but I mean, I think libraries replay a good role through the connectivity that we offer to allow people to take part in Internet governance, but you know there are things that you know people need if they're going to be able to participate accurately in this and that of course is the sort of skills that come with a good education and that's where we've been trying to do our best during the pandemic to make use of library facilities and extend online education whilst the doors and places like libraries are closed.  So I wanted to point out a couple things which I think are important for the over all debate which do cover that context of engagement.
We've seen a tremendous amount of use of digital library resources by all user groups which I think bodes well for engagement.  There mightbe an idea it's only younger people but we've seen it across the board and lenciya.  We've seen this big shift to online education and research and learning which Christopher was alluding to as well.  It's there I want to point out things we need too keep a close eye on as we go forward.  There are problems.
And some of these problems are around the licensing environments for the sorts of information that libraries make available.
Limits on number of simultaneous users that people can connect textbooks, ebooks, restrictions on lending.  Information op libraries across countries and restrictions on test and data mining which is extremely important because access to knowledge is very much in a pandemic a public health issue.  There are major issues around the costs of things like electronic textbooks.  I'll play us a link in the chat in a moment which will let you see the mattive differences between the cost of a print book and electronic book and huge issues around copyright.  If you think about a situation where lecturers are telling people it would be better to get a Netflix subscription because we don't have media studies courses take place.  This is something we need to be careful of.  In terms of what we want in policy recommendations we need clarity on the exceptions and limitations that be can use for online education and things libraries can provide.  We need an investigation into ebook pricing which is scandalous and we need more options to purchase them.  And something we haven't touched upon which is di Seth Reiss we talked about connectivity.  We need to talk about deadvice poverty in the future.  Hb hb thank you very much, Stewart.  Knowledge is power and educational aspect is also equally important in the issue of empowerment.  And I do have two hands, I think.  Two panelists that can speak to probably the issue of panel grating minorities and disilings making processes and I'll give the floor to ‑‑ Smita to reflect on this point.
If you can hear me, so the question speaks to the role of empowerments.  Of minorities or communities that are not represented properly.
>> Muhammad:  Yes, thank you very much.  Ladies and gentlemen, my apologies for you not being able to see me because I have a one key Internet connection so I would really apologize for that so you have to rely on my voice.
I would like to see two or three points here with regards to inclusion and awareness and particularly about the empowerment.  We have to have if we want to make people we we need to bring communities as we ‑‑ people with disabilities like to say.  Nothing about us without us..
If you want to have a discussion about persons with disabilities, you need to bring people with disabilities on to that level for having these kind of discussions about their issues.
With regard to their dynamic coalition on accessibility and disability this year, since were hearing that this IGF is going to go online, we thanks to a guard from Google and Vint Cerf, we supported people with disabilities all with regards to Internet connectivity.  We provided fellowships to enable people with disabilities with regards to accessing the Internet and availing the opportunity to attend IGF.  We also organized a hub in Italy to persons with disabilities but also supported by the grant provided by Google and Vint Cerf.  So thanks hats off to that.  We quo also provide some next year IGF goes back to in hitch person participation, there would be funds as well.  Two minutes is up.  You made cool suggestions on how to include basically guarantee more contributions in general so second recommendation in writing so we can put it forward and I'll give the floor to Smita because I know she has something to say about empowerment of minority in general.
 
>> Thank you very much.  I think one of the things that we really need in terms of bringing more people to this conversation, one in which ‑‑ I have two points to make, I think one of the reasons people live here in different conversations around IGF and less policy spaces is because they cannot connect to their own realities.  If you cannot connect with people on what is actually happening to them and convey why these policies matter to them in real life, why will they care about it?  Until you get people who care, policies and guidelines are just words in the cloud.  And second thing is that in a lot of conversations what happens, especially with regards to communities and women and other gender and sexual minority is the possibility speak establish all of this is that we constantly remain in disguys as intervention mode and we talk about problems.  Gender came into IGF spaces because online grew to the point that we couldn't ignore it and there were people smarter and wiser than me who spoke about it and said we can bring to Internet governance spaces.  Question not stop.  You need pleasure and access to spaces and technology for fun.  You need access to do what you want.  Policies need to support this.  I don't want a policy only to protect me.
I want a policy this will will allow me to have fun.  It's like demanding equality and this equality to loiter on online spaces equality to participate in policy and bring up topics that are relevant to you.  Access tomorrow.  But I think that is the way we can actually bring in more people.
 >> HUNANE BOUJEMI: Very concrete suggestions and inputs as usual.  Thank you very much.  And I think with that, I am going to wrap up the section on empowerment and education and we will have to spend the last 20 minutes of this session talking about the future of the IGF and contribution of ‑‑ to Tatiana will be moderating that specific space.  The last note it is very important at this point that the IGF works on cross fertilization of ideas between different segments that are not represented and I received information yesterday that the high level roundtable which included Parliamentarians would like to collaborate with the DCs and I think this is good news because then you can actually work with various entities on specific issues to advocate on whatever is at stake on the ground, on the floor to make sure your voice is heard.  An with that I will pass the floor to Tatianna.  AT&T AT&T thank you, Hanane:  As you said we want to ensure that all voices are heard and allow Gustavo to make the last word about the last phase.  I'll give you two minutes.  We will make it.
>> I'll be very brief.  On the topic of empowerment I think there are many ways to approach this especially when they talk about the youth.  Many of the young people who come to government spaces coming from other industries.  They come from economic activities which already are closely tied to Internet policy making so for them, it's only about matter of quickly learning about topic and then just jumping in.  For other youth who want these people, these young people they often do not have continued engagement if we want to create continued engagement, especially from youth or people, people in general, not only youth but underrepresented people such as LGBT people, we need to address a fact that for many pro fetionals, continuing engagement in Internet governance is not feasible.  There are very few incentives in terms of how it applies to their inactivity and we in the Internet governance community we benefit immensely from extremely hard working volunteers, it is uphill battle.  And this continued engagement especially for young people and people fl from the global ‑‑ it is when you have so many professional obligations when making enough to live by is so difficult.  It is very difficult.
To justify the kind ‑‑ this kind of engagement with global ‑‑ thank you.
Hb hb thank you, Gustavo and thank you for building another bring from our previous discussion to the wrapping up phase of this session.  We are going to talk Tatiana you're of IGF.  What can the IGF community do to make these ‑‑ the IGF catalyst, a cause for these Qian tomorrow changes during pandemic and post pandemic?  And is IGF doing enough we have two speakers in my mind for this phase of the session.  I would like to actually ‑‑ we wrapped up the previous one with youth and I would like to give the floor to another speaker from youth to Ellen.  What is your take on this and future of IGF in this regard?
>> Eileen CEJAS:  I'll be as short as possible.  From youth coalition we've been seeing that the current situation is that the disease had an a key player in the get governance and on youth coalition where we brought the topic of the table of which is the role that we have as youth how we want to play it and facility and empowering the next‑generation of leaders, we in the IGF/IG environment.  A good example is how we've been working closely with Internet Society to build mentorship training for interns who say youth and others of this years because we believe that we need more voices that can ‑‑ to be able to have voices who can give proper treatment of the topics that matter to us in IGF.  This has been part of our efforts targeting youth and participating at the youth and strategy.  So future within dynamic coalition we shall address the importance of eye lighting intersectional work as this has been happening with the BPMs, they may not get enough recognition to most of the discussion is concentrated at the developments in the IGF space.  But I would like to bring to this excellent panel the future application of IGF plus model.  It has been highly recommendation to the U.N. high level panel on digital korntion and especial other stakeholders and global citizens they organize this year.  Dynamic coalitions and other parts of the IGF intersectional work should be the basis to strengthen Internet in the terms of digital corporation as a introductory remark we have participated in IGF often behalf of the YC.  In addition we promote dynamic coalitions.  This year we have collaborated with statement on assistive Internet controls that my colleague 0 whrif live yay colleague Olivier mentioned before.  We have participated at a section organized by rights and principles coalition, these examples show us the work of dynamic coalition that should become more relevant than ever.  We are part of of a larger community.  We need to contribute the improvements of the IGF towards the future.
Finally I would like to remark that it is essential to have representation of youth including youth Parliamentarians at IGF intersection activities.  We shall decide in out future and encourage stakeholders to avoid tokenism of youth.  We are here to address the matters we care about.  Our voice should be heard and taken into consideration to shape the future of the IGF in the intreft governance space.  Internet governance.
>> Thank you very much eye even.  It's very nice to see youth being so active in all these processes.  I would like to give the floor to Olivier Crepin‑Leblond because I believe in a way the dynamic cocollision of core Internet values can tell us how core Internet values contribute to all these Qian tum changes.  Olivier you have 20 seconds to add something.  To add something to youth.
>> Olivier Crepin‑Leblond:  Oh, dear you're so tough.  Twenty minutes would have been just barely enough.  No, I'm not going to purport to say it's only dine applicant coalitions on values that has all the issues.  What this session is showing is that every coalition has got a different angle covered and covered extremely well.  And as Eileen just mentioned I'm not going to have to repeat what Eileen said but I can say that the future of IGF has got the core Internet ‑‑ sorry, dynamic coalitions and its real core.  It's vitally important that this intersectional work continues ‑‑ intersessional work continues.  That's only possible with the people of you, the people watching this, the audience here because the vibrancy of dynamic coalitions is only there because of the people that make it.  That's all I wanted to say.
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you very much Olivier.  And I would like to remind us all because I can see how many people are attending right now.  I have 103 people in this room.  And I hope that you're all enjoying this session.
We still have a couple minutes to wrap up this phase which was pretty short for this very big issue on the future of IGF.  If any dynamic coalitions weren't to say so this, yes, Gerry, go ahead. 
>> Gerry Ellis:  People with disabilities want to be involved and be included and to a large extent include.  DCED made standards on making meetings accessible so we say please lock it.  Make improving the Web site, I know it's going to be rebuilt.  These include our needs in those.  But as we get away from COVID‑19 and we move back toward physical access and then hopefully Poland next year, there is a recognition or there needs to be a recognition that it costs usually a lot more for people with disabilities to attend because of inaccessible transport and to able hotels and physical buildings where meetings are held.  I know IGF doesn't have funds but hopefully you'll work with us to find funders to help support people coming from particularly poorer areas of the world to have their themselves heard.  Keep in mind, please.  The basic saying of people with disabilities, nothing about us without us.  Consult us.  Talk with us.
we'll help you, you can help us.
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you very much.  Gerry, with them I'm going do Close the.  Peter you first and then Marianne.  Please be brief.  Uti, the floor is yours.
>> Jutta Croll:  I'm not speaking on behalf of dynamic co list I might belong to but as cofacilitator for all the dynamic cocollisions and I'm grateful for the richness of this depate.  I've seen a lot of points that will bring us forward into the future not only post pandemic but also considering how intersessional work will be done by dynamic coalitions in the IGF plus model suggested by the HLPDC.  If I can report back also from the roundtable of Parliament airians it's not only the roundtable itself but all the Parliamentarians that took part in that session yesterday.  Really had a great interest in working with this dynamic coalitions intersessional between Internet governance forum.  So we have achieved to arouse interest in that during the IGF last year.  And I would really suggest to pick up on that dynamic coalitions to have a look out for Parliamentarians who can work with them and also bring the work forward because that is the major step moving forward for all of us, thank you so much for this.  Thank you for all the work you do to facilitate this work Tatiana Tropino tts this work of dynamic coalition and everything you did for the preparation of this session.  Marianne we want to wrap this up with your contribution so please go ahead.
>> Thank you very briefly.  I want to the comment that shu just made to the charter of human rights and principles.  Starts with quality of service.  The quality of service to which people are entitled acts shall involve in line with advancing technological possibility.  I do not believe the quality of service is evolving in line with advancing technological facilities.  So I think we had a serious task ahead of us and this is why the IGF has proven its worth and Olivier, finally, a huge call out, thank you to everyone here who puts all their additional time their weekends, their leaping time to get up at 3 and 4 in the morning to be part of this.  I just want to say all this is voluntary, unpaid and underpaid and underrecognized laip and we need to start noticing it because our time is also money and we're descroating 0 you are time and money to this process.  So I want to thank everyone for all their time and all the extra hours.  And organizing committee for this DC9 session and professional paid support teams as well.  Let's give the IGF more money, more resources and more grunt because we make it so show us put your money where your mouth is, governments, private sector, technical communities and anyone with any member and give it to us without strings money taxed or you're noft not worth your salt.
>> Thank you very much.  I
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: I want to tell the number of funds ‑‑ there are 107 who heard your intervention and with this I'm going to give it back to Haane for the wrapup.  It's yours now.
>> Thank you very much.  Thank you, Tatianna, thank you to all the panelists and vibrant attendees of the session who made the discussion really interesting.  It's ‑‑ we're lucky that we have a transcript and I think we can always go back to look at all the contributions across the board, you know, through the whole of the phases you know that we had during this session.  So we can actually have a concise ‑‑ you know summary of all the recommendations and also I would like to thank the ‑‑ what do you call that the godfather and godmother of the intersessional work, specific to the DC work and that is Markus Kummer and Jutta for their encouragements and all the work that is being done by the DCs themselves.  I know what it takes because I cochaired one of them and I understand inside out how they can influence policy making processes in various contexts.  So I would encourage people to chose the topic that is close to their heart and join the DC work because it speaks to the heart, to the core of the issues tackle in the IG and there is a little bit of everything for everyone.  So ‑‑ and you know, for the people who are asking how to join, the DCs I invite you to check the Internet governance Web site, Secretariat.  There is a mailing list for each DC and you can actually choose which one that speaks to you most.  So you can join the work.  It's unpaid work.  It's voluntary.
It feeds usually to the full‑time job of all of us somehow.  Just to that none of us are paid.  We're doing it because we love what we're doing and we'd like to contribute to enrich enthe agenda of the IGF and make it more substantive and meaningful.
And I guess the sum up of this session speaks to us all.  We know that youth has a role to play.  We need to be more inclusive when it comes to representing making sure that every segment of the society is actually represented.  That pandemic made us all realize that the Internet is so crucial.  Now everybody who is not compelled or convinced that the Internet can may play actually a key role sites and economies, now is the time they understand that.  Having said that we also realize how the pandemic actually widened the gap whether it's gender gap, be disabilities gaps.  So we need to be wary.  We need to address these issues to make sure that nobody's left behind, that that we are actually practicing what we're preaching and that is very important.  And I hope this platform has been you know important you know to call out all the decision‑makers and policy makers to take into account and be accountable also to the feedback we're receiving from communities all around the world.
I have to say this is one of the most active sessions I've ever moderated or contributed to and that's thanks to the rich discussion that we had so far.
I invite the S and Ds to also read the substantive papers that were submitted by the DCs because they actually Zoom in to these issues that we're trying to speak to at a high level.  And that's what we do usually in these kinds of panels.  So maybe we don't have a silver bullet that kind of ‑‑ let's say creates solutions to solve things but this is a process.  I think a lot of people on this call understand what does it mean to be involved in the IGF.  For so many years at least two decades now we're doing this and we're doing it for a reason.  We can see the impact.  We can see how we manage finally to include actually more segments from you know Parliamentarians to youth into the discussion and I heap you enjoyed the session as much as I did.  Thank you very much, everyone.  Thank you to the interpreters, thank you Tatiannathank you Markus, Jutta and work of DCs and thank you to all the panelists and I think that's all from me today.  Thank you very much.  And good‑bye.
 
 >> TATIANA TROPINA: Thank you, good‑bye.  All.
>> Thanks to you both.  Wonderful moderation.  Thank you so much.
>> Bye, everybody and to the sign language interpreters and captioners vmentd yes, captioners and sign language interpreters.
>> wonderful session, thanks, everybody. 
>> Excellent, bye.
>> Thank you, everyone.
 

^^new transcript^^/multilingual/content/igf-2020-%E2%80%93-day12-%E2%80%93-ws119-mobile-internet-impact-on-the-environment-in-5g-era-%E2%80%93-raw^^

 
>> Hi.  We replaced the original moderator Chan.  So we will start the webinar. 
(No audio).
>> CHIH-LIN I: I have a question.  Can I share my screen for the PPT later?
>> MING YAN: Yes, you can share your PPT.
>> CHIH-LIN I: Okay.  Great.
>> DANIEL SCHIEN: When sharing the PowerPoint presentation from a local computer, will presenter notes not be visible?
>> PIOTR MIECZKOWSKI: No, I don't think so.  So you are covered.
>> DANIEL SCHIEN: Okay.  That's fine.  Thank you.
>> Professor Thas, your mic is muted.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: , can you play the video? 
Ming Yan, no audio.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: You can try to restart the video and in the section that you have for sharing the screen, there is an option, there is a check box that says sharing the audio.  You need to start again the video.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Yan Ming.  I think we might try to stop the video. 
Yan Ming, can we stop the video and we'll just try to send it out.
>> Mr. Yan, you can stop the video.
>> Mr. Yan, can you please stop the video?  Can you please answer the video.  Okay.  Now Professor Thas can take over, right?
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: I think the video, we will see whether we can play it later, but let's ‑‑ because we are about to waste time.
So welcome to the workshop, and we have an exciting panelist and we have a tight schedule.  So we have seven minutes each and five speakers and then let's hold the questions until all the panelists have shared their views, and then we will come back to question and discussion at the end.
So in that, we have the first presentation is by Dr. Chih‑Lin I from Chinese Mobile Research Institute, and Dr. I is well‑known around the world as a key speaker on this topic and she earned a Ph.D. from Stanford and had major awards and accolades within the industry.  So I don't think we need much introduction to Dr. I.  Please Dr. I.  You have seven minutes, ma'am. 
(No audio).
>> PIOTR MIECZKOWSKI: You have to unmute.
>> CHIH-LIN I: All right. 
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: All right.  You can share your slides.
>> CHIH-LIN I: Okay.  Can you see my slides?
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Not yet.
>> CHIH-LIN I: So it's not being shared?
Okay.  Sorry.
Okay.  So this is fine?
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Yes, great.  Take it to the slide show.
>> CHIH-LIN I: I guess I would like to share about the greener era that 5G is leading us into or will address.  So very quickly.  Next page.
Certainly, we are all on here, because we all have a vision for the green future, and China certainly shares this vision, and view as a great national priority, you can see that in both the recent four and five‑year plan being drafted and they are about to complete 13 years.  Green has been a key word and also, you probably have heard President Shi has also promised about meeting the carbon neutral ‑‑ sorry, not 2016, 2020 ‑‑ 2016 it's a typo.  Not 2016.  The carbon neutral by 2016.  So green development mode is a national plan.  And also globally in terms of the traffic roads is well‑known.  Typically, it's set ‑‑ it's around maybe close to double every year.  And the expectation is that we have a massive increase in terms of the terminals from the Internet of things development, as well as vast increasing the mative data centers as well as the data center across the globe would go to a great power consumption issue going forward, but it's good to see that major operators across the globe have all promised very aggressive emission target on their part, and also very, I think ‑‑ I think very responsive approach to making use of the renewable energy together.
And in China Mobile aspect of that, you can see that we have, I think, right now, honestly we have the world's largest 4G network, as well as up to now, in terms of the scale and size, we are the largest 5G network as well.  And the power consumption has always been very important consideration in all of our deployment operations and just last year, our energy consumption was 26.7 billion‑kilowatt hours, but this is still, I think, a good result after years of dedication into our green action plan.
And in this energy consumption, I think China Mobile is not alone, that together with all the major operators that it's very clear that the Wireless network RAN has represented the majority of that power consumption.  That's something that we have to pay great attention to.  And if you look at the kind of key technologies that we have been dedicating ourselves to focus on, for 5G, the power amplifier efficiency, the transceiver integrity, and also going from APGA to real ASIC implementation with much more aggressive technology loads.  All of these are from hardware side.  We are working with all of our partners and ecosystem players to ‑‑ to improve.
And in terms of software side, starting from the 5G standards, we actually have put in a lot of care in trying to maximize opportunity to save energies.  And so not only the subframe shutdown and the channel shutdown will continue to be important methods to reduce unnecessary energy consumption according to the traffic loads at the time and the place, we also have been aggressively pursuing the deep dormancy that in certain locates and times we may be able to shut down the majority of the RF circuits which is the largest where the largest power consumption exists.  And this is also thanks to our good, I think, design of 5G and frame structure in terms of the pilot and reference symbol placement that allowed this kind of opportunity.
And then in addition to this level, going unto the higher level across the network, ‑‑ am I moving?  I think ‑‑ there seems to be a latency.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: You are moving.
>> We side number four and probably slide number five if you click.
>> CHIH-LIN I: Okay.  Good.  Okay.  So we actually pioneered a very important solution which goes above a single network.  It goes across multiple network and we treat multiple network to this 3G as one system and jointly optimized its energy consumption dynamically across the day.  We have the minimum resource and the power consumption is that needed to support the necessary traffic with its required PP I. performance.  And this started very early on from 2011, to 2012, and by 2014, we first generations in the fields and we used the operation domain to perform the dynamic optimization of the power consumption.  And then through second generation, third generation, gradually, we improved not only improved the scale originally at kind of perpetual county level and then it moves up to the provincial level and then finally we integrated a way to the provincial‑wide big data platform, and also brought in eventually machine learning and AI that we actually made use of the users' location prediction, as well as the user traffic and application type prediction to further enhance the capability.
And up until now, this particular system required a multirate cellular energy savings system has been deployed across 19 provinces and annually, it brings up 230 million kilowatt power saving and building on that, we are now moving into incorporating 5G as well to this multigeneration, multicellular network integrated energy saving platform called I‑green and it's still early phase for this particular phase, but we think it will help with the massive operation of our 5G network.
And all of that would be on the management plan.  And in addition, together with partners in O‑RAN alliance, that some of you might have heard of, we are working on a major effort, what we call RAN intelligent controller, RIC, RIC is a control plan all the way down to scheduling and maybe even physical layer platform, that is hierarchical by nature, and it will actually further enhance even more fine grain and more realtime opportunity of highest energy efficiency of the 5G network.
And that is about how we strive to enhance energy efficiency of the 5G network itself.  But I think in other important perspective, is how 5G network in the 5G era will help us to enable various verticals to have a green transformation.
And actually, one very important experience we all shared, think across the globe this year, is on the one hand, we have the unfortunate epidemic of COVID‑19 across the globe.  On the other hand, because of this, did this pandemic, through our fight globally, and particularly I'm sharing here is our experience in China, how 5G has helped us in many different aspect of our life, being enabled because of 5G connectivity and its capability of offering not only extremely broadband connection, but also large number of collections, as well as very low latency services.  In many ways, it is a new opportunity and new mode of the way we live, the learn and work, and even govern and heal ourselves.
And so my summary, quickly, that we have the joint vision, I think all of us on this conference, as well as lots of, I think, colleagues across the world, that carbon neutral 2060 is definitely a shared goal and I understand there's some even more aggressive enterprise have promised to reach carbon neutral way before 2060.  Some are talking about 2030 or plus or minus five years.
And in terms of 5G, many are concerned about the high energy consumption, but I have to explain something that is, yes, the energy consumption of 5G, for example, base station is about three or four times of 4G base station.  Yes, the 5G network because of its potentially higher density due to the higher spectrum being used, that overall for the same kind of nationwide or Regionwide full coverage of 5G network, the energy consumption is many fold, compared to the previous generations, but I think we can still take in comfort the actual energy efficiency in terms of bit her jule or bit per hertz ‑‑ no.  Bit per jule or bit per second per watts in comparison to the previous generation is four or five times higher.
And the reason we had much higher energy consumption in the base station is because 5G peak data rate compared to 4G is about 15 times.  So it carries much more traffic with the increased power consumption.
Okay.  And then certainly, if we have time, we can discuss in more detail that all kinds of effort we have put in together with all the ecosystem partners to improve our 5G networks, the future power consumption aspect and also that we have ‑‑ we are all expecting that 5G will enable, facilitate low carbon or green transformation of wide array of vertical industries.  That's important in our life.
Okay.  Thank you.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Thank you, Dr. I for the taking us through the China Mobile carbon footprint.
Now we have the second panelist, Dr. Dan Schien from the University of Bristol and how do we assess and evaluate the impact of mobile Internet.
Dan, the podium is yours.  You need to unmute yourself.  We can see your slides and you have not unmuted yourself. 
>> PIOTR MIECZKOWSKI: I think if you are moving to presenter mode, in the PowerPoint, wherever, you have to share it presenter mode, because when you open up PowerPoint, you have like two views, one is view with slides, like professor just presented and then the other is just, you know, the presenter view.  So you have to open up the presenter mode and then look at the Zoom in the share screen option.
>> DANIEL SCHIEN: Let's try this.
>> PIOTR MIECZKOWSKI: Now this works.
>> DANIEL SCHIEN: Okay.  Thank you very much for the support.  It's not that I'm not using online tools all the time, but okay.  Fantastic.
Thank you very much for the invite, my name is DanielSchien, I want to talk about the environmental assessments of digital services and 5G.  And the environmental assessments talking about the consumming and the delivering services and the associated carbon emissions.
Digital services are those delivered over information and communication technology in this conception and focused by deliver specifically by those on delivery centers and delivered further for networks nor the devices.
Okay.
So let me first talk about green commitments.  2020 has been a very strong year for the sector with many organizations announcing plans to become carbon neutral.  Many organizations have made such green commitments.  The headlines have been grabbed by Apple, Amazon, Facebook, Google, and Microsoft all pledging to be carbon neutral by 2030 or 2040.  The environmental impact is a business risk, as well as an opportunity.
Organizations US as green peace have been calling out big cloud organizations for a while on the energy sources, and more frequently now, the mainstream media is also paying attention due to an absence of robust information open the energy consumption and carbon emissions for services and some of these reports have been exaggerating the actual energy consumption, sadly.
But we see a new development and that is organizations are now ‑‑ such as The Climate Pledge or the Science Based Targeted they require strict emissions of scope one, two, and three emissions for the organizations who joined these initiatives and that will hopefully help somewhat with organizational reporting.
Though it doesn't completely solve the questions when it comes to assessing specific services, so I will talk about that in a moment more.
Now, why is that ‑‑ why is that challenging?  So if we look the supply chains of digital services, these are complex.  Digital systems are not the only systems with complex supply chains, but what we are ‑‑ what we are observing is that those sensationalistic ports of alarming energy consumption and streaming that have emerged is due to this absence of robust data, and mainly borne out of the fact that no single organization associated to the delivery of the service has oversight of the entire system.
Digital service systems are provided for many organizations working together.  I have a screen shot of the delivery system from a recent white paper that we coauthored with the BBC and although the BBC is providing the service, they on infrastructure provided by many organizations such as cloud providers and network providers and sadly at the moment, they don't provide the data that is necessary for the sustainability professionals within the media organizations to carry out the assessments themselves.
These are the ‑‑ the four building blocks here that need to be taken into account.  The datacenter service, the wired networks, cellular networks and user devices.
And that's why our team at the university of Bristol is supporting a new initiative called Dimpact.  We are academics in this effort and we are supporting sustainability practitioners in industry by creating a reporting tool for scope, one, two, and three.  And this tool is compatible with the green house gas protocol for the protocol and the Science Based Targeted and dimpact.org.
I listed some of the founding members of dimpact that include media organizations as well as infrastructure providers, and in Dimpact, we offer service models and background data that these organizations can then use in a secure system to calculate their own footprints for reporting.
But importantly, we can also see that Dimpact provides a place for these organizations to share best practices and to learn about the ‑‑ the greening of their own organizations, for making optimizations in the delivery of services and that's the topic of my next slide.
The final ‑‑ yeah, the final element I want to talk about the sustainable design, this refers to considering sustainability alongside other criteria, such as user experience and cost when designing a service.
And this then allows to choose less energy intense options among the design alternatives.  I want to briefly describe an example.  And in this specific example, where we're talking about eliminating digital waste, digital waste is the ‑‑ is taking place when a service is provided, but part or the entirety of that service is not providing any value to the user.
And in the specific study, we first estimated the electricity footprint of YouTube and we see here the proportion of the different parts the delivery system ranked according to their contribution to the overall footprint but then we wanted to evaluate how such a footprint can be used in sustainable design, and the concrete intervention was here in some cases we ‑‑ we know from colleagues such as Caroline Lord that they observed YouTube sometimes being used as a radio service and the music is only being listened to but the video signal has not been consumed.  So no one was looking at the screen.  Maybe the phone was in the pocket.
And then we analyze how would a service that may be autoMatically detects that the screen is not being seen and then change the service that only the audio stream is being used.  How would that contribute to the reduction of energy reduction and associated carbon emissions, and you can see that this is being substantial.
So in summary, what follows for the development of 5G?  There are four things I would like to mention.  The first is we would like to have as much renewable electricity sourced for the provision of cellular networks as possible.  No doubt.
And secondly, it's important to comprehensively report on this energy consumption such that we can enable robust decision making by all parties, including designers and media organizations, consumers and the public sector.
And thirdly, we need transparency on the energy consumption by services.  So what is happening when a service is delivered via a network and how much of the energy consumption is associated to this specific service.
And finally, we would like to see more cross‑sector collaboration between infrastructure providers and media organizations, such as those that we enable within the Dimpact project.
That is all.  Thank you very much for your attention.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Thank you for really sharing that perspective.  And, again, please keep the questions coming and we will come back to Q&A.  Let's move to the next panelist.  We have Mr. Steven Moore, the head of climate action of GMSA, the podium is to you, Steven.
>> STEVEN MOORE: Hi.  Held local.  Can you hear me okay?
>> PIOTR MIECZKOWSKI: Yes, perfectly!
>> STEVEN MOORE: That's the first challenge.  Let's see if I can share without problem.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: You can go to slide show.
>> STEVEN MOORE: That's true.  I could go into slide show, couldn't I?  Let's go to view.  How about that? 
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Yes, that's great.
>> STEVEN MOORE: Great.  So good morning, everyone own good afternoon, wherever you are.  It's good morning here in London.  My name is Steven Moore and I'm from the GSMA.  Sorry.  So I will talk to you about the climate action program that we have at the GSMA that engages mobile operators on climate action.
Just before I does, I wanted to give you an overview of ‑‑ if I can click on to my next slide.  Here we go.  An overview of the electricity use and carbon emissions of ICT sector to put it in context.
So globally, around 4% of electricity is used by the ICT sector, with an additional 3% for entertainment and media.  And in terms of the breakdown of carbon emissions you can see on the right‑hand side it's important to understand that there is significant carbon emissions associated with both the customer use of devices, about 27%, as well as device manufacturer which is a similar amount.  And then you can see over the top of the graph, the operations of running networks.  So data centers, entertainment networks, mobile networks and fixed networks as well.  And useful to bear in mind, because in looking at the environmental impact and tackling that, in particular carbon emissions, it's important to address all aspects of the supply chain.
So what is the mobile industry doing around climate action?  And last year, in February of 2019, the GSMA, which is the industry association representing mobile operators, committed to move the mobile industry to net zero emissions by 2050.  So this is in line with the highest ambition of the Paris climate change agreement to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees.  So how are we looking to do this?  Firstly as mentioned by my previous speaker, disclosing your carbon emissions.  So being transparent about your scope, one, two and three emissions.  Secondly focus on what the path is to zero emissions for the segment.  And it ideally aligns to net zero by 2050.
So CDP disclosure.  So CDP is a global reporting system for carbon emissions and, it's important because transparency around this is necessary in order to start managing carbon emissions.  Both to understand what the risks are of carbon intensive areas of your business, but also what the opportunities might be presented by shifting to lower or zero carbon products and services and that's particularly of relevance to the mobile sector because digitization enables ‑‑ (no audio).
Digitalization enables redictions in carbon emissions in other areas of the economy.
In total, more than 50 mobile operators covering more than two‑thirds of mobile connections disclose to the CDP last year, which was a really big up lift on the year before, and was as a result of us engaging with mobile operators around the world.
Also in climate disclosure, there is the TCFD framework, which is a framework to look to bring into your business an understanding of the financial risks and opportunities associated with climate change, to improve governance around it, across your business, to embed these considerations within the strategy of your business, to better understand and manage risk and use metrics and targets going forward as well.
So we also work with operators to help them understand the TCFD framework and a number of our members already use it.
So in terms of the progress so far, in these areas, I talked about member's climate disclosure.  The mobile industry pathway to net zero emissions, this was something that we calculated and created and launched earlier this year, back in February:  It was a consortium of the GSMA working with the ITU, working with the global esustainability initiative, to understand what this pathway would be so we could reach net zero emissions by 2050.  And there's slightly different reduction pathways whether you have a mobile operator, whether you are a fixed line operator or whether you are a data center operator.
In terms of then aligning carbon reduction targets to the science, so 29 operators representing more than 30% of global connections have committed to science‑based targets.  These actually represent just over 50% of the industry by revenue.  So some of the previous presenters actually mention a few of the mobile operators such as the likes of Vodafone, Telefonica, et cetera.  So big, global operators who set in some cases actually carbon reduction targets faster than the asset to pathway.
We engage with mobile operators around the world, through the climate action task force that's been set up.  We have more than 40 members part of this task force.  Representation from every part of the world, North America, South America, Europe, Africa, Europe, and Australia as well.  And the purpose of the task force is to highlight best practice, to engage in thought leadership, to understand more about what we can do around climate action.
And one of the particular areas we focused on was updating a climate policy for the industry.  And this is something that we updated and published over the summer.  And this is because we wanted to reflect the increased amount of activity on climate action and leadership that's being shown across the industry, but also to highlight where a challenge is going forward.
So energy efficiency, as we are talking about, particularly in the context of the rollout of the 5G. which is putting pressure on the electric use.  Digitalization reducing emissions, which is how you can use smart connective technologies in both ‑‑ both within the mobile sector and outside to reduce the emissions.  And equipment sustainability is very important and more of a challenge, especially engaging with suppliers and supporting them improve their capacity in this space.
And then adapting to a changing climate.  As an infrastructure business, we are at risk of exchanging climate, extreme weather events, flooding, et cetera.  So this is something that's updated and published and available.  Please do feel free to check it out on GSMA.com.
I will just run through a couple of projects that we are doing around particular areas of focus for climate action.  Energy efficiency, and artificial intelligence for energy workshop, which we will be kicking off in energy.  Energy efficiency benchmarking project which we'll be doing from January as well to understand how operators, network energy efficiency varies to understand how to improve their energy efficiency, and on renewable energy, we engage with the RE100, the global campaign, a number of the members of the task force are members of the RE100 campaign, they advocate for renewable energy mark and they also have a lot of information on how to source renewable electricity.
We have also just produced a report looking at renewable energy for mobile towers, particular interest in low, middle‑income countries where you are reliant on diesel generators where you don't necessarily have reliable grid and this report looks at renewable energy alternatives.
Device and equipment sustainability, we work a lot through the joint audit corporation, which improves understanding and why it's important to measure carbon emissions and set the reduction targets.  There's a new initiative which is called the eco rating which is being looked at for mobile handsets and eengage a lot around that to ‑‑ there's a particular tool we actually have which is an ewaste policy tracker which is available on our website.  So you can understand the ewaste legislation in different countries.
And I mentioned before enabling carbon reductions in the sector and I think this is important to bear in mind in the context of potential increase of 5G, which can actually be the savings, the carbon savings and efficiencies which are being realized in other sectors and everything is connected now.  Really you can see from the graph that we are already seeing efficiencies in all sectors whether it's smart agriculture, whether it's smart buildings, whether it's the energy sector, which would rely on connectivity to make sure that the balance of renewal energy brought on maintains a stable energy grid and smart manufacturing, and the way we are living and working.
And obviously what has happened over the last six month has meant that we are all relying on digital connectivity a lot more and world traveling a lot less and there's some big savings associated with that.
Just to finish off, we have a number of resources on our website to help operators understand their carbon emissions.  We produced the climate action handbook, which is kind of an introductory 101 and the climate policy.  We also have a climate action toolkit and a guide to setting carbon reduction targets that's in line with the new sector pathway.
So apologies in I'm slightly over the time.  Quite a lot of information to get through.  That gives you a good overview of what we are doing in our sector.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Thank you, Steven.  It's nice to know the extent of climate action and energy efficiency improvements the GSMA is undertaking.
Let us move to the next panelist.  We have Mr. Piotr Mieczkowski from the digital transformation of power to share on the impact or the upgrade that 5G is promising us across a number of applications.
>> PIOTR MIECZKOWSKI: Thank you for having me.  So first, let me congratulate Steven for bringing the last slides, which presented the 5G impact.  So this is exactly what I was talking about ‑‑ I would like to talk about.  So I know even in total 5G network will consume more energy, because there is more data but we have to keep in mind that 5G is more efficient than 4G, 3G, and 2G, especially.  And per bit, it's more efficient by four and five times as was mentioned at the beginning of this session, but we have to keep in mind that especially in EU, since we are talking about EU Green Deal, that EU Green Deal, which is about massive digitalzation of energy sector, will not be possible without Smart Grid, IoT, and 5G connectivity.  So in other words, 5G is a must.  It's like electricity, to make the whole world much more greener.
In terms of current status, what is happening in terms of the 5G implementation scenarios in verticals so what is the potential?  So first of all, there were more than 50, you know, 50 use cases already tested in the whole of Europe.  Some of them in the UK, coordinated by the UK 5G association or alliance and some of them were Scandinavia and some were the in south part of Europe.  Most of them were covered by grants from Horizon 2020 from EU funds dedicated for R&Ds.  We have seen that there is a ‑‑ you know, a huge potential to make the whole world much more greener, especially in terms of, you know, intelligent networks and Smart Grids, which, you know, manage the ‑‑ the renewable energy.
We have to keep in mind that if you want to manage the whole new energy sector, then it's totally different than the old one, with call, et cetera, and you have to, you know, micromanage the flow of electricity within the whole system.  You have to ‑‑ you have to manage also the ‑‑ the accumulators and other part of the ‑‑ of the whole network, which means it's not possible to have reliable green energy without huge connectivity.
So for example, in Poland, we are implementing LT450, but we are waiting for 5G to be implemented in order to manage the green energy.
In terms of the potential also, when we are in the middle of pandemic or maybe at the end, let's hope because of the advances that are coming, there are many use cases.  You know, 5G is a huge connectivity provider and so it could be a good ‑‑ it could give reliable connection for ‑‑ for example, for the automated net necks of the testimony, for example, at airports or any place where people are moving.
Additionally, of course, there's a huge case which was presented in China that you can work ‑‑ that you could work remotely, and I'm not talking about our work, you know, let's say, office clerks or managers, whatever, but I'm talking about the ‑‑ the veccicos.  Could you control the veccicos in mines that's one case.
And the their case is robotics.  There's robots already implemented in several hospitals, which sterilize the rooms and, you know, they kill the virus with a special light, I would say.  So they are also connected through 5G network.  Of course, probably you could think about WiFi, but, you know, we have to keep in mind at least in Poland that it's hard to cover the whole hospitals with WiFi network and 5G is much more reliable because they are a separate function, you know, dedicated IoT, which makes the signal go much deeper, way deeper into the building, because of the special function of 5G networks.  So you could actually manage the robots even in the underground, which is not normal or you can do it actually with 2G or 3G.
So that's very briefly my input since I was ‑‑ I was asked to talk for the five minutes.
You have to unmute.  That's I think most common word or sentence we talk in the world.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Yes thank you.  A.  I think I was unmuted me, and because of the noise someone muted me.
The last, we are going to be cover, Robert Zambrana, he will talk about how to guide enterprises to take the pathway towards low carbon and green transformation.
>> ROBERTO ZAMBRANA: Thank you very much, Thas and thank you for the invitation to this panel.  I am glad to share some thoughts about it.  First of all, it's necessary to remember the difference between different regions and countries about the state of development of 5G technologies worldwide.  In one side, we may find advanced development ‑‑ deployments of 5G networks in the United States, Poland, we just heard about it Sweden, Spain, Netherland, China, South Korea, Japan and Brazil, and South Africa.
As part of the global south, most of these countries are halfway to consolidated 4G technology and we could say that 5G is far behind.  This reality goes hand in hand with Internet penetration rates considering the same countries, broadband Internet services are below 40% despite the fact that coverage of technologies, like HSPA, and HSPA plus, what we used to call 3.75G and higher such as LTE and LTE advance cover nearly 80% of the territories where more than 80% of their users live, actually.
And after hearing so many conferences during this IGF 2020, we may confirm that this paradox is mainly a consequence of the high cost of mobile Internet services due to a business model that has not evolved and that continues to apply rates based on the volume of information transmitted which makes the services still unaffordable to most citizens.
This is one of the reasons that in this regions, Internet services treated as basic service such as water or electricity, and that's considered a fundamental rights in the constitutions of several of these countries.
Finally, with this background and you are colleague Steven Moore said before in his presentation, the contribution to the generation of carbon footprint is quite lower compared to other sectors such as industry, transport, electricity, general consumption, among others, which far exceeds their priority of mitigation.
This is certainly not the case in countries where 4G services are already more widely deployed and where 5G is undergoing final testing to enter the market.
An important example of this regulatory action that governments can take is the circular economy action plan as one of the main components of the European Green Deal, that includes measures suggests ‑‑ and I'm going to read this, electricity and ICT including mobile phones, tablets and laptops under eco design directive so that devices are designed for energy efficient and durability, repairability, upgradeability, maintenance, reuse and recycling.
Focus on electricity and ICT as priority sector for implementing the right to repair, including the right to update also that software.
And finally, just as an example, regulatory measures on chargers for mobile phones and similar devices including the introduction of common charger improving the durability of charging cables and incentives to the couple of the purchase of chargers from the purchase of new devices.
Of course, it's necessary to consider how to involve and what incentives, actually, we could offer to the private sector so that it can adequately and quickly meet this requirements.  On one hand, we have the operators with deployment of 5G infrastructure, who should include mechanisms that as far as possible can employ renewable electricity sources in the networks and our colleagues already mentioned this.
Well, this includes from their design mechanisms, to accurately measure the energy consumption used by all the component of their infrastructure, to collect this information in realtime and in transport and manner so that the information is contrasted by the regulators based on the established indicators.
On the other hand, we have the manufacturers of the devices, particularly mobile terminals, which following the example of the European Commission and the regulation that is intended to be implemented will force manufacturers to follow its guidelines, which will surely collide with conventional production strategies, and business models that sustain an important part of the reviews and massive sale of chargers and other accessors.  Therefore, governments will have to be very creative when imposing these type of regular la aretoy actions incorporating mechanisms that allow commuting this phase of taxes with others such as a spectrum allocation cost or other regulatory fees.  This is very different of what can be done in the global south, such as the LAC region.
In this region, unlike the European Union, there's no supernatural organizations and no regulatory harmonization to articulate a single common strategy to impose this time of regulatory actions as a region.  This leaves the implementation of these measures to the discretion and depending on the success imposed on them, it will not be uncommon to expect that any cost or reduction in revenues that this means for 5G network operators and/or device manufacturers will mean that the economic impact will be passed on to the end users.
And under these circumstances, considering that the risk of break in the balance between the urgent need to increase the Internet penetration rate, and pave the way for emerging technologies such as 5G, and IoT as one of the collateral technologies, it will be fundamental to seek consensus among the private sector.  Government, particularly regulators and even end users in action suggest ‑‑ and I will end with these five points, establish and reaffirm the commitment and the joint responsibility that we also have to contribute to the carbon reduction, encourage operators to modernize their 3G and 4G infrastructure, and also plan, design and deploy their 5G networks taking into account good eco efficient and low carbon strategies.
Encourage and devise manufacturers to develop production lines with longer obsolescence times and establish new marketing models for new mobile broadband Internet services that enables minimum speeds like 2 to 4 megabits per second but with unlimited potential.  And a potential benefit for operators, efforts should be made to reduce the cost of access to a spectrum in new bands required by 5G and to review other bands allocations in order to reduce these costs.
Finally, realize multilateral agreements between the governments of the different regions of the global south to implement joint strategies that establish a common regulatory framework for all Internet broadband mobile broadband services, including 5G.  Thank you very much, Thas.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Roberto, that's interesting to finish it on the significant challenge that we have in terms of the connectivity divide and how we need to change the government ‑‑ the governments need to change how they encourage sustainability in these areas.
I think we have a few minutes left, but there was really interesting conversation from different perspective, but I'm really good to see a coordinated coverage of topics all the way from what the operator perspective in terms of the roadmap towards I think 2060, Dr. I articulated the roadmap to zero carbon mobile networks.  Dan, you really took us through the kind of how to orchestrate or access the energy efficiency or the energy impact of digital services and I think it was really great to see how your tools can be really extended for broader global use in terms of assessing energy efficiency.
And we also have learned how 5G is critical to really achieving energy efficiency across many sectors and while we here talk about the energy efficiency of 5G itself, but 5G is going to offset energy impact of many sectors, and you mentioned very importantly about with just the health and the ‑‑ you know, the energy sectors, for example, Smart Grid.
And it's also great to see how GSMA is really activating a lot of projects in this space and I think it's great to see mobile operators committing to climate change and very vibrant program.
And Roberto, you really summed it up with some of the challenges when we have major operators committing to this but we also have a significant divide in our connectivity map and that brings us a lot of challenges how do we administer.  So we might wrap it up there because I don't see any burning questions there, but I think there was a video that they were planning to show but I'm not sure whether they are going to play now.  With that, I want to thank all of you if we finish it early because I think it cuts off very quickly.
>> PIOTR MIECZKOWSKI: Thank you.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Thank you.
>> STEVEN MOORE: Thank you very much. 
>> DANIEL SCHIEN: Thank you.
>> THAS NIRMALATHAS: Thanks a lot.
 

